AF om esse
ii .
iS geal Aone ite! Hoge
ieee a eh Y
a
F
“a Halen ye
ie
BEL agtette :
gE tgtn
Sf golly hd
1 id
THE
RAMAYANA.
KISHKINDHA KANDAM.
SECTION I.
Rerarine with Lakshmana to the lake Pampa filled with
sed and white lotuses and fish Rima having his senses agitat-
ed began to lament. And beholding there that lake his senses
were stirred with delight. Troubled with passion he spake
unto Saumitri saying,—“Behold, O Saumitri, how beautifully
appeareth Pampa of transparent water like unto Baidurja,
graced with full-blown red and white lotuses and various
trees. Observe again, O son of Sumitra, the picturesque
wood-land around the lake, where trees, crowned with large
branches resembling the summits of a mountain, appear like
so many hills. Mental agony arising from Sita’s ravish-
ment and Bharata’s grief, have been grinding me who am
already stricken with sorrrow. Verily conduceth to my
felicity the pleasant lake Pampa of cool water, scattered with
various flowef's, covered with lotuses, highly graceful, girt with
variegated woods abounding in voracious animals and fre-
quented by deer and birds. This green common, chequered
with yellow and blue, appeareth of enhanced beauty by the
various flowers of «the trees as if covered with a blanket of
87
mountainous expanse. Trees with flowery tops, tossed by
the airy currents and crested with the bees, are as if dancing
in accompaniment with melodious strains. Behold, the
Karnikaras covered with flowers appear on all sides like unto
human beings decorated with golden ornaments aud wearing
yellow cloths. This spring, O Saumitri, sounded by the
musical notes of the birds hath been kindling my grief who
am without Sita. Cupid hath been smiting me the more
who am stricken with grief, and the cuckoos have been defying
me, displaying their mirth, O Lakshmana. At the pleasant
fountains the delighted Détywahas with their warblings have
been afflicting me who am possessed by Cupid. Formerly
my dear one, while in the asylum, delighted with the music of
these birds, used to attain to a greater joy addressing me to


KISHEINDHAKANDAM. 69x


hear: them. Behold, birds of variegated hues, emitting forth
diverse notes have been alighting upon the trees, groves
and creepers from various quarters. O Saumitri, birds and
bees of melodious notes accompanied by their co-mates and
delighted with their mutual companionship are on the-banks
of this lake. There live happily flocks of delighted vultures.
The trees sounded by the lascivious murmurs of Datyuhas
and Punskokilas have been kindling my amour. The fire of
spring having clusters of Asokas as its embers, the hum
of bees as its sound, the redness of the twigs as its
flame, hath been burning me. O Saumitri, of what avail
is this life unto me, not beholding Sita of sweet accents,
having eyes with their eye-lashes, and a head of curly hair.
O blameless one, this season, when the groves become
charming and the border-lands resound with melodious
strains of the cuckoos, is the most beloved of my
dear one, Methinks, this fire of distress, originating from
amorous trouble and enhanced by the influence of spring,
shall soon burn me down. My amorous feelings shall attain
to an intense height, as I do not behold Sit& before, whereas
see the beautiful trees around. Sita, away from my vision
and the spring,drying up perspiration,have been both inciting
my amour. That one having the eyes of a fawn and ruthless
vernal breeze, O Saumitri, have been oppressing me who am
overpowered with anxiety and grief. These peacocks and
pea-hens unfurling their wings like unto crystal lattices,
have been dancing hither and thither. These maddened
peacocks encircled by the pea-hens, have been aggravating
my amorous desire who am already possessed by the
Cupid. Observe, O Lakshmana, there danceth with her
dancing mate on the mountainous expanse, the pea-hen,
troubled with amorous sentiments. The peacock unfolding
his charming wings is moving after his dear mate mocking
me as it were with his cry. Surely the Rakshasa hath not
brought my dear one in this forest of peacocks and therefore


652, RAMAPANA,


they dance with their mates in this picturesque forest land.
It is unbearable for me to live without Sita in this season of
flowers. Behold, O Lakshmana, this attachment is to be seen
even amongst the brutes. The pea-hen being influenced by
passion is approachthg her mate. Sita of expansive eyes
would have thus neared me being influenced by amour had
she .not been carried away. In this season of spring
flowers of this forest are of no avail to me. These pleasant
flowers of the trees have been uselessly falling on the
earth with the bees. The birds exciting my desire have
been delightedly warbling in flocks as if welcoming each
other. Surely Sita, under the influence of another person,
is lamenting in the same strain, as I do, if spring hath
appeared there, Even if spring hath not appeared there
how can Sita having eyes resembling full-blown’ lotuses
live in my separation ? If spring is there, what can it do her
having a beautiful hip and loins, who hath already been
overpowered by a mighty enemy ? Surely shall my dear wife
of a slender make, having eyes like lotus-petals and of sweet
accents renouhce her life at the appearance of this spring ?
Methinks, for certain, the chaste Sita shall not be able to
maintain her being at my separation. Vaidehi’s attachment
is entirely centred in me and mine in her. This cool breeze
of a pleasant touch, carrying the fragrance of flowers appears
like a fire-brand unto me who am thinking of my spouse.
That breeze appeareth painful unto me in Sita’s absence
which, ere this,had been regarded by me as a source of pleasure
in her company. This bird set up acry in the sky at that
time* and now sitting on the tree is crying delightedly. This
bird flying up in the sky brought about Sitd’s ravishment
and this bird shall take me to her having expansive eyes.

* This refers to the time when Rama was united with Sita 7. ¢. at the time
of his wedding, At that time the bird, flying up in the sky set up an in-
auspicious cry indicating that in no distant time he should be separated from
her; and now his sitting on the tree and cawing delightedly indicated that
he should soon be re-united with her—T.


KISHRINDHARANDAM. $93


Hear,O Lakshmana, the maddening notes of those birds
sitting on the tops of the flowery trees and setting up their
melody. The Vramaras are approaching the 7i/akas tossed
by the wind like unto intoxicated damsels. This Asoka,
enhancing the desires of the amorous, stands here, as if
remonstrating with me by its clusters shaken by the wind.
There appear, O Lakshmana, those blossoming mangoe trees
like unto persons, exercised with passion and smeared with
unguents of sandal. Behold, O Saumitri, O foremost of men,
the &innarvas are ranging at large in this varieagated forest-
land on the banks of Pampa. Here the fragrant red lotuses
are shedding forth their splendour like unto the newly risen
sun. Here appeareth beautifully the lake Pampa of trans-
parent water, filled with blue and fragrant lotuses, swans and
Karandhabas and abounding in red lotuses like unto the
virgin rays of the sun and having their filaments crushed by
the bees. And the beautiful woods around the lake have been
manifesting their beauty, filled with chakradakas and the herds
of elephants and deer desirous of drinking water. Behold,
O Lakshmana, the picturesque view of the letuses oscillated
by the ripples driven to and fro by the wind. I do not
delight in my life, not beholding Sita, having expansive eyes
like unto lotus-petals and ever fond of lotuses. O how wily is
the course of Kama who hath been presenting unto my mind
that auspicious one, hard to attain and of sweet-accents! Had
I not been overpowered by this season of spring with
blossoming trees, I would have been able to put up with
the present amorous infliction. The objects which appeared
beautiful unto me while in the company of Sita, now seem
shorn of all grace in her separation. My eyes pant for
beholding those lotus-petals, O Lakshmana, because of their
resemblance with Sita’s eyes. Issuing out of the trees and
touching the filaments, the pleasant wind is blowing like unto
Sit8’s breath, Behold O Lakshmana, the flowery branches
of the Karnikaras on the summits of the mountain situated


694 RAMAYAN2.


on the southern bank of Pampa. This prince nf mountains,
beautified with various metals, hath been throwing up
dusts of diverse- colors driven by the wind. O Saumitri,
these mountainous expanses are burning in beauty with blos-
soming and beautiful, Az#swkas void of leaves. These fragrant
Malatis, Mallikas, Karavis and lotuses, growing on the
banks of Pamp4, and fostered by Pampa’s water, and Ketakis,
Sindhubaras, Basantis, Matulingas, Purnas, Kunda groves,
Chiribilyas, Madukas, Banjulas, Vakulas, Champakas,
Tilakas, Nagas, Padmyakas, blue Asokas, Ankolas, Kurantas,
Churnakas, Paribhadrakas, and yellow Lodhras on the
hills like unto manes of a lion, are in flowers. There
appear beautifully on the hills, blossoming Chutas, Patalas,
Kobidaras, Muchukundas, Arjunas, Ketakas, Uddalakas,
Strisas, Singsapas, Dhabas, Salmalis, Kingsukas, Raktas
Kuravas, Tinisas, Naktamalas, sandal trees, Syandanas, Hin-
talas, Tilakas and Nagas. Behold, O Saumitri, many
a beautiful and blossoming tree growing on the banks of
Pamp& and gnarled by creepers having flowery tips. Like
unto inebriate Jamsels, these creepers are embracing the
trees, hard by, having their branches tossed by the wind.
The breeze, delighted with various tastes is passing from
tree to tree, mountain to mountain and forest to forest.
Some fragrant trees, covered with flowers and some with
buds, appear beautifully green, Saying, ‘this is sweet’, ‘this is
pleasant’ and ‘this is full-blown,’ the attached bees are falling
to the trees. And rising again they are approaching the
other trees growing on the banks of Pampa. This forest-
land, strewn with flowers dropping spontaneously from
the trees like. unto a bed sheet, hath become pleasant. O
Saumitri, the mountainous levels variegated with flowers, are
appearing like unto beds. Behold O Saumitri, the origina-
tion of flowers in the trees at the expiry of the winter. The
trees’ as if vieing with each other, have blossomed in this
season of flowers. The trees, O Lakshmana, with bees


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 695


humming around and with flowery branches are as if wel-
coming each other. This swan, hath been sporting with its
mate in the lucid water of Pamp4 exciting my amour. Truly
does this lake like unto Mand&kini itself, deserve the accom-
plishments that are known all over the world. O best of
Raghus, | do not desire Ayodhya or the dignity of Indra if
that chaste Sita be found here and if I can live with her. I shall
‘renounce all desires and thoughts if 1 can sport with her in
this picturesque and green forest-land. These trees, clothed
in. diverse flowery attires, have been exciting my thought
in this forest, who have been deprived of my dear one. O
Saumitri, behold this Pampa of cool water, enveloped on all
sides with lotuses, and frequented by Chakrabakas, Karan-
davas, Chraunchas, Plabas and high deer. Its beauty hath
been further enhanced by the birds caroling. Diverse delight-
ed birds have been exciting my passion, reminding me of
my dear spouse, of blameless countenance, having a moon-
like face and eyes resembling lotus-petals. Behold on the
yonder mountainous expanse of various colors, stags sport-
ing with hinds and myself on the other hasd forsaken by
Vaidehi having eyes resembling those of an antelope. These
deer ranging hither and thither have been distressing my
soul. It is then only that I shall attain to mental quietitude
if I can behold Sita on this charming mountainous expanse
filled with birds and deer. It is then that I shall draw my
vital breath, O Saumitri, if Vaidehi, of slender waist, with me,
enjoyeth the fine breeze of Pampa dispersing the fragrance
of lotuses and Saugandhikas and ever assuaging grief.
Blessed are they, O Lakshmana who enjoy this wild breeze of
Pamp3. How hath that exquisitely fine daughter of Janaka,
my beloved spouse, having eyes resembling lotus-petals,
brought under the control of another person, been living
forsaken by mey What shall 1 speak unto that virtuous,
truthful king Janaka when he shall interrogate me about
Sit@’s welfare in an. assembly? Where is that Sits now


696 RAMAYANA.


who followed me in the track of virtue, who am unfortu-
nate and have been exiled unto woods by my Sire ? How
shall I keep up (my being) being poorly, O Lakshmana, being
forsaken by that Sitd who followed me, deprived of king-
dom and sense? My heart is sinking not beholding her
fine spotless countenance, having eyes resembling lotuses
and smelling sweet. When shall I hear again O Laksh-
mana, the sweet incomparable and auspicious accents of
Vaidehi, intervened by smiles and couched in an elegant
and easy style? That chaste and exquisitely fine damsel
even when afflicted in the woods used to welcome me
under the influence of Cupid as if she were delighted
and had her sorrows removed. O son of a king, what
shall I speak unto Kaugalya in Ayodhya when she will
ask me of her high-souled daughter-in-law's welfare and
whereabouts ? Do thou proceed, O Lakshmana, and join
Bharata gifted with fraternal affection. I am incapable
of living any more without that daughter of Janaka.”
Thereupon Lakshmana addressed unto the high-souled Rama
who was thys bewailing like one helpless with the
following pregnant and immutable words. “Forsake thy
grief, O Rama. May good betide thee. Do not grieve O best
of men. Even the sinless persons lose their seuse when they
are afflicted with grief. Remembering the grief consequent on
separation do thou forsake thy attachment unto thy dear one,
Out of an excess of oil even the wick burneth itself. O wor-
shipful one, even if he hideth himself in the region under the
earth or in a darker quarter, Ravana shall not be able to draw
his breath. Do thou procure information about that vicious.
souled Rakshasa ; either he shall give up Siti or meet with
destruction. Unless he gives back Sit&, forsooth I shall kill him
even if he enters with her into Diti's womb. Do thou, console
thyself and renounce thy poorliness of mind, O worshipful
oue. Without sufficient endeavours even men of energy do
not regain their lost ends. O worshipful one mighty is the


RISHKINDHAKANDAM. 697


course of energy. And than this there is no greater power
on earth. And there is nothing unattainable in this world to
one gifted with energy. Persons endowed with zeal do never
wear away in their actions. And resorting to this energy
only that we shall regain Janaki. Do thou not percieve that
thou art high-souled and highly educated? And leaving
behind grief do thou forsake thy amorous madness.” Being
thus accosted by Lakshmana, Rama having his mind stricken
with sorrow, attained to mental quietitude renouncing
grief and dolour. Thereupon Rama, of unimaginable prowess,
passed slowly by the pleasant and charming Pamp& with
banks girt with trees shaken by the wind.

Thereupon the high-souled Rama, stricken -with grief
passed along beholding the forest-land, fountains, caves
and revolving aside (the pregnant words of Lakshmana).
And the high-souled Lakshmana, of unagitated mind, ‘ ntent
upon R&ma’s welfare and wending like unto an infuciated
elephant, cheered him up by means of moral and heroic
counsels. Beholding their countenances passing strange, that
mighty chief, of monkeys, while ranging near the mount
Rishyamuka, became highly terrified and motionless. Obser-
ving them range there, that high-souled monkey, wending
slowly like unto an elephant and stricken with fear and
grief, became exceedingly sorry. Espying the highly power-
ful Rama and Lakshmana there, monkeys, terrified, entered
iato that holy and pleasant asylum, a worthy refuge and
having its inside always frequented by them.


88


698 RAMAYANA,


SECTION It.


‘Benorpine those two high-souled brothers Rama and
Lakshmana, heroic and vith great scimitars in their hands,
Sugriva became teriified. That best of monkeys, of a distur
bed mind, cast his looks around and could not stand
(patiently) at any place. Beholding those two of great prowess
he could not make up his mind to remain there and the heart
of that terrified monkey, sank, Pondering over what
is more and what is less important the virtuous-souled
Sugriva became highly anxious along with that monkey-herd.
Beholding Rama and Lakshmana, Sugriva, the king of
monkeys, greatly exercised with anxiety spake unto his
counsellors, saying—“Forsooth, these two heroes, in false
guises and wearing bark, despatched by Vali, have come here
traversing the forest stronghold.” Beholding these two
mighty archers the counsellors of Sugriva, quitting that
mountainous €xpanse proceeded to another best of hills.
Thereupon proceeding quickly the commanders of various
monkey herds stood encircling the king of monkeys and the
chief of leaders. The monkeys thus sharing in the misery and
happiness (of their chief) proceeded jumping from hill to hill
shaking the summits thereof, with the velocity (of their per-
sons). Thereupon those mighty monkeys, jumping,broke down
the flowery trees of that stronghold. Those best of monkeys,
springing all around that mighty hill, proceeded terrifying
the deer, the wild cats and the tigers. Stationed on that
best of mountains the ministers of Sugriva, coming in the
front of that monkey-chief, stood with clasped palms. There-
upon Hanuman, skilled in spcech,spake unto Sugriva, terrified
and afraid of Vali’s wicked wiles, saying :—‘Let all the
monkeys renounce Vali’s fear; in this best of mountains,
Malaya—there is no fear of him. I do not behold, O best of


KISHKINDHAKAND AM. 699


monkeys; that wicked Vali of terrible looks, afraid of whom
thou hast fled away and for whom thou art anxious, I do not
observe here, O gentle one, the wicked-souled Vali, thy elder
brother of impious actions and whom thou dost fear and
I do not percieve any terror proceeding from him. O monkey-
chief, truly manifest is thy monkey-hood and it is through
thy light-heartedness that thou art incapable of fixing thy
soul. Gifted with intellect and knowledge do thou perform
all by means of gestures. A king void of sense cannot
govern all creatures.” Hearing those pregnant words of
Hanumin,Sugriva said in better accents—"Who is not terified
beholding those two mighty armed heroes, having expansive
eyes, with bows, arrow, and daggers in their hands like unto
-two sons of a celestial? Methinks these two best of men
have been despatched by Vali. Kings have many friends.
And it is not proper for me to place confidence in them.
People should know that enemies, always treacherous by
nature, range under false guises. And those foes, availing
of their credulity, bring about their destruction whenever
opportunity presents itself. Vali is eminewtly expert in
despatching business. Monarchs, cognizant of many a wily
.expedient, bring about others’ destruction. [It is proper to
discern them by means of disguised spies. O monkey, do
thou proceed under a false guise and come by their intentions,
examining them aright by their countenances, gestures and
words, Do thou ascertain their intention. If dost thou find them
delighted, secure their confidence in my favour, by eulogizing
me again and again and giving out unto them my views, O
best of monkeys,do thou ask them why they have entered this
forest, if thou dost perceive that these two archers are pure-
soiled. Do thou determine the fairness and unfairness of
their purpose by means of their gestures and conversation.”
Being commanded by that chief of monkeys, the son of
Maruta purposed to approach Rama and Lakshmana. Assen-
ting to'the words of the terrified and unconquerable Sugriva


700 RAMAYANA,


and saying ‘Be it so,’ Hanum&n, the high-souled monkey
proceeded where the heroic Rama was with Lakshmana.


SECTION He.


° ‘Unpersranpine the words of the high-souled Sugriva,
Hanuman, proceeded, springing, from the mount Rishyamuka,
towards the descendants of Raghu. Thereupon renouncing
his monkey shape, the son of M&ruta, not confiding in them,
assumed the semblance of a mendicant. Approaching them
humbly, Hanuman paid obeisance unto them. And he eulo-
gized them truly in words, sweet and pleasant. Greeting
duly those two heroes, having truth for their prowess, that
best of monkeys addféssed them in sweet accents in conso-
nance with Sugriva’s instructions. “Ye are ascetics of
celebrated austerities, resembling the Rajarshis and celestials
and best of Brahmacharis, why have ye come here causing
fear unto thes€ deer and other wild animals of the forest?
Surveying around the trees grown on the banks of Pamp&,
ye have enhanced the beauty of this lake of auspicious water.
Who are ye two youthful figures of mighty arms, wearing
bark, patient, sighing and troubling these wild animals?
Heroic, of leonine looks, gifted with mighty strength and
prowess, slayers of foes, and holding a bow like unto that of
Sakra; graceful, of a pleasant countenance, of prowess like
unto a mighty bull, having hands resembling the trunks of
elephants, effulgent, great among men, youthful, beautifying
this chief of mountains with the effulgence of your persons,
worthy of having kingdoms, and like unto celestials, why
have ye come here? Having eyes resembling lotus-petals,
heroic, wearing matted locks, resembling each other, have ye
come here from the celestial region? Verily the Sun and
the Moon have come down to the earth of their own accord.


KISHKINDHAKINDAM. yor


Of spacious breast, heroic, having leonine shoulders, gifted
with high energy, stout like unto plump bulls. and human
albeit looking like celestials, why are not your long, round
arms, resembling Paridhas and deserving all ornaments
adorned ?. Methinks ye two are perfectly able to protect
this entire earth, filled with forests and oceans, and intersected
by the mountains Vindhya and Meru. These thy painted
and smooth hows appear like unto the thunder-bolts of Indra
adorned with gold. And these beautiful quivers are’ filled to
the brim with sharpened and deadly shafts like unto flaming
fire and serpents. And these two daggers, of mighty propor-
tions, furnished with burning gold, appear like unto serpents,let
loose. Why do ye not answer me accosting you thus? A
certain heroic and virtuous monkey-chief, by name Sugriva,
hath been journeying on this earth, distressed at heart, being
driven away by his brother. I have come here being des-
patched by that high-souled Sugriva—my name is Hanuman,
the foremost of monkeys. That virtuous-souled Sugriva
desires to make friends with you. And know me to be his
counsellor—a monkey, the son of Pavana,, ranging every
where at my will, coming here, under the guise of a mendicant,
from the mount Rishymuka, for the welfare of Sugriva.’’
Having addressed thus those two heroes—Rama and
Lakshmana, Hanuman, conversant with words and skilled in
speech, did not speak again. Hearing those words, the
effulgent Rama, with a delighted countenance, spake unto his
younger brother, Lakshmana—sitting by him. “He is the
counsellor of the high-souled Sugriva,the lord of monkeys and
hath approached me, soliciting my friendship in his (Sugriva’s)
favour. Do thou welcome, with pleasant words, O Saumitri,
this monkey—Sugriva’s minister, the subduer of foes, affec-
tionate and skilled in speech. None can speak thus who
hath not mastered the Rig-veda, borne well the Vajur-veda
and acquainted himself thoroughly with the Shyam-veda,
Forsooth be hath studied well all the Grammars, for he hath


708 RAMALANA.


not used a single inelegant word though he hath addressed
me with a number of them. And no defect was perceived on
his countenance, eyes, forehead, brows or on any of his limbs.
His words,—few, beyond all suspicion, pleasant, and uttered
in a mild tone,—came out readily of his throat and breast. He
has uttered accents, wonderful, ready, accomplished, auspici-
ous and captivating. Whose heart is not moved by these
wonderful words, proceeding (from heart, throat and brain) ?
Even an enemy, who hath his sword uplifted, (is moved). O
sinless one, how doth that monarch accomplish his objects
who hath not got sucha messenger? Indeed whose emis-
saries are so accomplished, all his missions are fulfilled only
by virtue of their words.” Thus addressed, Saumitri, skilled
in speech, welcomed that monkey—Sugriva’s counsellor and
son ‘of Pavana. “O learned one! We knew well the
accomplishments of the high-souled Sugriva. We shall
find out that king of monkey herds. O Hanum4n, O best of
monkeys, we shall go by whatever thou‘shalt say, under. the
instructions of Sugriva.” Hearing these skillful words, that
son of Pavana, delighted, revolving within him the means for
Sugriva’s conquest, purposed to bring about a friendly union
between them.


SECTION Iv.


oer


Henrie those words (of Rama) and learning his amica-
ble feeling (in relation to Sugriva) as also, seeing that Rama
was willing to assist Sugriva, Hanum4n, getting exceedingly
delighted, remembered Sugriva. “Since this one of successful.
acts hath been come by and also this business is in hanu,
the high-souled Sugriva will most probably obtain the
monarchy.” Then transported with joy, that foremost of
monkeys, Hanuman, in these words, replied unto Rama, deft


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 703


in speech, saying, “Why is it, that accompanied with thy
younger brother, hast thou come to this dense and trackless
forest, garnished with the wood-lands of Pampa, and filled
with various kinds of ferocious beasts?” Hearing those words
of his, Lakshmana, directed by Rama, informed (Hanuman)
of all about Rama, the son of Dagaratha. “There was a
king named Dagaratha. Possessed of effulgence, and attached
unto righteousness, he, in consonance with his proper duties,
for aye, governed the four orders. He hath no hater; nor
doth he hate any one. And in relation to all creatures he
was like another great-father. And he celebrated Agnishtoma
and other sacrifices with presents (to Brahmanas). This one
is his eldest son, named Rama, famous among men. He is
the refuge of all creatures, and competent to carry out the
injunctions of his father. The eldest son of Dagaratha,
he is foremost of all his sons in merit. He bears marks of
royalty, and hath the prosperity of a kingdom. Deprived
of his kingdom, in company with myself, he hath come
hither with the view of dwelling in this wood. And, O
highly exalted one, this one of subdued senses is followed
by his wife Sita even as at the decline of day the exceedingly
effulgent Sun is followed by (his spouse) Splendour. I am
the younger brother uf this one endeued with gratitude and
of various lore. Subdued by his virtues, 1, Lakshmana by
name, have dedicated myself to his service. Worthy of
happiness, homage, and intent upon the welfare of all beings,
deprived of wealth and living in the forest, he hath his wile
carried off by a Rakshasa,wearing shapes at will. Nor have
we yet (been able) to ascertain who is that Rakshasa that hath
carried off his wife. A son of Diti named Danu, had,by virtue
of an imprecation, undergone Rakshasa-hood. He it is
who had’ related unto us all about the capable Sugriva.—
“That exceedingly puissant one shall have a knowledge of
the ravisher of thy wife?” Having said this, Danu beaming
(with a halo) went to heaven. Thus have I related unto thee


704 RAMAYANA.


all as it fell out. Both Rima and myself have saught ‘the
shelter of Sugriva. Having given away profuse wealth and.
attained high fame, this one who formerly was the lord of
the worlds, now wishes to make Sugriva his master. That
one attached unto virtue, that refuge (of all)—the son of
that shelter (of all beings) hath come under the protection of
Sugriva. That spiritual guide, who ere now was worthy
of being the shelter (of all) and who (actually) was the refuge
(of all creatures)—Raghava, hath saught the shelter of
Sugriva. That Rama in whose happiness and favor the
subjects found their felicity, seeketh the good graces of
Sugriva. Famed over the three worlds, the eldest son of
that monarch who had always and for aye honored all the
kings of the earth crowned with every virtue—viz, Rama,
hath sought the protection of Sugriva, lord of monkeys. On
Rama being overwhelmed with sorrow, tried by grief, and
having come under his refuge, it behoveth Sugriva along
with the leaders of bands to show favor unto Rama?’ When
Sumitr’’s son shedding tears hal spoken thus, that one
skilled in spezch, Hanumin, answered in these words,
‘Persons of such a stamp, endeued with understanding, of
controlled anger and subdued senses, should be seen by the
master of monkeys; and such come within one’s ken through
blessed luck. He also hath been driven out of his kingdom,
and hath incurred the hostility of Vali. And his wife torn
away from him, he dwelleth in this wood, in fear, having been
exceedingly harassed by his brother. That son of the Sun,
Sugriva, along with us, will help thee in seeking out Sita.’
Having said these sweet and hurried words, Hanuman said
unto Raghava, ‘I will (now) repair unto Sugriva.’ When
Hanumfn had said this, the righteous Lakshmana duly pr" ug’
homage unto the former, addressed Raghava, saying, ‘From
the glad way in which this son of the god of the wind is speak-
ing, it appears that he also seeks thy service; and, arriving
{at this region) thou-alsc, Raghava, hast reaped success. He


RISHRINDHAKINDAM. 705


speaketh openly with a delightful light in his countenance ;
and cheerfulness. (It seems) that the heroic Hanuman, son
unto the God of wind doth not speak anything that is false.’
Then that vastly wise one Hanumin the son of the wind god
departed, taking with him the heroic descendants of Raghu,
for (presenting them) unto the monarch of monkeys.
Renouncing the guise of a beggar, and assuming the form
of a monkey, that foremost of monkeys went away, placing
those heroes on his back. And then the heroic monkey,
the son of the wind-god, of wide fame, and great prowess,
with his mind perfectly pure, considering himself as crowned
with success, and experiencing exceeding delight, arrived
at that best of mountains in company with Rama and
Lakshmana.


SECTION V.


—-——


Hayne departed from Rishyamuka, and arrived at the
Malaya hill, Hanuman informed the king of monkeys of
(the arrival of) the descendants of Raghu. “O exceedingly
wise one, this one that hath come here is Rama having
truth for his prowess. This is Rama having truth for his
prowess, in company with his brother, Lakshmana. Rama
the son of Dagaratha, is born in the race of the Ikshwakus.
Ever doing the will of his sire, he has been sent hither, ia
order that his father’s verity may stand in tact. Rama, who
hath come to the forest, is the son of him who hath propitiae
ted Fire with Rdjasugas and horse sacrifices,—dispensing
Dakshinas and kine by hundreds and thousands—and who
bath governed the earth by asceticism and truthful speech.
His son Rama hath come to the forest through a woman.
While that high-souled one having his senses under control
was dwelling in the woods, his wife was carried off by

89


706 RAMAYANA.


Ravana; and he (Rama) hath (in consequence) sought thy
protection, Do thou, granting an interview unto the brothers
Rama and Lakshmana—both of them worthy of homage—
who are eager for thy friendship, receive them respectfully.”
Hearing Hanum&n’s words, Sugriva—lord of monkeys,
becoming visible (at his will), gladly spake unto Raghava,
“sir, you are versed in morality, and bear love’ towards all.
The son of the wind-god hath faithfully described your
virtues unto me. That you, O lord, are anxious to contract
friendship with me who am a monkey does me honor and
is my gain. If you relish friendship with me, do you take
this stretched arm and my hand with yours,—and bind
yourself fast with a vow.’ Hearing these sweet words of
Sugriva, (Rima) exceedingly delighted, pressed Sugtiva’s
hand with his. And contracting friendship with Sugriva,
Rama experiencing great joy embraced him warmly. Then
that subduer of foes, Hanum§n, leaving off the guise of a
beggar, in his native shape produced 2 fire with two pieces
of wood. Then worshipping that flaming fire with flowers,
he, well pleased, carefully placed it between them (Rama and
Sugriva.) Then Sugriva and Raghava went round the fire;
and (thus) they.were fastened in friendship. And with
delighted hearts, both of them—the monkey and Raghava
began to gaze at each other, yet they did not feel satiated.
“Thou art the friend of my heart. Our happiness and misery
are common,”—Sugriva, rejoicing greatly, said these words
unto Raghava. Then spreading a beautifully blossoming
spray of Sila, full of foliage, Sugciva made an awning and sat
down with Raghava. Hanumin, the son of the wind-god
with great joy gave unto Lakshmana a bough of a sandal
tree, plentifully blossoming. Next Sugriva, feeling,...\gu
rapture, with his eyes expanded with joy, answered
Raima blandly in sweet words, saying, “Oppressed have I
been, O Rama; and here am always afflicted with fear.
Deprived of my wife, I have, agitated with apprehension,


KISHRINDHBKANDAM. yo7


sought refuge in this dense wilderness. I am afflicted with
fright, and worried by fear, with my senses bewildered. in
this wood. Wronged have I been by Vali, my brother; and E
have incurred his hostility, O Raghava. And, O exalted one,
do thou dispell the fear of me, who am tormented with
fear on account of Vali. And, O K&kutstha, it behoves thee
so to act that I may not become subject to fear.” Thus
addressed, the powerful Kakutstha, knowing righteousness,
and devoted to virtue, answered Sugriva, smiling, “O mighty
monkey, that the outcome of amity is good offices 1 am well
aware of. I willslay that captor of thy wife Vali. These
infallible sharpened shafts of mine, resembling the sun, fea-
thered with the plumes of the Kanka, like unto the thunder-
bolt of the great Indra, having sharp heads and even knots,
like infuriated serpents,—being let go with vehemence,
shall alight upon the impious Vali. Do thou today behold
Vali slain with sharpened shafts, resembling venomous
snakes,-—like unto a torn hill lying on the ground.” Hearing
those words of Raghava fraught with his welfare, Sugriva
supremely rejoiced, said these words, informed, with rapture,
“Thou hero! Thou lion among men! by thy grace shall I
obtain both my beloved and my monarchy. O God among
men, do thou so deal with that foe, my elder brother, that
he may not again wrong me.” The left eyes of Sit&, the
lord of apes, and night rangers,—respectively like the lotus,
gold, and flaming fire, throbbed when the friendship between
Rama and Sugriva was contracted.


708 RAMEYVANA.
SECTION VI.


Sccriva well pleased again addressed Raghava, the sor
of Raghu, saying, “O Rama, this servant of thine, foremost of
my couns:™ |:",,"1a* umn, hath related (unto me), the reason
of thy arrival in this lone forest. Thy wife, Maithili, daughter
unto Janaka, separated from thee as well as the intelligent
ELakshmana, and weeping (in consequence) was carried off by
a Raksha. Seeing for opportunities of doing mischief that
Raksha, having slain Jatayu, hath.caused unto thee the
grief that comes of separation from one’s wife. But thou
wilt soon be relieved from the sorrow that comes of separa-
tion from one’s wife. Her will 1 bring like unto the ravished
Devagcruti. O repressor of foes, whether she be in the
nether regions or under the sky, I will, bringing thy wife, make
her over unto thee. O Raghava, kuow my words to be true.
O mighty-armed one, like unto poison, thy wife is incapable
of being digerted even by the gods and Asuras with Indra
(at their head). O mighty-armed one, leave off sorrow, I
will bring back thy beloved. From guess I find that it was
doubtless Mithila’s daughter whom I saw when she was
being carried away by that Raksha of terrific deeds. She
was crying, ‘Rama, Rama, Lakshmana, Lakshmana,’ and in
the lap of Ravana she looked like the wife of the Snake-chief.
Seeing me along with my four counsellors stationed at the
hill, she dropped down her scarf and her ornaments. AH
these, O R&ghava, I have taken and kept (with me). I will
bring them. It behoveth thee to recognise them.” There-
upon Rima spoke unto the sweet-speeched Sugriv~“ sring
(them), at once, my friend. Why dost thou tarry?” Having
been thus addressed, Sugriva swiftly entered a deep cavern
in the mountain, with the view of doing what was dear unto
Righava. Then taking the scarf as well as the ornaments.


KISHRINDHARANDAM. 709


“Look at this,’ (Saying this) the monkey held them before
Rima. And taking the sheet and the ornaments, (RAma)
had his eyes filled with tears, like the moon covered by the
dew. And from affection for Sita, (R&ma,) his eyes filled
with tears, deprived of patience, fell down to the ground.
And placing the elegant ornaments on his bosom, he sighed
again and again, like an enraged serpenttii » “. And
seeing Sumitra’s son at his side, Raima shedding ceaseless
tears, began to lament piteously, “O Lakshmana, behold this
scarf and these ornaments which Vaidehi, while being carried
away, let fall from her person tothe earth. Surely Sita,
while being ravished, let these fall on a sward, for these
remain as before.” Thus accosted, Lakshmana spoke, saying,
“I do not know her bracelets ; Ido not know her ear-rings.
But I know full well her bangles on account of my always
bowing down unto her feet.” Thereupon Raghava said these
words unto Sugriva, ‘'Tell me, O Sugriva, at what place didst
thou see Sita, while she, dear unto me as life, was taken away
by the fierce-looking Rakshasa? And where doth that
Raksha, who hath brought on this high peril, ond for whom
I will slay all the Rakshasas, live? He, that hath carried off
Mithila’s daughter, and roused my wrath, hath certainly for
his own end, opened the door of death. Tell me all about
that ranger of the night, that deceitfully hath carried away my
dearest wife from the forest. My foe, O lord of monkey,
wilt I to-day send to the neighbourhood of Yama.”


SECTION vii,


Tas addressed by the aggrieved Rama, the monkey,
Sugriva, his accents obstructed by vapour and his eyes filled
‘with tears, said with joined hands, “I do not know the hidden
abode of that exceedingly wicked Rakshasa,—nor do I know


710 RAMAYANA.


his heroism and prowess, or the lineage of that one sprung
from a vicious race. O vanquisher of foes, leave off sorrow-
ing. I promise unto thee truly, I will exert so that thou
mayst obtain Maithili. Slaying Ravana with his hosts, and
putting forth my manliness capable of pleasing others, I
will speedily act so that thou mayst be pleased. Do not be
overwhelmed with grief: summon the fortitude that is in
thee. Such lightness of sense doth not become persons like
thee. I also have experienced mighty disaster arising out of
separation from my wife; but I do not weep in this wise,—
nor do | forsake my fortitude. A despicable monkey as I
am, I do not grieve for her,—and what again shall I say of
one that is magnanimous, endued with meekness and firm-
ness, and great? It behoveth thee to restrain thy falling
tears by patience. It behoveth thee not to resign that
patience which is the dignity of persons possessed of the
quality of goodness. Persons endued with firmness of
understanding by help of their intellect, do not in
calamity consequent on separation from dear ones, or on
the occasion of loss of wealth, or of fear arising from thieves,
wild beasts, &c., or of loss of life itself, lose their self-
possession. He that is senseless as well as he that suffers
himself to be overwhelmed with grief, losing all control over
self, drown themselves in sorrow like a boat bearing a
heavy load in water. I soothe thee from the love I bear
towards thee. Do thou have recourse to manliness. It doth
not behove thee to let grief overcome thee. Those that in-
dulge in sorrow, know no happiness ; and their virtuc* goeth
out of them. Therefore it behoveth thee not to grieve.
The life even of him that is mastered by sorrow is in jee «dy.
Therefore, thou foremost of monarchs, leave off tnat grief.
Do thou entirely have recourse to fortitude. In the spirit
of a friend I tell what is for thy good: I do not instruct
thee. Honor the amity I bear towards thee. It behoveth thee


* In the sense of energy —T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. yur


not to weep.” Thus sweetly consoled by Sugriva, Righava
with the end of his cloth wiped his face tarnished with tears.
And after that lord, Kakutstha, had recovered his natural state
through the words of Sugriva, he embraced Sugriva and
addressed him, saying, “O Sugriva, that which, pleasing and
profitable, proper and fit, ought to be done by a friend, hath
been done by thee. Solicited by thee, I have, O friend,
regained my natural tone of mind. Such a friend is rare,
specially at such atime. But thou shouldst strive to trace
Maithili as well as bring about the destruction of that fierce
Rakshasa, the impious Ravana. Do thou also without reserve
say what I shall have to do for thee. Like corn sown in a
fertile field in the rainy season, every concern of thine shall
attain success, O best of monkeys, do thou verily consider
as true the words that I have uttered through affection.
Falsehoods have I never spoken before, nor will I ever say
one (in future). This I promise to thee, I swear by truth
itself.” Hearing Raghava's words, and in special his promise,
Sugriva felt exceedingly delighted along with this monkey
ministers. Thus fast bound in friendship, the man and the
monkey conversed with each other about (topics) which each
thought fit, connected with their joys and griefs. Hearing
the words of that illustrious monarch of kings, that hero—~
greatest of monkeys—considered and felt in his heart as if
his work had already been accomplished.


SECTION vill.


Sueriva, rejoiced at the words of Rima, said unto that
hero, the elder brother of Lakshmana, who was well pleased.
“I am, without doubt, worthy of being favored by the gods,
since thou accomplished and furnished with virtues art my
friend. By thy help, O Rama, one can, O sinless one,


71a RAMAPANA.


obtain the kingdom of the celestials,—what isto be said of
one’s kingdom, O lord ? J, who have, ‘in the presence of Fire,
gained for my friend (thee) sprung from the R&ghava race,
am, O Raghava worthy of being honored by my friends and
relations. Thou also shalt by and by learn that I am a fit
friend for thee; but I can not speak unto thee of the qualities
that abide in me. free one, the felicity of high-souled and
self-governed friends like thee abounds and is enduring.
Pious friends look upon the silver, and gold, and the elegant
ornaments of pious friends as common property. Whether
tich or poor, happy or miserable, good or bad, a friend is
the greatest refuge (of his friend). Witnessing such affection,
people can, O sinless one, forsake wealth, comfort, and
even their native land for the sake of their friends.” There-
at the graceful Rama, in front of the intelligent Lakshmana
resembling Vasava, said unto Sugriva of a pleasing presence,
It is even so.’ The next day seeing Rama as well as
the mighty Lakshmana seated on the ground, Sugriva briskly
cast his eyes about the forest. And hard by that lord of
monkeys discovered a Sd/a tree, bearing a few beautiful
blossoms, with its wealth of foliage, decked by black bees.
Thereat tearing oft a beautiful bough full of leaves, Sugriva
spread it (on the earth), and then sat down with Raghava.
and seeing them seated, Hanuman breaking off a branch of
Sala, humbly made Lakshmana sit down. Seeing Rama seated
at his ease in that best of mountains abounding in Sdla
flowers, and cheerful like the ocean, Sugriva from love spoke
unto Rama sweet and excellent words, of which the letters
vibrated with delight. “Wronged by my brother, I deprived
of my wife and exceedingly distressed, and exercised." ith
fear, live in this foremost of mountains, Rishyamucs. ’ And,

O R&ghava, my senses wildered, having been oppressed by
Vali, and having incurred his enmity, I am afflicted with fear,
and tormented with fright. O thou, that removest the fear
of all creatures, it behoveth thee who am tormented by fear


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 713


and am helpless, to extend thy favor unto me.” Thus
accosted, that ever energetic one knowing righteousness and
devoted to it, Kakutstha,smiling, said unto Sugriva, “Benefits,
make friends, while injuries denote enemies. Even this
very day will I slay him that hath deprived thee of thy wife.
O.exalted one, these feathered shafts of exceeding energy,
sprung from the Kartikeya forest, decked with gold, furnished
with the plumes of the Kanka, resembling the thunderbolt of
the great Indra, having smooth knots, and sharp heads, are
like enraged serpents. Thou shalt behold thy brother and’
enemy, who is named V4li slain by my shafts, and lying like
a dislodged hill.’ Hearing Raghava’s words, Sugriva—lord
of hosts—felt excess of joy and exclaimed, “Excellent well ¢
Excellent well!” “O Rama, overwhelmed am I by grief.
Thou art the succour of those afflicted with sorrow. Having
made thee my friend, I express to thee my grief. I have,
in the presence of Fire by giving thee my hand, made thee
my friend. Thou art dearer unto me than life itself. This I
swear unto thee by Truth. Having made thee my friend, I
inspired with confidence am unbosoming myself to thee.
The sorrow, that is in my heart, is constantly enfeebling
my mind.” Having proceeded thus far, he, his eyes filled
with tears and his words faltering because of vapour, could
not speak aloud. And Sugriva suddenly restrained, before
Rama, the force of tears, like unto the tide of a river. And
having restrained his tears and wiped his fair eyes, that
energetic one, sighing heavily, again went on,—“Formerly, O
Rama, I was deprived of my kingdom and reproactted in
harsh language by the strong Vali. And he also took away
my wife dearer unto me than life ; and my friends have been
imprisoned and been bound. That wicked wight, O Raghava,
seeks my life. Many monkeys commissioned by him have
been slain by me. It was, O Raghava, in consequence of
this fear that when I (first) saw thee, 1 did not come out.
This is ‘all the fear that oppressesamc. My adherents are


go


RAMAYANA,


only these headed by Hanuman. It is for this that al-
though reduced to the greatest straits I have been able to
preserve my life. These affectionate apes protect me on all
sides. They go when! go, and stay when I stay. Why
should I expatiate ? In brief, Vali my elder brother, famed
for his prowess, is my foe. Even by his death my present
pain would be removed. Both my life and my happiness
are bound up with his death. I have, O R&ma, communi-
cated unto thee, the way in which my grief might be
removed. Whether in joy or in sorrow, a friend is the
refuge of his friend.” Hearing these words, Rama said unto
Sugriva, “What for arose hostility between thyself and Vali?
I wish to hear this (related) faithfully. Having learnt the
cause of your hostility, and ascertained your strength and
weakness, I will,Q monkey, understanding the irritation
that hath ensued, compass thy happiness.. Great is my
wrath, on hearing thee disgraced ; and like a downpour in the
rainy season my ire increases, shaking my very heart. Do
thou cheerfully and confidingly speak while I fix the string
to my bow. As soon as my shaft is off, thy foe is beaten.”
Thus addressed by the high-souled Kakutstha, Sugriva, along
with the four (other) monkeys, experienced exceeding delight.
Then with a cheerful countenance, Sugriva began to unfold
unto Lakshmana’s elder brother the cause of their hostility,


SECTION IX.


ae


“My elder brother named Vali—destroyer of foes, was
formerly highly honored both by my father and." cif. At
the death of our father, the counsellors, saying,—'This is the
eldest son’, made him, who was well loved (of all), lord of the
monkeys in the kingdom. While he was governing the
kingdom which had belonged to his father and grand-father,


RISHKINDHARANDAM. 75


Lat all times, in humiliation, remained like a servant. There
was one endued with energy, named Miyavi. He was the
eldest son of Dunduvi. Formerly there arose a mighty
hostility between himself and Vali. And it came to pass
that one night when all had fallen asleep, (M&y&vi) coming
to Kishkindh, began to emit roars in great wrath, and
challenged Vali to an encounter. My brother, who was fast
asleep, hearing those dreadful yells, could not bear them;
but at once rushed out vehemently. And as he rushed out in
wrath, for the purpose of slaying that foremost of Asuras, he
was opposed by his wives as well as myself, who humbled
himself before him. But moving them aside, that exceeding-
ly powerful one sallied out. Thereupon out of affection I
also went out with Vali. And seeing my brorher and me
present from a distance, the Asura, seized with a panic,
fled with speed. And as he was rushing on in fear and when
we had proceeded further, the moon arising, discovered the
way. And the Asura, coming by a capacious and impregnable
hole covered with grass (on the surface), entered it amain;
and we remained there. Seeing his enemy ¢nter the hole,
Vali, overcome by anger, and with his senses agitated, spoke
unto me, saying, “Do thou, O Sugriva, carefully stay at the
mouth of the hole, while I entering in, slay my foe in battle.”
Hearing his speech, that subduer of foes was besought by
me (for permission to enter the cave along with him), But
making me swear by touching his feet he entered the
cave. And after he had entered the cave, and as I re-
mained at its mouth, a space of over a complete year
rolled away. And seized with sorrow (I reflected), ‘As
Ido not see my brother, he must be lost’—and my mind
was alarmed, apprehending his death. After a long time,
I saw frothy blood issuing from the cave. Thereat I was
greatly aggrieved. And roars of Asuras also reached
my ears; but I could not hear the cries of my superior, en-
gaged in conflict. And from these signs concluding. my


16 : RAMAFANA.


brother to be slain, I, closing the mouth of the cavern with
a crag, huge asa hill, and afflicted with grief, after perform-,
ing his watery rites, came (back) to Kishkindha, O my friend.

And although I carefully concealed (the matter), the coun-

sellers heard it all. There they, assembled together, installed
me (in the kingdom). And, as 1 was ruling the kingdom
with justice, it came to pass that after having slain his foe,
the Danava, that monkey (Vali) came to Kishkindha. Then
seeing me installed, he, with his eyes reddened in wrath,
slaying my counsellors, spoke harsh words to me. And

although I was capable of chastising him, yet my mind
influenced by a sense of my brother's dignity, did not incline

towards that sin.- Having slain his foe, he then entered his

city; and I, honoring that high-souled one, duly saluted him.

He withal did not with a glad heart utter his benediction.

And, O lord, J, bowing, touched his feet with my crown; yet

from anger Vali did not extend to me his grace.””


SECTION X,


6


66 .

Tnex wishing for my welfare I strove to propitiate
my angry brother, wrought up with wrath, who was seated
(there). By good luck it is that thou hast come off safely;
and that thou hast slain the foe. O thou that rejoicest the
forlorn, thou art the only protector of me who am helpless.
I hold this umbrella furnished with many ribs, resembling
the moon risen; as well as this chowri containing hair,—do
thou accept my service. O king, suffering greatly, I remained
for a whole year at the mouth of the cave. And se:-* iy blood
issuing from the cave, I had my heart agitated with grief
and my senses extremely overwhelmed. Then closing up
the mouth of the cavern with a mountain summit, and
‘returning from that place, ] again came back to Kishkindha.


KISHKINDUAKANDAM. 917


Secing me enter in a dejected mood, the citizens and coun-
sellors installed me, but it was not done with my will. There-
fore it behoves thee to forgive me. Thou art the king, O
worthy of honor; and I am, as before, ever (thy servant). I
was entrusted with regal power in consequence of thy
absence. This kingdom consisting of courtiers and citizens,
remains now rid of its thorns. It was established in me as a
trust. And I protected it as‘such. Do not get wroth, O mild
one, O destroyer of foes. I beseech thee with bent head,
and, O king, with joined hands. | With the view of preventing
any one to wish to conquer this kingdom vacant (of its
ruler), the citizens and counsellors unanimously, by force,
entrusted me with regal authority.’’ As I said this soltly, the
monkey reproaching me, said unto me ‘Fie on thee,’ and
censured me greatly. And bringing together the subjects
and favorite counsellors, spoke unto me, before friends, highly
improper words. ‘Ye know that formerly one night the
mighty Asura Mayavi, getting enraged, challenged me (to a
fight) desirous of an encounter with me. Hearing his speech
I sallied out of the palace, and was followed by, this horrible
brother of mine. Thereat seeing me with one to assist me,
and finding that we had come upon him, that mighty Asura,
fled, seized with fear. And fleeing on, he (at length) swiftly
entered a huge hole. Knowing that he had entered that
dreadful and large cave, I spoke unto my brother of a crooked
presence,—Without slaying (this Asura) I cannot return to
the palace. Do thou wait at the mouth of the cave while I
slay him. This one is stationed here~thinking thus, 1
entered that inaccessible cave. And as I searched (for the
Asura), one entire ycar passed away. And that wicked
wight who had roused my alarm in consequence of his dis-
appearance, was (at length) slain by me in one day, along
with his friends. Then as he emitted yells in the subterrane-
an region, the cave was filled with his blood and it became
difficult to come out of it. Having with ease slain my


78 RAMAYANA.


powerful foe, I could not find the outlet of the cavern, its
mouth having been closed. Then as ] again and again cried
“Sugriva, Sugriva,” I became exceedingly sorry for not
receiving any reply. Thereat I threw down the stone after
striking it many times with my legs. Then coming out by
its mouth, I have come to this city. Seeking my kingdom,
the crafty Sugriva had shut me up there, forgetting fraternal
love’ Saying this, that monkey, the shameless Vali, exiled
me with a single cloth on. O Raghava, I have been dis-
comfitted by him, and been deprived of my wife. And from
fear of him, I have wandered over the whole earth having
forest and seas, And aggrieved in consequence of my having
been deprived of my wife, I have (at length) entered this
best of mountains, Rishyamuka, which for a certain reason*
is incapable of being approached by V&li. Thus have
mentioned unto thee the great cause of this hostility,O
Raghava, innocent as I am, I have come by this mighty
misfortune. O thou that inspirest the fear of all creatures,
by chastising Vali it behoveth thee to grant thy grace unto
me, who am tormented with fear in connection with VAli,
O hero.” Thus accosted, that energetic one knowing righte-
ousness, smiling, began to address Sugriva in words fraught
with morality. These sharpened shafts of mine, resembling
the sun, and never missing, shall furiously fall upon the
wicked Vali. So long as thou dost not see that stealer of
thy wife, so long only shall the impious Vali of vile character,
live. By what I myself feel, I see that thou hast sunk ina
sea of sorrow. But I will deliver thee; and thou shalt attain
both thy wife as well as this kingdom. Hearing that speech
of his, capable of enhancing joy and manliness, S~ jriva
overjoyed, spoke those words informed with high'sense.


* In consequence of Matanga’s curse —T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 719


SECTION xi.


Heaawe Rama’s words capable of enhancing joy and
maoliness, Sugriva highly honored the former and extolled
him, saying, “Enraged, thou, with thy sharp and flaming
shafts, capable of piercing into the vitals, canst burn up the
worlds, like the sun at the universal dissolution. Heedfully
hearing from me of Vali's strength, prowess and fortitude,
do thou afterwards, ascertain what is fit. Before the sun
rises, Vali cau easily range the ocean from west to east and
from south to north, Ascending the tops of mountains, Vali
possessed of prowess throws up their summits, and then
again swiftly holds them. And displaying his strength, Vali
vehemently crushes in the woods various stout trees. There
was one assuming the shape of buffaloe named Dunduvi,
resembling in splendour the summit of Kailaga. That one
possessed of prowess had the strength of an hundred elephants.
That wicked one of a gigantic body inflated by. his prowess
and blinded by the boon he had received once went to that
lord of streams—the Sea. Passing beyond the Sea, with
‘waves upon him,—and containing heaps of gems, he said unto
the mighty deep—“Grant me battle.” Thereat the righteous-
souled and mighty Ocean arose and, O king, said these words
unto that Asura, who had been urged by Death. O thou
that art skilled in fight, I am not competent to offer thee
fight ; but listen to me who will tell thee who shall offer the
fight. There is a monarch of mountains in a mighty forest,
—the great refuge of asceticism, the worker of the weal
(of all), an Asura, celebrated by the name of Himavan con-
taining great cascades and furnished with many fountains
and caves. He can compass thy incomparable pleasure.
Concluding that the ocean was afraid, that foremost of
Asuras, presented himself in the wood of Himavin, like a


720 RAMAYANA.


shaft shot from a bow. Thereupon Dundhuvi began to throw
down many white crags resembling the foremost of elephants ;
and sent up shouts. Then resembling white clouds, mild and
possessed of a pleasing shape, Himavan, stationed on the
summit, spoke, “O Dundhuvi, O thou that art attached to right-
eousness, it behoveth thee not to distress me. Iam the
refuge of all those ascetics who are not expert in military
arts.” Hearing those words of that intelligent lord of mountains
Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes, said :—‘Afraid of me and
ygnce void of energy if tyou art incapable of fighting with
me, do thou name him who fs ready to fight with me who am
desirous of entering into conflict.” Hearing these words
the virtuous-souled Himavan, skilled in speech, spoke unto
that great Asura, exercised with ire. ‘“O greatly wise one,
there lives in Kishkindha, of incomparable beauty, the mighty
and highly graceful monkey—the son of Sakra, by name
Vali. That mighty wise one, skilled in warfare, is capable
of fighting with thee on equal terms like unto Namuchi with
Vasava. Do thou speedily repair unto him if dost thou wish
for a conflict. He is always expert in military exploits and
is hard to repress.” Hearing Him&van’s words, Dundhuvi,
inflamed with ire, went to Kishkindha—vVali’s capital.
Assuming the figure of a terrible buffaloe, with sharpened
horns like unto a cloud big with water, ranging on the sky
in the rainy season, ant\ approaching th gate of Kishkindh&
that highly powerful one set up a terrible roar, shaking
the earth like unto the sound of a kettle-drum. Like unto
an elephant he felled, out of haughtiness, the trees around,
and rent the earth with his hoofs scraping it with his
horns. Vali was in the female-apartment at that tim-, and
unable to bear the sound came out with his wives tke unto
the Moon with stars. Thereupon that lord of monkeys and
other wild animals, spoke openly unto Dundhuvi, saying,
“O Dundhuvi, obstructingthis my city-gate, why dost thou
set up a terrible roar ? Dost thou know my mightv strength ¢


KISHRINDHARANDAM. 73


acquire virtue. Like unto the deity of hundred sacrifices
causing the rice fields bring forth their fruits by means of
profuse showers, I shall fulfill my promise by dint of my
prowess. Do thou therefore renounce all doubts about it.
Do thou call Vali, wearing a golden garland. Do thou make
such a sound, O Sugriva, as may bring out that monkey chief
(from: his city). He hath subdued his breath, is proud of
victory and fond of warfare; thou couldst not repress him
before. Forsooth that Vali shall come out, leaving the
company (of his wives). Hearing the war cry of his enemy,
he shall never put up with it, specially, as he boasteth of
his prowess before his wives.” Hearing R4ma’s words.
Sugriva, having a gold-yellow hue, set up a terrible roar,
asif riving the sky. Terrified by that sound, the kine,
losing their countenance do move hither and thither like unto
damsels, oppressed on account‘of their kings’ neglecting
(to protect them). And the deer fly away like unto the
horses defeated in a warfare. And the birds fall down on
the earth, like unto planets, losing their purity. Thereupon
confiding in R&ama’s words, that son, of Suryya (Sun) having
his energy enhanced by means of his prowess resembling the
ocean agitated by the wind, began to roar like unto cloud.


SECTION XV.


——


Wane residing in the female apartment, Vali heard the
uproar of that high-souled Sugriva—his wrathful brother.
And hearing that mighty roar, shaking the whole world of
creation, his pride was in no time, crushed and he attained.
to an excess of ire. Thereupon, Vali, having a golden hue,
greatly exercised with wrath, instantly lost the effulgence of
his person like unto the sun possessed by Rahu. And looking.
terrible by his teeth and having eyes resembling burning fire


932 RAMAYANA.


in consequence of ire he appeared like unto a pond, having
the lotuses thereof uprooted with their stalks and fibres. And
hearing that unbearable sound, the monkey, issued out speedily,
as if riving the earth with his foot marks. Embracing him
warmly and showing her affection, Tara, afraid and mortified,
addressed him with the following words, presaging his
future welfare :——“Do thou renounce, O hero, this thy ire,
coming like the course of a river, like unto one, leaving
aside the garland, which he used in the night, after rising
from bed. O monkey chief, do thou engage with him in
conflict, tomorrow. O hero, thy enemy is very insignificant
and hence there will be no deterioration on thy part. Thy
hastily issuing out doth not please me; do thou hear, why
I do prevent thee. Formerly this Sugriva invited thee
angrily to battle and being defeated and wounded by
thee fled away. That one, who had been defeated and
harassed by thee formerly, is now calling thee. Indeed it hath
excited my fear. His pride, his energy, and his terrible uproar
do indicate that there is nothing insignificant (at the
bottom). 1do not think Sugriva has come here without any
to assist him. Forsooth he hath taken shelter of some body,
and securing which he hath been setting up such.a terrible
uproar. That monkey is clever by nature and gifted with
intellect. And Sugriva shall not desire friendship with any
one without having a test of his prowess. Hearken, O hero,
J shall relate unto thee today, the auspicious words, I heard
_ere this, from the prince Angada. He hath related unto me
all about Sugriva, what he heard from his emmissaries while
journeying in the forest. The two heroic sons of the king of
Ayodhyi—R4ima and Lakshmana, incapah*’-' ot being
defeated in a battle and born in the race of Ikshawkus, have
repaired unto woods. To accomplish Sugriva’s welfare, those
two heroes, hard to repress, have come here. He is the
main stay of thy brother in the battle. Rama hath sprung
up like unto the fire of dissolution and is the repressor of


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 923


garland, the cause of the Saint’s curse by him and other
monkeys. Hearing those words, Vali approached that great
ascetic and solicited him with fo'ded hands. Disregarding
him, the ascetic entered into his asylum and Vali was over-
whelmed with the fear of curse. O Lord of men, afraid of
the curse that monkey chief purposed to repair unto the
mount Rishyamuka. Knowing for certain, O Rama, that
he shall not enter this forest, I have been living here
with my ministers, devoid of fear and grief. Here is
the collection of Dundhuvi’s bones, killed on account of
his own haughtiness, resembling a huge mountain. These
are the seven huge Sa/a trees, clothed in branches, which
Vali could simultaneously divest of leaves by virtue of his
prowess. I have related unto thee, O Rama, the incomparable
prowess of his, Do thou tell me now, O hero, how canst théu
destroy him in the conflict ?” Unto Sugriva speaking thus,
Lakshmana smiling replied :—“Performing what, shalt thou
confide in (Rima’s ability) to destroy Vali?” Thereupon
Sugriva bespake him—“ These seven Sa/a trees, before thee,
the mighty Vali, formerly pierced, all at a time, with one
shaft. If Rama can aim at one of these only with one
arrow and if he can, O Lakshmana, throw the bones of this
dead buffalo at a distance of two hundred bows—l shall
consider V4li slain.” Having addressed Rama thus, Sugriva,
having blood-red eyes, thought aside for a moment and again
spoke unto K&kuthstha:—‘He is heroic and proud of his
prowess—his heroism and strength are known all over’ the
world. He is a mighty monkey and incapable of being
repressed in a battle. His actions are such as are above the
power of the celestials. Revolving them within myself and
terrified 1 have repaired to this mount Rishyamuka. And
thinking of that lord of monkeys, unconquerable and irre-
pressible I dare not leave this Rishyamuka. And exercised
with -fear and anxiety, therefore, I have been wandering in
this mighty forest along with my devoted counsellors, headed


by Hanuman. And having secured in thee a worthy and
sincere friend, O best of men, O thou that art loving
unto thy friends, I have taken thy shelter like unto Himavat
himself. Cognizant am I of the prowess of my highly power-
ful and wicked brother, but I have never witnessed thine in
a conflict, O Raghava. I do not compare thee with Vali,
nor do I disregard or frighten thee—forsooth have I greatly
been alarmed by his terrible actions. O Raghava, thy words,
patience and figure are the proofs of thy heroism—truly do
they bespeak of thy valour like unto fire hidden by ashes.”
Hearing those words of the high-souled Sugriva, Rama,
smiling, spoke unto that monkey, saying—“O monkey, if
thou dost not confide in my valour, soon shall I create thy
confidence about my warlike abilities.’ Having thus ad-
dressed Sugriva and consoling him, the highly powerful
Raghava, of mighty arms—Lakshmana’s elder brother, lifting
“up easily with his thumb the dried frame of that Asura—
Dundhuvi—hurled it at a distance of ten yoyanas. Beholding
that Asura’s body thrown thus, Sugriva, again addressed
unto the herdic Rama, before Lakshmana and the monkey
herd, the following pregnant words :—‘“Friend, formerly
this body was wet and corpulent, and it was thrown with
great difficulty by my brother Vali, mad with voluptuousness,
And O Raghava, it is now divested of flesh and hence light
like unto grass and consequently it has been hurled by thee
with ease, O descendant of Raghu. And unable am I to
ascertain who is the mightier? There is a good deal of
difference, O Raghava, between a body, wet and dried.
There is still doubt, O worshipful one, which of you,is the
mightier? Truly shall thy strength be mauavsted in the
piercing of one of these Sa/a trees. Having stringed thy
bow like unto the trunk of an elephant and stretching it to
‘thy eagg, do thou shoot this mighty arrow. Doubt there
- 4s none that this arrow flung by thee shall bore this Seda
- ‘tree. There isno need of discussion any more ; do thou per.


RISHRINDHAKANDAM. 725


form; O king, what dost thou think proper for me, con-
tracted, as thou hast, friendship with me, with a solemn
vow. Like unto the sun amongst the planets, like unto the
Himalaya amongst the mountains, like unto the lion amongst
the quadrupeds thou art the foremost of men in prowess.”


SECTION XIl.


Hearine those pleasant words of Sugriva, the highly
effulgent Rama, to create his confidence, took up his bow.
That one, conferring honors upon others, holding his ter-
rible bow and a shaft, darted it towards the Sé/a, filling all
the quarters with a sound. The arrow, clear as the gold
itself, hurled by that one of mighty strength, perforating the
trees,entered into the mountainous expanse and the sevenfold
regions of the earth. And that shaft, gifted with wonder-
ful velocity, piercing all the trees entered again into the
quiver, Having beheld those seven trets bored by
Rama's arrow, that monkey chief attained to an excess of
surprise. Thereupon Sugriva, exceedingly glad, and de-
lighted with his actions, bowing down his head on the earth
and stretching his ornamented person on the ground,addressed
with clasped hands, that heroic descendant of Raghu—R&ma,
the foremost of those conversant with religious lore, with
the following pious words—“O best of men, O lord, what of
Vali, thou art capable of destroying with thy arrows, in
the conflict, even the celestials headed by Indra. O Kakutstha,
who can stand before thee in a battle, who hath pierced the
seven trees, and the mountain, and the earth with one
arrow? Obtaining thee as my friend like unto Mahendra and
Varuna, my grief hath been removed and I have attained
to an excess of delight. Do thou, O Kakutstha, even to-day
destroy, for my welfare, my brother Vali. .This I do pray


726 RAMAYANA,


unto thee with folded hands.” Thereupon embracing
Sugriva, of a pleasant countenance and like unto Lakshmana,
the highly wise Rama spoke unto him, saying, “Soon
shall we repair unto Kishkindha.—Do thou go before, O
Sugriva, and invite thy false brother, Vali, to battle.” There-
upon proceeding quickly to Kishkindha, V4li’s capital—they
all stood waiting in that dense forest, hiding themselves
under the trees. With a view to call Vali, Sugriva, tying
fast his cloth (around the waist) set up a terrible roar, as if
rending the sky (therewith). Hearing the terrible uproar
of his brother, the mighty Vali, highly angered, issued out
of his city, like unto the Sun from the western shores (where
he sets). Thereupon there arose a mighty conflict between
Vali and Sugriva like unto the planets Mercury and Mars
fighting with each other on the sky. The two brothers,
exercised with ire, struck each other with palms like unto
Agani and with fists resembling adamant. Thereupon Raima,
with bow in hand, beheld those two heroes resembling each
other, like unto two A¢wins, And Raghava did not discharge
that mortal sheft untill be could perfectly ascertain who was
Vali and who was Sugriva. In the mean time, being defeated
by Vali, Sugriva fled away and not beholding Raghava,
proceeded towards Rishyamuka. And wearied, worn out with
blows, and having his person bathed in blood, he, followed by
VAli, angered, entered that mighty forest. Beholding him
enter that forest, the highly powerful Vali could not pursue
him there for fear of the curse but said :—‘Thou art released
to-day.” And R&ghava too, with his brother and Hanuman,
entered that forest, where the monkey chief Sugriva was.
Beholding Rama approach with Lakshmana, Sugriva, stricken
with shame and casting his looks on the earth, addressed
him poorly, with the following words :—‘Accosting me with
‘do thou call (Vali), displaying thy valour and making me
struck by the enemy, what improper, conduct hast thou shown
by me? Thou shouldst have spoken me then truly, O Raghava,


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 727


—‘I shall not destroy Vali” and I would not have gone there
The high-souled Sugriva speaking thus poorly, Raghava again
spoke unto him, saying :—“Do thou hear, O Sugriva, O
worshipful one, why I did not discharge my arrow then.
By ornaments, dress, stature and movements thyself and
V3li are just the same, O Sugriva. By voice, by words, by
looks or by valour, monkey, I could not make out any"
distinction. O best of monkeys, being thus surprised by
the similarity of your countenances I could not discharge
that foe-destroying and quick-coursing shaft. I was so
afraid of thy resemblance with Vali that I thought that lest the
mortal shaft might destroy thee. O hero, O lord of monkeys,
if any disaster befalleth thee, who art already overwhelmed
with miseries, through my ignorance or childishness, they
shall be known all over the world. Mighty is the sin that
ariseth from the destruction of one who hath been offered
shelter. Myself, Lakshmana, and that exquisitely fine
damsel—Sité—are all at thy service—thou art our only refuge
in this forest. Do thou again enter into conflict, therefore,
and do not fear, O monkey. And do thou behold even, in
this very moment, Vali, moving restlessly on the breast of
the earth, wounded by my shaft. Do thou make some mark
on thy person, O lord of monkeys, by which I shall be able
to recognize thee when engaged in a duel (with thy brother).
O Lakshmana, plucking this auspicious Gaja flower, do
thou put it round the neck of the high-souled Sugriva.”
Thereat that highly graceful one with the garland around his
neck appeared like unto a cloud. And appearing in a graceful
person and attentive to Rama’s words he again entered
Kishkindha with him.


728 RALAVANA,


SECTION xiil.


"Tuereveon the high-souled Rama, along with Sugriva,
proceeded from the mount Rishyamuka to Kishkindhé,
maintained by V&li's prowess, raising up his gold crested
mighty bow and taking his battle arrows like unto Aditya.
The mighty Sugriva, bending low, proceeded before the high-
souled Rama and Lakshmana. They were followed by the
heroic Hanum&n, the mighty Nala and Neela, and the highly
powerful Tara, the leader of the monkey herd. They beheld as
they proceeded, trees, lowered down with the weight of flowers,
rivers of clear water flowing to the ocean, mountain hollows,
hills, caves, cavities, and principal peaks and charming rills.
They beheld on their way, pools filled with water clear as
Batdurya and beautified with lotuses—full blown and buds,
and resounded with the cries of Kdrandhabas, swans, geese,
Banchulas, water-fowls, Chakrabakas, and various other
birds. They*surveyed all around in the forest-land, deer
ranging fearlessly at large and grazing on tender grass.
They beheld frightful wild clephants having white teeth,
ranging alone—the destroyers of river banks and* enemies
of pools. And observing many an infuriated monkey like
unto elephants, resembling so many moveable mountains
tiving the mountainous expanses crusted with dust, and .
many other wild beasts and birds the followers of Sugriva
wended their way. They proceeding quickly, Rama, the
descendant of Raghu, beholding the forest filled with trees,
spake unto Sugriva, saying—‘These trees skirted by plantain
groves, dense as a collection of clouds, appear as clouds in
the sky. Great is my curiosity, O friend, to learn what are
these. And I wish to have my curiosity removed by thee.”
Hearing the words of the high-souled Raghava, Sugriva
began to describe that great forest—~‘In this extensive


KISHEINDHAKANDAH 729


asylum, oO Raghava, removing the toil (of the travellers)
filled with gardens and trees and abounding in delicious
fruits, roots and water, dwelt seven Saints, having control
over their senses. Those seven Saints, dwelling on the
mountain, passed days and nights in water with their heads
down and after seven nights used to live upon air. In
this wise, passing seven hundred years they repaired bodily
unto heaven, By virtue of their asceticism, this asylum is
walled by trees and incapable of being conquerred even by
Indra, the celestials and the Asuras. Birds or other wild
animals do not enter this asylum ; whoever entereth this by
mistake never returneth. There is audible, O Raghava, the
sound of the dressing of Apsaras, their sweet-winged accents
and that of their music and drums ; and herein pervadeth the
celestial fragrance. Here burneth the fire 7reté ; and the smoke
and cloud sable like unto the wings of a pigeon envelope the
tops of the trees. And there appear the trees, having their
tops saturated with smoke and cloaked with clouds, like
unto so many Baidurya hills. Do thou, O Raghava, O
virtuous-souled one, make obeisance unto them along with
thy brother Lakshmana, with concentrated heart and folded
palms. There resteth no sin in their persons, O Rima, who
bow unto those self-controlled Saints.” Thereupon Rama,
along with his younger brother Lakshmana, made obeisance
unto those high-souled ones. And having paid homage (unto
the sacred memory of those great ones) the virtuous-souled
Rama, his (younger) brother Lakshmana, Sugriva and other
monkeys, proceeded with delighted hearts. And wending
adistant way from that hermitage of the seven great ones,
they beheld Kishkindh&, hard to conquer and occupied by
Vali, Thereupon, Rama, his younger brother and the
monkeys taking their weapons, entered, to encompass the
‘destruction of their enemies, the city (of Kishkindh&) reared
by the prowess of Indra’s son.


ga


730 RAMAPANA,


SECTION XIV.


Tuev all, repairing quickly unto Kishkiidh’, Vali’s capital,
stood waiting in the dense forest, hiding themselves behind
the trees. Casting his looks all around in the forest, Sugriva,
having a huge neck and fond of woods, became exceedingly
enraged. Setting up a terrible uproar and rending the
sky with his cry (Sugriva) encircled by his kinsmen, invited
(Vali) to battle. Thereupon roaring like unto a huge cloud,
preceded by a mighty wind,Sugriva,gifted with leonine motion,
and resembling the newly risen Sun, finding Rama expert in
business, spake unto him, saying:—“Thou hast reached
Kishkindh§, V&li’s capital; adorned with gold, filled with
pennons and instruments and surrounded by monkeys. Do
thou make good thy promise, O hero, thou hadst made
before to encompass the destruction of Vali like unto the
season making the creepers filled with fruits.” Being thus
accosted by Sugriva, the virtuous-souled Raghava, the slayer
of foes, addressed him with the following words :—"Uprooting
the Gaya creeper, Lakshmana, hath placed it around thy
neck as an emblem (to distinguish thee). Thou dost appear
more beautiful, O hero, with this creeper around thy neck
like unto the sun on the sky engarlanded by the stars. I
shall, O monkey, by the discharge of one shaft in the conflict,
destroy thy fear and enmity proceeding from Vali. Do thou
show me, O Sugriva, thy enemy, in the guise of a brother.
Wounded (by my shaft) V&li shall roll in the dust in the
forest. And if regaining his life he comes in thy view, do
thou leave this field, showering abuses upon me. Thou didst
behold seven Za/as riven by a single shaft of mine and do
thou therefore consider Vali destroyed to-day by my prowess
inthe conflict. Though fallen in distress before, I never
spoke an untruth, being always guided by an inclination to


KISHKINDHAKINDAM. 7at


Do thou save thy own life.” Hearing those words of that
intelligent lord of monkeys, Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes
spoke : —“O hero, it becometh thee not to speak thus before
thy wives. Do thou enter into conflict with me and thy prowess
shall be ascertained thereafter. Or I shall suppress my
wrath for this night and do thou, O monkey, enjoy till the
rise of the Sun. Embracing all the monkeys, inviting all thy
friends, do thou, that art the lord of the monkey herds,
honor them with gifts. Do thou survey Kiskindha and make
thy children kings. And do thou enjoy with thy wives—it
is me that shall crush down thy pride. He, whe destroyeth
a person who is given up to drinking, reckless, emaciated and
deprived of weapons, and one like thee, sunk in the abyss
of voluptuousness, committeth the sin consequent upon the
destruction of an embryo,” Whereto replied Vali, laughing,
unto that wicked lord of Asuras, leaving aside all his
wives, headed by Tara. “If thou art not afraid of fighting,
do not consider me as one given up to drinking only.
Do thou regard this my attachment as a draught in this
conflict, to be drunk by the heroes.” Sayiag this, V&li,
taking his golden garland, conferred on him by his father
Mahendra, addressed himself for the conflict. Holding him
by the horns, Vali, that lord of monkeys, setting up a
terrible roar, hurled Dundhuvi resembling a mountain.
And bellowing a thundering voice, V4li crushed (him) down.
And blood began to trickle down from the pores of his ears.
Both of them desired to subdue each other—and thus
there arose a terrible conflict between V&li and Dundhuvi.
Thereupon fought Vali equalling Sakra in prowess, by fists
knees, legs, stones and trees. And thus there was a skirmish
between the monkey chief and the Asura. And in this
conflict Asura’s strength was greatly reduced, while’ that of
Sakra’s son was highly enhanced. Holding up Dundhuvi
he threw him on the ground. And in that dreadful skirmish
Dundhuvi was greatly reduced. And there was a profusion


gt


722 RAMAYANA,


of blood falling from the ears of that one crushed down.
Thereupon that one of mighty arms fell down to the earth
and breathed his last. Andtaking up with his arms that
lifeless one, the .mighty Vali hurled him with great force at
distance of a yojana. While thus thrown down by force,
drops of blood, falling from his mouth, driven by the wind,
fell upon the asylum of the great Saint Matanga. O great
one, beholding the drops of blood there, the great ascetic,
angered, thought within himself—Who might be the author
of this sprinkling of blood? Who is that wicked-souled,
vicious-minded, stupid person, who hath all on a sudden
sprinkled me with blood?” Saying this, that best of saints
issued out (of the hermitage) and surveyed a lifeless buffalo
lying on the earth,like unto a huge mountain. And apprehend-
ing by virtue of his asceticism that this hath been committed by
a monkey, he imprecated a mighty curse on the perpetrator
(of that iniquitous deed).—“He shall not enter here who hath
spoiled the sanctity of my forcst with showers of blood.
And surely he shall be kilicd (on entering). Forsooth shall
that wicked une cease to exist if he strideth within a yojang
around my asylum, who hath felled these trees by throwing
the body of the Asura. His counsellors or any one related
to him, who shall resort to this my forest (shall meet with
the self-same fate). They shall not live here; hearing this
from me let them take their own ways. And even if they
live here, forsooth, shall I curse them too. This my forest
is being protected by me every day like unto my own son—
and the monkeys are always used to destroy its leaves, trees
and roots. Forgive them I to-day—but if I find any to-
morrow, he shall be turned into stone for many thousand
years.” Hearing those words of the saint, the monkey herd
issued out (of the forest) And beholding them (coming
out of the forest} Vali spoke—“Why have ye all—the dwellers
of the Matanga forest approached me—Is it all well with
you?” Thereupon they related unto Vali, wearing a golden


KISHRINDHAKANDAM. 733


enemy’s prowess. He is the refuge of the saints and the
prime shelter of the afflicted. He is the protector of those
grinded by their enemies and is the only possessor of fame.
He is gifted with knowledge and intellect and ever abideth
by, his sire’s commandments. Like unto Himalaya, the
king of mountains, containing diverse metals, he is the
mine of various accomplishments. It doth not behove
thee therefore to enter into conflict with that high-souled
Rama, incomparable in prowess and hard to conquer in
battle. Hearken, O hero, I desire to speak something more
—I do not wish to excite thy wrath. Do thou instantly
confer upon Sugriva, the dignity of heir apparent (to thy
throne). O hero, O king, do not quarrel with thy younger
brother. I do consider it thy welfare to contract friendship
with R&ma and regain Sugriva’s affections, renouncing all
thy inimical feelings. This thy younger brother, even when
remaining at a distance, should always be maintained by thee.
Whether by thee, or at a distance, he is always thy best
friend—I do not find his equal on earth. By conferring on
him gilts and honors do thou receive him back.” And de thou
renounce thy enmity and let him sit by thee. Methinks,
that large-necked Sugriva is thy best friend—there is no
other resource for thee than to secure thy brother’s friendship,
If thou dost wish to go by my desire, if thou dost regard
me as thy well-wisher, do thou perform what I do request
thee for thy welfare. Be pleased and hear my beneficial
words. It doth not behove thee to yield to the influence of ire
--thy conflict with that son of the king of Kogala, gifted with
the prowess of Sakra, will not conduce to thy welfare.”
Thereupon Tara spoke unto Vali these suitable and well-
meaning words—but they did not satisfy him, possessed by
Kala, as he was, on the eve of his destruction. .


734 RAMAPANA.


SECTION XVI.


AFTER Tir3, having a moon-like countenance, had
spoken thus, Vali, remonstrated with her and said—“O thou
of exquisite loveliness, my brother, and specially my enemy,
is roaring lowly and haughtily—and how shall I put up. with
it? Otimid damsel, heroes, who have never been defeated
and have never fled away from the battle field, had rather
meet with death than put up with this ignominy. I am incapable
of bearing this proud uproar of Sugriva, having a defective
neck and desirous of entering into conflict with me. Fear-
ing danger from Raghava, thou needst not entertain any
anxiety on my account. Why shall that virtuous-souled and
grateful Rama perpetrate iniquity? Do thou therefore
return with my other wives. Why do thou follow me again ?
Thou hast already shown thy friendship and respect for me.
Iehall repairing thither, only fight with Sugriva. I shalt
crush down hi’ pride and not destroy him. I shall deal with
him mercifully in the battle as thou dost wish and being
struck with fists and trees he shall fly away. Forsooth, that
vicious-souled one shall not be able to withstand my pride
and proficient skill in warfare. O Tara, thou hast already
displayed thy attachment unto me by giving me good
counsels, By my life, do thou go back with the other
members of my household, I shall only return after bringing
about the discomfiture of my brother in the battle.’’ There-
upon, Tara, dexterous and of sweet accents, embracing Vili,
went round him, with tears trickling from her eyes. And
having performed Sastayana or the ceremony of benedic-
tion, that one gifted with a knowledge of Mantras, and
desirous of Vali’s success, went, overwhelmed with grief, to
the inner-apartment in the company of other females. After
Tara had departed to her own quarters with her female com-


KISHKINDHAKANDAM 738


panions, he issued out of the city sighing like an enraged
serpent. And the quick-paced vali, exceedingly wroth,
sighing, cast his looks around with a view to behold his
enemy. And that highly efiulgent one espied Sugriva,
having a golden yellow hue, tightly clothed, standing firm on
the earth and shining like unto burning gold. And behold-
ing Sugriva stationed thus, the greatly enraged Vali, of
mighty arms, put on his clothes tightly well. Highly power-
ful and closely habited, he, clinching his fists, proceeded
towards Sugriva, and waited for the action. Sugriva too,
clinching his fist and exceedingly wroth, proceeded towards
Vili, wearing a golden garland. And beholding Sugriva,
adept in warfare, having his eyes reddened with ire, advance
quickly, Vali spake :—“Behold, I have clinched this terrible
fist, arranging close my fingers ; and one blow from me will
take-away thy life.” Being accosted thus by Vali, Sugriva,
exercised with wrath, spake unto him, saying,— This my
fist shall strike thee on thy head taking away thy life.”
Thereupon being struck by Vali, waxing wroth and approach-
ing him quickly he began to vomit out gorg like unto a
mountain having springs, And Vali too was struck down
by Sugriva, fearlessly taking up a Sé/a tree, like unto-a
mountain clapped by a thunderbolt. Being thus smitten by
the tree and overwhelmed with the strike of Sé/a he was
troubled like unto a heavily laden boat in the midst of an
ocean. And these (two brothers) gifted with mighty strength
and prowess and motion of Suparna, and having huge persons.
fought with each other like unto the Sun and Moon on the
sky, They were inimical to each other and intent on finding
their mutual dark sides. And Vali, gifted with strength and
prowess, fared better in the conflict, and that highly power.
ful son of Sun—Sugriva, was worsted. And having his
pride crushed down by Vali and strength greatly reduced,
Sugriva in anger pointed him out unto Rama. Thereupon
there took place a mighty conflict between them like unto


736 RAMAYANA.


Vitra and Vasava by means of trees with branches, hills,
nails, hard as thunderbolts, fists, knees, legs and arms. And
these two monkeys ranging in the forest, fought with each
other, having their persons bathed in blood, and roaring
like unto clouds, And Raghava again and again beheld the
weak points of that monkey chief Sugriva, losing his strength
by and by. And beholding that chief of monkeys greatly
distressed, the highly powerful and heroic Rama cast his
looks upon his shaft, having the destruction of Vali in view.
And fixing on his bow an arrow resembling a serpent, he
stretched it like unto Death drawing out his cycle of time.
Being terrified by the sound of his stringing of the bow the
birds and beasts, dismayed as on the eve of dissolution, fled
away into different quarters. And a mighty shaft, like unto
thunderbolt and resembling flaming fire, being hurled by
Rama, alighted on the breast of Vali. Being wounded by
that shaft that highly powerful chief of monkeys, gifted’ with
prowess fell down on the earth. Like unto Sakra’s banner
in the full-moon of Aswin, Vali, with his throat choked with
vapor, losing all sense and sighing hard, fell dead down
to the ground. Asthe great God Hara emitted forth fire
with smoke from his mouth, so that best of men like unto
Death hurled an excellent, flaming and foe-destroying shaft,
tesembling gold and death itself. Thereupon being bathed
in blood that son of V&sava, fell senseless on the ground, in
the conflict like unto a blossoming Asoka growing « on a hill
and Sakra’s banner struck down on the earth.


SECTION xvii.


—00-—


"Tuerevron Vali, adept in warfare, wounded by Rama’s
shaft, fell down to the ground like unto a felled tree. Orna-
meated with burning gold, he stretched the whole length


KISHRINDHAKANDAM. 737


of his person on the ground like unto the banner of the
Lord of celestials, loosened and thrown (off the chariot). That
lord of monkeys being levelled to the ground, his kingdom
appeared like unto the sky, shorn of the Moon. Though struck
down to the earth, neither vitality, effulgence nor prowess
did renounce the body of that high-souled one. That excellent
gold and jewel-crested garland conferred on him by Sakra
maintained the vitality, effulgence and prowess of that lord
of monkeys. Being adorned with that golden garland, that
heroic lord, of monkey-herds, appeared like unto an evening
cloud. Though felled to the ground, his beauty appeared as
if divided into three, namely, his garland, his body and the
shaft piercing his heart. The arrow thrown off Rama’s bow
pointing out unto him the way to the celestial region, became
an excellent means to that hero. Beholding the broad-chested
and mighty-armed Vali, Mahendra’s son, wearing a golden
garland and having a flaming countenance and yellow eyes,
thus struck down to the earth, resembling a flameless fire in
the field of battle, like unto Yayati, slipped from the abode
of the celestials on the wane of his peity, dike unto a
tree falling down to the earth at the time of Dissolution,
hard to repress as Mahendra himself, incapable to with-
stand like Upendra, Rama, followed by Lakshmana, approa-
ched and beheld him. And paying respects unto that hero
falling on the earth like unto a flameless fire and eying him
again and again those two highly powerful brothers, Rima
and Lakshmana neared him. And beholding that highly
powerful Raghava and Lakshmana, VAli addressed them
with the following bold and pious words. And thereupon
Vali, of mitigated prowess, waning vitality, motionless and
stretched on the ground, spoke unto Rama, proud of warfare,
saying these pregnant words—“What merit hast thou
reaped by déstroying me, who was not engaged in fight with
thee? I was exercised with ire, being engaged in conflict
(with another person) and for thee I have met with destruc-


93


733 RAMAYANA.


tion, People speak highly of thee, O Rama, on this earth,
describing thee as coming of a high family, gifted with
manliness and prowess, ever engaged in the welfare of thy
subjects, compassionate, energetic, of firm resolution and
knowing time. Punishment, control of passions, forgiveness,
picty, firmness, truth, prowess and suppression of the
wicked—these all are the royal virtues. And knowing thy
high pedigree,and all these thy accomplishments I approached
Sugriva with a hostile intention, albeit prevented by Tara,
Before 1 saw thee I had thought within myself :—‘Forsooth
Rama shall not destroy me, engaged as I am with another
person and hence not prepared to fight with him.’ Ido now
know thee as one who hath spoliated his soul through
impious actions, feigning religion while in truth an
irreligious person, resorting to all vicious deeds, like unto
a well crusted with grass, unrighteous while passing under
the cloak of honesty and religion like unto a hidden fire. I
have not done thee any wrong either in thy kingdom or in
thy city. Nor have I passed by thee. Why hast thou then
destroyed mg, who am a monkey ranging always in the
woods, living on fruits and roots and who have come here to
fight with another person? It appears that thou art of a
kingly father and of a graceful countenance. And, O king,
there are marks of piely on thy person. Who, born in the
race of Kshatryas, versed in religious lore, having his doubts
removed and marks of peity on his person, perpetrates such
an iniquitous deed ? Thou art born in the family of Raghus and
known all over the world as being pious. Being clothed in
righteousness why dost thou commit such an unrighteous act ¢
Chastisement, charity, forgiveness, piety, truthfulness firm-
ness, prowess and the punishment of the iniquitous are the
virtues of a king, O prince. We are, O Rama, wild beasts
ranging in the forest and living on roots and fruits—our
nature is such—but thou art a man, O king. Land, gold and
silver are the causes of dissension. But who is there who is


RISHRINDHAKINDAM. 739


avariciois enough to get by our forest habitations and
fruits? The royal virtue consists in humbly and freely
administering discipline, favour and punishment. Kings
by no means, should follow their whims. But thou art angry
and unsteady by nature, capricious, perfectly narrow-minded
in the discharge of thy royal duties and dost use thy bow and
shafts (any where and every time). Thou hast no attachment
for virtue, no comprehension of right things and art always
guided by thy passions albeit thou art a lord of men. O
Kakutstha, destroying me sinless, with thy shaft and perpe-
trating such a digraceful act, how shalt thou relate it unto the
pious. Those,who commit treason, destroy Brahmins and kine,
who are theives and always engaged in the destruction of ani-
mals, and who are athiests and marry before their elder
brothers are married, do all go to hell. The villainous, the ava-
ricious, those who kill their friends and elope with their pre-
ceptor’s wives, do always visit the land of the vicious. And
there is not the least doubt about it. My skin is not worthy of
thy touch and my bones and hairs should always be avoided
by the virtuous. And my flesh is not worthy of being eaten
by persons of thy piety, A hedge-hog a porcupine, an iguana,
a hare and a tortoise—these five animals only, having five toes,
are worthy of being eaten by the Kshatryas and Brahmins,
O Raghava. The wise, O Rama, do-not touch my skin and
bones and my flesh is not worthy of being taken—I am that
(monkey) having five toes who have been killed by thee.
Alas! disregarding the well meaning and truthful words of
Tara, I have placed myself under the control of Kd/a
(Death). O Kakuthstha, the Earth hath got thee as her
husband like unto a good natured damsel being wedded to
a husband who hath forsaken his own religion. How art
thou, who art wicked, narrow-minded, a liar and ever intent
upon bringing about others’ misfortune, born of the
loins of the high-souled Dagaratha ? I have been killed by
an elephant—Rima, disregarding the virtue of the pious,


740 RAMAFANA.


breaking the chord of character, and neglecting the goad of
religion. Perpetrating this inauspicious, and improper act,
blamed of the warthy what shalt thou speak unto the pious
when thou shalt return in their company ? The prowess, thou
hast displayed towards me, careless, O Rama thou dost never
employ for the suppression of the iniquitous. O son
of a king, hadst thou fought with me openly thou wouldst
have, forsooth, seen the abode of Death being killed
by me. O- Rama, like unto a serpent destroying persons
asleep, thou, that art under the control of vice, hast killed
me, who am hard to repress, keeping thyself out of my sight
in the battle. I have been killed by thee, desirous of
encompassing Sugriva’s well being. Hadst thou apprized
me of thy object before, I would have got thee thy Maithili
in the course of a day, and brought, by the neck, that vicious-
souled Rakshasa—Ravana, the ravisher of thy spouse with-
out putting an end Lo his life in the battle. Whether in the
deep ocean or in the region under the earth, I shall bring
thy Maithili like unto an Ashyatarr.* Itis perfectly proper
that Sugrivg shall inherit my kingdom on my ascension to
heaven. And it is equally improper that I have been vici-
ously killed by thee in the battle. Every one in time meets
with death and hence there is nothing to be sorry for me.
But do thou think of a proper reply thou shalt give to the
people (when asked about the cause of my destruction).”’
Having said this, that high-souled Son of monkey-chief,
greatly distressed being wounded by (R&ma’s) shaft and
having his cours: dried up, became silent, fixing his
look upon Ramd; résembling the sun.


* Here is an, sion. A princeof Daityas, named Hayagriva, stole the
Vedas at the Kalpa ; inthe recovery of them he was slain by Vishny
after his de: s Matshya—T.


KISHKINDHARANDAM. 4


SECTION xvill.


Ano thus R&ma was addressed by V&li, wounded and
senseless, with those modest, pious and auspicious words.
And being thus reproached he spoke unto that excellent lord
of monkeys, gifted with virtue and other accomplishments,
resembling the Sun shorn of its lustre, a cloud which has
already discharged its waters and fire extinguished.—“Not
cognizant of virtue, knowledge, passion and custom, why
dost thou blame me like a child? Why dost thou purpose
to address me thus out of fickleness, consequent upon thy
monkeyhood not asking thy wise elders recognized by the
preceptors ? This land, abounding in hills and woods, belongs
to the Ikswakus. Along with it was conferred 6n them the
power of administering favour and chastisement unto
beasts, birds and human beings. The upright, virtuous and
truthful king Bharata, cognizant of virtue, knowledge and
passion and ever engaged in adminstering favour and punish-
ment, governs this kingdom. That king is said to be
cognizant of time and place; in him dwelleth modesty,
truthfulness, prowess and a love for discipline. Ourselves and
other kings, being commanded by him to practise piety, have
been journeying in this wide world desirous of multiplying
virtue. That foremost of monarchs, Bharata—lover of virtue,
governing this entire earth,who dares perpetrate an iniquity ?
Stationed in the excellent virtue of our own and placing
Bharata’s commandments on our heads, we shall consider
how we shall punish them who go astray (from the path of
virtue). Thou hast oppressed virtue and perpetrated a
gtoss iniquity. Thou hast placed thyself-under the control
of thy passions and deviated from the track of royal duties.
The elder brother, father, and the instructor—these three
should always be regarded in the light ofa father if they tread


742 RAMALVANA.


the paths of virtue and morality. A younger brother, 2 son
and an accomplished follower should always be regarded as
sons, And virtue is always at the bottom of all such considera-
tions. O monkey, the religion of the good is indeed very
subtle and can comprehend great things—the immortal soul
can understand what is good or bad. Fickle as thou art, how
canst thou comprehend what is proper, consulting with thy
monkey companions who are equally stupid and light-hearted,
like unto one, born blind, leading with another such? I
do fairly speak unto thee that it is not anger only that has
led me to bring about thy destruction. Do thou consider
why I have killed thee—thou hast ravished thy brother’s wife
renouncing that ever-existing virtue. Thou, the perpetrator
of many evil deeds, hast got by Ruma, the wife of thy brother
—the high-souled Sugriva. O monkey, thou hast thus
violated the path of virtue. And thus I have punished thee
who hast ravished thy elder brother’s spouse. O thou, the
leader of monkey-herds—I find no other alternative than to
punish him who acts against humanity and violates the sacred
sanctions of custom. I am a Kshatrya coming of a high
pedigree. I cannot put up with thy immoral conduct. Sastras
sanction the destruction of one who under the influence of
passion ravishes his own daughter, sister - and younger
brother’s wife. This is Bharata’s commandment—the lord
of earth, and we have been satisfying his orders. Thou hast
disregarded virtue. A wise man, living in virtue, cannot
fet go one who hath passed by the sanctions of morality.
Bharata hath sanctioned the destruction of the amorous;
and we, O lord of monkeys, following his orders, thought
proper, to encompass the destruction of one like thee who
hath spoliated virtue and morality, Like unto Lakshmana,
I have contracted friendship with Sugrive. And with a view
to regain his wife and kingdom, he resolved to engage in my
well-being. I too also promised the same before the monkeys:
And how cag a man of my position neglect to make good


KISHKINDHAKANDAN. 743


his promise? For these causes of very great moment,
favoured by virtue,“ i have administered unto thee this
condign punishment. Do thou now approve it. Thy discom-
fiture is quite of a piece with the sanctions of morality—
and to assist friends is one of the codes of religion. Hear,
Manu hath composed a couple of couplets tending to the
purification of character and highly prized by the virtuous as
well as myself. Those who, perpetrating iniquity, bear with
fortitude the punishment, inflicted by their soverign get at
the abode of the celestials being purified like unto the pious.
People are freed from their sins, when they confessing their
crimes, are either punished or forgiven. But the monarch
who doth not punish the perpetrator of an evil deed, is
visited by a mighty sin. Formerly an iniquity, like one
perpetrated by thee, was committed by a devotee who
was punished severely by my forefather Mdndhdta. And
other lords of earth punish in the same way the authors of
misdeeds. What more, the perpetrators of crime, themselves
undergo penances and are thus released from their sins.
Therefore do not repent any more, O best of monkeys. The
punishment, | have inflicted on thee, is in consonance with
the sanctions of morality. We are not our own masters.
Hearken, O best of monkeys, there is another argument (for
thy destruction) ; and hearing which, O great hero, it be-
hoveth thee to renounce thy ire. Many persons living on flesh,
either lying in ambush, or openly. catch and pierce by means
of net, noose and trap, many a deer, terrified and trusted,
taking to their heels or quarrelling with their companions,
careful or careless. They are not to blame in this and I do
not cherish, O best of monkeys, any mortification or ire for
this. And even many royal ascetics, versed in religious
lore, go a-hunting ; and hence thou hast been killed by me
with a shaft, O monkey, in the conflict. And I am justified
in killing thee, whether thou dost fight or not since thou art
amonkey. There is no doubt, O best of monkeys, that the


744 RAMAYANA.


monarchs confer life and piety auspicious and hard to
attain. It doth not therefore behove any one to injure them,
to blame them and to use improper words by them—since
they are the celestials ranging on this earth under the
semblance of man. Not knowing virtue and growing angry
why dost thou blame me who am following the religion of
my forefathers ?” Being thus accosted by Rama, Vali, greatly
mortified and informed of the principle of religion, observed
no delinquency in R&ghava. Thereupon that lord of
monkeys spake unto Rama, with folded hands, saying :—
“There is not the least doubt, O best of men, in all that thou
hast said. An inferior person can by no means address his
superior improperly. It doth not behove thee, O Raghava,
therefore to blame me for those unpleasant words which I used
towards thee, out of foolishness. Thou hast acquired a
ptactical mastery over the principles of religion and art
ever engaged in the welfare of thy subjects. Thy eternal
power of ascertaining the crime and meeting its condign
punishment is perfectly clear. Do thou know me as the
foremost of sinners and one who hath deviated from the track
of morality. Do thou conduct me, with pious words, toa
better land.” Vali, having his throat choked with vapour,
addressed again aid again, Rama, with piteous accents,
saying :—‘“I do not mourn so much for me, Tara, or other
friends as for my son Angada, eldest and wearing a golden
Angada.* Brought up by me from his very infancy; ‘he shall
by my separation, wear away like unto a pond having its
liquid contents drunk up by an elephant. He is my only
son, dear and born of Tara. A mere child and of unripe
understanding as he is, that one of mighty strength should
always be protected by thee, O Rama. Do thou regard
favourably Sugriva and Angada. Thou art their protector, and
chastiser punishing them for their sine. O king, O lord: of
men, it behoveth thee to regard Sugriva and Angada in the


* A bracelet worn on the upper arm.—T, ~


RISHKINDHAKANDAM. 745


same light in which thou regardest Bharata and Lakshmana.
It behoveth thee to so arrange as Sugriva may not disregard
that chaste Tar& who is blameable for my folly only. He,
who is favoured by thee, abideth by thy commandments and
-acteth after thy heart, can acquire kingdom, attain to heaven,
and govern the earth. Desiring to have my destruction
brought about by thee, 1 entered into conflict with my brother
Sugriva, albeit prevented ty Tar&.” Having addressed
Rama thus, the lord of monkeys stopped. Thereupon Rama
consoled Vali, of clear understanding with the following moral
words, acceptable unto the Saints. “O best of monkeys, do
thou not consider ourselves as well as thyself blame-
able. Weare more conversant, than thou, with the prin-
cipies of religion. They never Jose their virtue being pro-
ficient in the mode of ascerting crime and punishing it—one
administering punishment unto the criminal and the cri-
minal receiving it. And therefore receiving punishment
(from mc) thou hast been released from thy sins and acquir-
ed a knowledge of religion. Do thou therefore renounce
thy grief, thy illusion and the fear that ig lurking in
thy heart. It is impossible for thee, O foremost of
monkeys, to withstand the course of dispensation. There is
not the least doubt, O lord of monkeys, that Angada shall
be brought up by me and Sugriva in the same way as he was
by thee.” Hearing these sweet, collected and pious words
of the high-souled Rama,—the represser of the enemies in a
battle,—the monkey again addressed him with the following
pregnant words—"O lord, O thou having Mahendra’s prowess,
I do propitiate thee for my having insulted thee with
improper words, senseless as I was being wounded by shafts.
Do thou forgive me, O lord of monkeys.”


94


746 RAMAYANA,


SECTION XIX.


bd _———


Bene thus accosted with reasonable words, that lurd, of
monkeys, lying on the ground and wounded with shafts, gave
no reply. Having his limbs dissevered by stones, being
struck with trees and wounded by Rima’s shaft, he became
senseless at the approach of death. His spouse Tara heard
that Vali, the foremost of monkeys, bad been killed in the’
conflict by Rama’s shaft. Hearing the heart-rending news
of her husband’s demise, she, big with a child, issued
out of the mountain cave with ‘a troubled heart. And
beholding Rama with a bow in his hand, the mighty
monkeys, followers of Angada, fled away, terrified. Thereupon
T&r& observed those monkeys flying away terrified like unto
deer alienated from their herd, having lost their king. And
the chaste lady, racked with sorrow, spoke unto those
monkeys, afraid of Rama, wounded with shafts and exercis-
ed with grief, saying:—O monkeys, why are ye flying away,
terrified and distressed, leaving behind that foremost of
kings before whom ye were used to fight? Hath Vali been
killed by Rama, waiting at a distance with fleet and distant-
coursing shafts, being requested by Sugriva for kingdom 2”
Hearing the words of that wife of the monkey, they, wearing
shapes at will, addressed that damsel with words, worthy
of being said on that occasion,—"‘O thou, having thy son
alive, do thou go back and bring up thy son Angada. Death
himself, under Rama’s semblance, hath snatched away Vé&li.
He was killed by (R&ma's) shafts, resembling thunderbolts
as if clapped by thunder itself, having bored trees and big
stones (hurled by Vali). That king of monkeys, having
Sakra’s prowess, being made away with,this host of monkeys
have been taking to their heels being overwhelmed with
consternation, Let the heroes defend the city and instal
Angada on the throne. And on his being installed the


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. m7


monkeys shall serve Vali’s son, O thou having a fine coun-
tenance, the monkeys shall enter this stronghold, although
it is a favourite place with thee. Herein dwell many forest-
rangers, wifeless and having wives. And we are really
afraid of them, avaricious, and formerly deprived of their
wealth by us.” Hearing those words of the monkeys, lying
at a little distance, that lady, smiling sweet, spoke unto them,
words worthy of herself—“That great Jord of monkeys, my
husband, being dead, what shall [ do with my son, my king-
dom and myself? I shall place myself at the feet of that
high-souled one, who hath been killed by Rama's shaft.”
Having said this, (Tara) proceeded, overwhelmed with grief,
weeping and striking her head with her hands. While
proceeding, she espied her husband lying on the ground like
unto the destroyer of the lords of monkeys who have never
been discomfitted in a battle field, hurling mountains like
unto V4sava hurling thunderbolts ; emitting a roar like unto
a big cloud assisted by a mighty wind; resembling Sakra
in prowess and like unto a cloud accompanied by rain; the
represser of repressers; a mighty hero discomfitted by an
equally powerful one; like unto a lion killed by a tiger for
flesh ; worshipped of all men; like unto a chactya,* adorned
with pennons and altars, scattered and broken by Garuda
with a view to kill serpents. And she espied Rama reclining
his person on a mighty bow, his younger brother and her
husband’s younger brother. Passing them by and getting
at her husband and beholding him killed in battle, she, losing
her sense, fell down to the ground. And thereupon rising
again like one asleep, she, beholding her husband engarlanded
by death, cried aloud, exclaiming “O son of worshipful
sire.” And beholding Tara like unto a she-elephant and
Angada, bewailing in this wise, Sugriva attained to an excess
of grief.

lS ne

*.A pile of stones.—T.


748 RAMAVANS.


SECTION XX.


"Benorpine her husband lying dead on the ground with
the life-destroying shafts of Rama, Tara, lbaving a moon-
like countenance, approaching, embraced him. And seeing
him slain with shafts like unto an elephant, resembling a lord
of mountains and an uprooted tree, Tara, racked with grief
began to bewail—‘O hero, O foremost of monkeys, O powerful
one, O thou terrible in warfare, why dost thou not welcome
me to-day who am guilty of some iniquity by thee ? Rise,
O best of monkeys, and lie down on a better bed; monarchs
do not stretch themselves on earth. O lord of earth, indeed
earth is thy favourite wife; since renouncing me, thou,
though dead, art serving her with thy body. Evident it is,
O hero, that while engaged in a lawful conflict, thou hadst
created another city of Kishkindha,in the region of the celes-
tials. All thy enjoyments with me in nectar-smelling woods,
have been “brought to a close. Thou, the lord of monkey-
herds, being slain, I am deprived of joy and hope and
am sunk in the abyss of grief. Forsooth, my heart is uncom-
mon hard, since beholding thee on the ground it hath not
been sundered into thousand pieces being overwhelmed with
grief. Sugriva’s wife was carried away and banished by thee
and this is the result of thy action, O foremost of monkeys,
O lord of monkeys, out of thy ignorance thou didst neglect
all my well meaning words which I said, being intent on thy
welfare and benefit. O worshipful one, thou shalt captivate
today, the hearts of the dexterous Apsar&s, proud of their
youth and beauty. Forsooth, thou hast been by force brought
under the control of Xé/a, since thou hast been discomfitted
by Sugriva, albeit thou art above the control of others.
Destroying V4li unseasonably, while engaged in conflict with
another person, and perpetrating such an iniquitous deed‘


KISHRINDHAKINDAM. 9


Kakuthstha doth never relent, Unused to miseries before
how shall I, being an object commiseration, put up like one
helpless, with my widow-hood and grief. How shall the
heroic and youthful Angada, brought up in luxury and happi-
ness, be regarded by his uncle, senseless with wrath? Do
thou cast for good, O my son, thy looks towards thy pious
sire, for since now it will be hard for thee to see him again.
Do thon console thy son, favour me with orders, smell his
head, as thou art going to journey ina foreign land. By des-
troying thee,Rama,hath performed a great action,since by this
he hath been released from his vow unto Sugriva. O Sugriva,
do thou gain thy ends and get back thy Ruma, devoid of
anxiety do thou govern thy kingdom—thy enemy, thy brother
hath been slain. O lord of monkeys, why dost thou not
welcome me, thy beloved spouse, who am bewailing thus?
Behold, thy other wives are also mourning in the same wise.”
Hearing the bewailings of that she-monkey, others, taking
Angada, distressed and overwhelmed with grief, began to
cry piteously.--“O hero, having Angada on thy arms, why
art thou proceeding on a journey for good in a foreign land
leaving behind (thy son) Angada. It doth not behove thee (to
leave aside) thy dear son, gifted with diverse accomplish-
ments and wearing a charming and beautiful cloth, O thou
of long arms, O lord of monkeys, if I have offended thee in
any way, do thou forgive me, after ascertaining my crime. O
hero, Itouch thy feet with my head.” Bewailing thus pite-
ously with other she-monkeys, Tara, having a blameless
countenance, stationing herself where Vali was, resolved to
put an end to her being by fastings.


750 RAMAYANA.


SECTION XXI.


Puerevron beholding Tara fallen (on the ground) like
unto a star dropt down from the sky, Hanumn, the lord of
monkey-herds, consoled her again and again.—‘Animals, un-
agitated, attain to happiness or misery, as an outcome of their
actions performed (in their previous existence) by merits or
demerits. Why dost thou mourn for others, thyself being an
object of moruning ? Why dost thou feel commisseration for
the poor, thyself being poorly ? In this body like unto a bubble
who is there who mourneth for another? It behoveth thee
now, O thou having thy son alive, to look after prince
Angada and think of those duties which remain to be
executed by thee (after the demise of Vali). Do thou know
that life and death of the animals is very unsettled. It is
therefore proper to perform what tends to the welfare of after-
life. It doth not behove thee, O learned damsel, to mourn
like others. He even, who (while living) was surrounded by
thousands of monkeys cherishing hopes, hath met his
destined end. This hero discharged his royal duties in
consonance with the sanctions of morality and was gifted
with various kingly accomplishments such as conciliation,
charity and forgiveness. He hath attained-to the land of
kings and it becometh thee not to mourn for him. O blame-
less damsel, all these foremost of monkeys, this thy son
Angada, this kingdom of the monkey chief, do belong to
thee. Do thou soon despatch, O passionate lady, these two
(Angada and Sugriva) exercised with grief as they are (for
the performance of V4li’s funeral rites). And abiding by thy
commandments let Angada govern the earth. Let Angada
perform all those ceremonies, whicl should be gone through
by sons according to the Sestras and which are for the
well-being of the king; this is the time for the performance


RKISHKINDHARANDAM. 754


of those funeral rites. Performing the funeral ceremonies
of the lord of monkeys do thou install Angada. And behold-
ing thy son thus established on the throne thou shalt be
able to pacify thy grief 7” Hearing those words of Hanuman,
‘Tara, racked with grief’ consequent upon the loss of her
lord, bespake him who was standing there :—“I would rather
die with this hero who hath been slain than have hundred
sons like Angada, I cannot myself govern this kingdom nor
can I confer it upon Angada. Such duty devolves upon his
(Angada's) uncle Sugriva now. QO Hanuman, do thou not
consider that I shall confer this kingdom upon Angada—O
best of monkeys, father is son’s friend (in this respect) not
mother. There is no other resource for me tending to my
welfare both in this world and the next than taking refuge
unto this lord of monkeys. It is becoming for me to serve
this bed which hath been resorted to by the hero, slain (and
lying before me.) :


SECTION XXIl.


; Va, tanging on the verge of death, casting his looks
jarounds and sighing faintly, espied his younger brother
ugriva before him. Welcoming that lord of monkeys with
lear accents, VAli addressed him affectionately saying :—“O
ugriva, do thou not take to thy heart the improper conduct
have shown towards thee, being attracted by inevitable
Hoolishness, subject as I was to sin. Methinks, O brother, it
IS not our fortune to enjoy at the same time the double bliss
of fraternal affection and the enjoyment of kingdom, or else
why has it happened otherwise? Do thou acquire to-day
this kingdom of the forest-ranges and know me as one who
hath departed to the abode of Death. Soon shall I renounce


752 RARAPANA.


my life, ‘kingdom, my exquisite grace and my blameless
fame. It behoveth thee, O hero, O king, to perform what
I shall speak unto thee in this plight, however difficult it
might be. Do thou behold Angada fallen on the ground with
tears in his eyes—a little boy, incapable, brought up, in
luxury and deserving happiness. Do thou maintain this my
son, dearer than my life, like unto thy own son, born of thy
loins, satisfying all his wants in my absence. O best of
monkeys, like unto me, thou art his father, protector, con-
ferrer of gilts and remover of fear. This graceful son of
Tara equals thee in prowess and shall precede thee in the
destruction of Rakshasas. This youthful Angada, Tar&’s
son, gifted with energy and strength, shall perform befitting
exploits displaying his prowess in the battle. Surasen’s -
daughter is wonderfully expert in ascertaining subtle things
and giving counsels in the time of danger. Do thou, without
the least doubt perform what shall the chaste lady instruct
thee to do; for Tar&’s advice never goes without effect. It
behoveth thee to perform Raghava’s service fearlessly or else
thou shalt be visited with sin: on his being insulted thou
shalt be injured. O Sugriva, do thou put on this celestial
golden garland—herein dwelleth the bounteous Sree whd
shall renounce me after my death.” Having been accosted
thus by V4Ali, out of fraternal affection, Sugriva renouncing
joy again became pale like unto the Moon possessed by R&hu.
Renouncing his inimical feelings, being thus addressed by
Vali and carrying out his words energetically Sugriva
accepted the golden garland as ordered (by him). And con-
ferring (upon Sugriva) that golden garland and beholding
his son before him, Vali, resolved upon death, spake unto
Angada, saying:—Do thou place thyself now under the
control of Sugriva, ascertaining time and place, putting up
with misery for thy welfare and injury. O thou having long
arms, Sugriva shall not regard thee much, if dost thou remain
inthe same wise in which thou hadst been brought up by


KISHKINDHAKANDAHM. 753


mie before.* O slayer of foes, do thou never mix with
Sugriva’s enemies, and place thyself always under Sugriva’s
control, having subdued thy senses and being intent upon thy
master’s (Sugriva’s) welfare. Do thou not cultivate too much
of friendship nor be wanting in it—for both of these extremes
are sources of disasters. ‘Do thou therefore follow the golden
mean.” After he had said this, his eyes became expanded, his
teeth were opened and his appearance became ghastly. And
greatly pained by shafts he breathed his last. And there-
upon, the monkeys, the foremost of those who go jumping,
having lost their chief, bewailed and cried. On that monkey
chief’s departure to the land of celestials, Kishkindha’ was
divested of her lord, and gardens, hills and woods were all
rendered lonely, That best of monkeys, who fought a dread-
ful battle with the high-souled Gandharéas, being dead,
all other monkeys became of pale countenance. “Vali entered
into a terrible conflict with the mighty-armed Golava and
fought for ten years and five, for nights and days without
respite. And on the sixteenth year, Golava was killed.
- Bringing about the destruction of that wicked Gandharba,
Vali, having terrible teeth, saved us all from fear. How hath
he been killed to-day ?” Like unto kine, incapable of enjoying
peace in a mighty forest filled with lions,their chief being dead,
these forest-rangers could not attain to felicity on the demise
of that lord of monkeys. Thereupon, Tara, sunk in the
gulf of disaster, eying the countenance of her deceased lord,
fell down to the ground embracing Vali like unto a creeper
clinging for its suppurt to a mighty but broken tree.


* The significance of the passage is as follows :—Thou wert a mere child
while I brought thee up. But now thou art a grown up young man and this is
the time for thee to serve thy elders, Do thou therefore serve Sugriva—T,


95


754 RAMAPANA,


SECTION xxtit.


——


"Terzuron smelling the face of that lord of monkcys,
Tar& again addressed her deceased lord, known all over the
world, saying :—"O hero, disregarding my words, thou. art
lying on the uneven earth, hard and filled with gravels. O
lord of monkeys, the earth is dearer unto thee than I, since
thou art lying there embracing her and art not welcoming me.
O hero, O dear, O brave Jord, wonder it is that God under
the semblance of Rama, hath placed himself under the
control of Sugriva; hithertofore he shall be regarded as a
hero, Why art thou not awake, hearing the bewailings of
bears and monkeys who used to wait upon thee, powerful,
as well as that of Angada and myself? Alas! thou art lying
on this bed of the heroes, being slain in the battle, where
formerly, thy enemies destroyed by thee, used to lie down, O
thou born of a pure family, O thou that art fond of warfare,
O my dear, O conferror of honors, whither hast thou departed
making me husbandless? Let not the wise, henceforth,
confer their daughters upon the heroes. Alas! behold me,
the wile of a hero, made a widow in no time. Shattered
is‘ my honor and destroyed is my happiness and I am sunk
inthe deep abyss of grief. Forsooth, this my firm heart is
not sundered into hundred pieces, beholding my husband
slain! Thou art my friend, my dear husband and a great
hero—and thou hast met with destruction, being struck by
another man. A husbandless woman is always styled by the
wise as widow, although she might have a son and enough
of riches. O hero, thou art lying down in a pool of blood
issuing out of thy own person, like unto thy own bed having
a red-dyed bed-sheet. Thy body is on all sides besmeared
with blood and dust and I am incapable of embracing thee
with my arms, O best of monkeys. Surely hath Sugriva


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 755


satisfied his hostile intention to-day, whose fear hath been
removed by one shaft, discharged by Rama, Thyself depart-
ing to the land of the dead, I have been eying thee simply,
being prevented from touching thy person by the shaft
piercing thy heart’.* Thereupon Neela took out that shaft
from the person of (Vali) like unto a flaming serpent lurking
in a mountain cave. There beamed the shaft extracted
from his body like unto the rays of the Sun, stationed on the
summit of the setting hill. And there poured forth from all
his wounds, streams of blood, like unto showers of melted
copper and other metals falling from a mountain, And
(Tara) washed, with tears, her heroic husband’s body
covered with dust and wounded with weapons. Beholding
her husband thus slain and besmeared with blood, she spake
unto her son, Angada, having coppery eyes,saying :—‘Behold
this terrible declining stage of thy Sire. Here is the end of his
hostilities collected by his impious actions. O my son, do
thou bow unto thy kingly father, the conferrer of honors, who
hath departed to the abode of Death, having a flaming person
like unto the rising Sun.” Thus accosted, Angada rose up
and, saying, “I (do touch my Sire’s feet),’”” embraced his father’s
feet with his plump arms. (Thereupon Tar& said)—‘‘Saying
‘Do thou live long’ why dost thou not welcome Angada,
to-day as before, who hath bowed unto thee? I am with
my son, standing by thee who art dead, like unto a cow
with her calf, having the bull slain by a lion. How hast thou,
without me, thy wife, bathed in the water of Rama's shafts, at
the end of thy battle-like sacrifice 7 Why do I not behold here
that favourite golden garland of thine, which was conferred
on thee by the lord of celestials, pleased in a battle? Royal
grace hath not renounced thee, O conferrer of honors, albeit
thou art dead, like unto the rays not quitting the king of
mountains, even after the Sun is set.. Thou didst not act by


* The meaning is —Lest by my touching that shaft thou feelest a greater
pain. —T. -


756 RAMAYANA.


my wholésome words, nor could I prevent thee. And lam
now destroyed with my son, along with thee in the battle.
Truly hath Sree (goddess of wealth) renounced me.”


SECTION XXIV.


Besoroinc Tara emerged in a deep and mighty ocean
of grief, V4li’s younger brother was overwhelmed with
penitence, in consequence of the unbecoming destruction of his
brother. And seeing her countenance full of tears, the
high-souled (Sugriva), racked with grief and repentance, ap-
proached slowly Rama along with his followers. And nearing
him, with a bow in his hand, having arrows like unto serpents,
famed and having auspicious marks on his person, he spake
unto Raghava, seated there, saying—O lord of men, thou
hast fulfilled thy promise by carrying it out into practice ;
and as for wretched me, O son of a king, I shall refrain today
from all enjoyments. This queen lamenting piteously, these
subjects and retinue bewailing, being overwhelmed with grief,
this king being slain, how can kingdom please me ? O Rama
out of anger, and passion, and on account of my being insul-
ted by him, I did formerly desire to bring about my brother’s
destruction. But that lord of monkey-herds being slain, O
best of Ikshwakus, } am truly pierced to the quick with
anguish. 1 do prefer living for good in the mount Rishya-
muka, earning my livelihood somehow or other, to the
accession of heaven by destroying (Vali). This highly
intellectual and high-souled one spake unto me “Do thou
range at large, I do not wish to destroy thee.” Such
words were really becoming of him, O Rama. And these
words and this action become me (vile as I am). How
can a brother, O Raima, however avaricious he might
be, relish the destruction of his qualified brother, com-


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 237


paring the happiness of a kingdom, with the grief (con-
sequent upon his brother’s demise)? He did not desire
to slay me, lest his greatness might be spoiled; but alas !
through my wicked sense, I performed an iniquity by
taking the life of my brother. Being struck by him with
branches of trees, while I fled away and wept, he, consoling
me, said only ‘Do not do this again.” He all along main-
tained his fraternal feelings, his honesty and piety ; but (woe
to me) I have displayed my wrath, passion and monkey-hood.
O friend, like unto the lord of celestials perpetrating sin
by destroying Biswarnpa, I have been, by bringing about
the destruction of my brother, visited with this sin, beyond
comprehension, avoidable, undesirable and invisible. Indra's
sin was shared by earth, water, trees and women ; but who
is there who will bear and desire to participate this monkey’s
sin ? Perpetrating such an improper and irreligious act, tend-
ing to the decay of my family, I do not deserve the respect of
my subjects and the heir-apparentship ; what of kingdom, O
Raghava. I am the perpetrator of a vile and disgrace.
ful sin, blamed of ali in this world. And like unto a
current of rain going downwards, this mighty grief hath
overcome me. This mighty and infuriated elephant of a sin,
having the destruction of a brother as its body, repentence,
as its trunk, head, eyes and tusks, hath been crushing me
like unto the banks ofa river. Alas! O best of kings, this
unbearable sin hath been driving away all pious feelings from
my heart like unto alloy leaking out of discolored gold when
molten in fire, O Raghava. Methinks, for me, O Raghava,
these mighty monkeys gpd Angada are almost half-dead
(with grief). A good-natured and obedient son is rare. Where
is to be found Angada's equal? O hero, there is no such
land where I may meet again my brother. The heroic Angada
shall not live to-day—and if he lives, his mother shall live to
bring him up. Forsooth, without her son, she shall not
live long. Therefore shall I enter this faming fire with a


758 RAUVAVANA.


view t6 place myself on the same level with my brother
and his son and all these mighty monkeys shall engage
in quest of Sita, abiding by thy commandments, O son of
a king, they shall all carry out thy orders even in my absence,
do thou,therefore,order me (to enter fire) who am the destroyer
of my own race, have performed an inquity and do not
deserve living any more.” Hearing the words of VAli’s youn.
ger brother, who was bewailing thus, Rama, the heroic
descendant of Raghu and the slayer of foes, remained stupified
for some time with tears in his eyes. In the mean-time, Rama,
patient like unto the protector of the world, worked with
curiosity, looked again and again towards the bewailing Tara
sunk in the gulf of disaster. Thereupon the principal coun-
sellors raised up the brave spouse of the lord of monkeys,
having graceful eyes and lying on the earth, embracing her
husband. And snatched away from her husband and trembl-
ing, she beheld Rama, with bow and arrows in his hand,
burning like unto the Sun by virtue of his own effulgence. And
beholding him gifted with all royal marks, having beautiful
eyes and never seen before, that one, having the eyes of
a fawn, thought within herself. “This great one must
be Kakuthstha.” And the worshipful Tara, worked with
grief, and overwhelmed with disasters, bewailing, neared
quickly that high-souled one, resembling the lord of celestials
and hard to approach. And having reached the pure-souled
Rama, who had his ends fully attained in battle, the high-
minded Tara, having her frame worked with grief, spake
unto him, saying:—“Thou art immeasurable, hard to
approach, highly pious, prudent, pf controlled senses and
increasing fame, forgiving like unto earth and of blood-red
eyes. Thou hast bow and arrows in hand, art highly powerful
and of a tough body. And renouncing human grace thou
hast assumed the grace of acelestial person. Do thou slay
me with that self-same shaft with which my dear one was
slain. . And thus slain, O hero, I shall near him, for Vali doth


KISHEINDHAKANDAM, 759


not relish the company of any other woman but me. O-
thou having eyes “resembling clean lotus-petals, this
(hero ) departing to the abode of celestials and not
beholding me there, shall not delight in the company of
Apsaras, wearing diversified garments and copper-colored
corronets. Even in the land of celestials, O hero, Vali
shall turn pale with grief in my separation, like unto
thee in the picuresque dale of the Lord of mountains, separa-
ted from the daughter of the king of Videha. Thou knowest
well that a handsome man is greatly afflicted with the
seperation of his spouse ; and knowing this, do thou slay me,
and Vali shall not be tormented with grief consequent upon
my absence. High-souled as thou art, thou art thinking that
thou shalt, slaying me, be visited with a sin arising from the
destruction of a female. But do thow kill me, O son of a
king, knowing me as the soul of VAli, and thou shalt not be
responsible for destroying a woman. According to the Vedas
and various other sacred texts, wives are inseparably blended
with their husbands. And the wise say that there is no
other gift better than that of a wife in this world. Thou
shalt, O hero, confer me religiously upon my dear one
and by this gift thou shalt be saved from the sin consequent
upon killing me. It doth not behove thee not to kill me,
who am exercised with grief, without my lord, snatched away
from him and reduced to such a (pitiable) plight. O lord
of men, I cannot live long without that highly intelligent
lord of monkeys, having an elephantine gait and wearing an
excellent golden garland.” Thus accosted, the high-souled
lord consoling Tara, spake unto her the following well-
meaning words.—“Do thou not lose thyself, O wife of a hero.
This whole world of creation is being guided. by God’s
dispensation, And by Him is administered misery or happi-
ness as people say. These three worlds cannot neglect His
dispensations and are entirely subject to Him, Thy son
shall attain to the heir apparentship of the throne and thou


760 RIKAPANA,


shalt enjoy excellent joy therefrom. This hath been decreed
by the Almighty. Wives of heroes do never relent.” Being
thus consoled by the high-souled (Rama) gifted with"prowess,
and the slayer of foes, T41&, the wife of a heroic husband,
and wearing a graceful garment, ceased bewailing.


SECTION XXV.


Tuerevron, Kakutstha, with Lakshmana, equally ag-
grieved, said, consoling Sugriva, and Tara together with
Angada.—Grief and lamentations do not tend to the
welfare of the deceased. It therefore behoveth ye to
perform the after ceremonies. Ye have satisfied the worldly
practice with a profuse discharge of tears. It is not proper
to delay the performance of appointed actions. Time is the
prime cause in this world, and the source of the accomplish-
ment of actions. And Time it is that leads men to actions.
No one is the lord of another person, and no one leads him
to actions. People are subject to their actions of previous
existence and Time aids them. Even the Eternal being can-
not withstand the ways of Time. He never decayeth—and
no one else can withstand the course of Time. It hath
no friend, no cause and no one can overcome it. It hath
no kinsman, no relation; even it is not subject to itself.
The wise can percieve the work of Time. Piety, wealth
and desire are all subject to it. V&li, the lord of monkeys,
hath attained to his own true state, reaping the fruits of, his
actions, acquired by virtue of his royal accomplishments
—namely, forgiveness and charity. The abode of the celes-
tials, which was conquered by this high-souled one by his
former piety, hath now been occupied by him after resigning
his body. This is the best course of Time that hath been
attained to by the lord of monkey-herds. No more with


KISHKINDHAKINDAM. 76


lamentations therefore; do thou perform the actions that
are worthy of being performed on this occasion.” After
" Rama had spoken thus, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes,
addressed Sugriva, senseless with grief, with the following
sound words :—‘Sugriva, do thou perform the funeral
ceremonies of Vali along with Tara and Angada. Do
thou collect for cremation many a dry fuel and celestial
sandal. Do thou console the unfortunate Angada, who is
beside himself with grief. Do not conduct thyself like an
ignorant person, for this city is now under thee. Let Angada
bring clothes, garlands, scents, clarified butter, oil and
other necessary articles. O Tara, do thou goand bring soon
a conveyance ; for speediness is a special virtue on an occa-
sion like this. Let the monkeys dress themselves who can
convey this hearse. The powerful and the capable only shall
carry Vali’. Having thus addressed Sugriva, Lakshmana, the
enhancer of Sumitra’s joy and the destroyer of foes, stood
before his elder brother. And hearing the words of Laksh-
mana, the counsellor respectfully entered the cave with a
view to bring the conveyance. And taking that conveyance
carried by the monkeys and worthy of being carried by the
heroes, he issued out again of the cave. It had a celestial
throne and was like unto a war-chariot and had trees and
birds painted on it. It was painted on all sides with the
figures of foot soldiers, had latticed windows and was like
unto the car of the Siddhas—spacious and artistically and
stoutly built by artizans with beautiful carvings like unto a
wooden hill. It was ornamented with excellent ornaments
and beautiful garlands, sprinkled with red sandal and skirted
with strong ribs. It was covered with flowers and lotus-
garlands, crusted with precious clothes and had the colour
of the rising Sun. Beholding such a conveyance, Rama
spake unto Lakshmana, saying—“Do thou soon conduct the
funeral service of Vali.” Thereupon Sugriva, along with
Angada, placing Vali on the conveyance, began to bewail.


96


72 RAMAYANA.


And placing the lifeless body of V&li on it, hé covered it with
various ornaments, garlands, and clothes. Thereat Sugriva,
the king of monkeys, ordered for the performance of VAli’s
funeral rites. ‘Let the monkeys go before, scattering many
@ precious jewel and let the conveyance follow them. Let
the monkeys perform the obsequies of our master with such
grandeur as befits the riches of the kings on this earth.”
With a view to perform the funeral ceremonies of Vali, the
counsellors and other monkeys, having lost their king and
embraced Angada, proceeded weeping. And other subject
monkeys followed them. And all other she-monkeys, headed
‘by Tara, having Jost their lord, bewailed, exclaiming again
and again—“O hero, O hero”.—And they, thus bewailing
piteously, followed their lord. And in response to the be-
wailings of she-monkeys, hills and forests, as if, bewailed on all
sides. Monkeys, ranging in the forest, made funeral piles on
the banks of the hill-streams and in solitary watery nooks,
Thereupon laying down from their shoulders the conveyance,
those foremost of monkeys stationed themselves in a corner,
being stricken with grief. And Tar3, beholding her husband’s
body on the conveyance, placed his head on her lap and
bewailed, overwhelmed with griet. ‘“O lord of monkeys! O
my lord! O my dear one! O thou used to luxuries! O thou
having long arms! O my darling! behold me. Why dost
thou not behold these monkeys, racked with sorrow? O
conferrer of honors, thy countenance looks as if beaming with
joy ; although thou art dead, and thou appearest as if alive,
having the hue of the setting Sun. O monkey, Death himself,
under the semblance of R4ma, is attracting thee, who with
one shaft in the battle, hath rendered us all widows. O best
of kings, these she-monkeys cannot go by jumping. Dost thou
not percive that they have travelled so far on foot? Those
thy wives, having moon-like countenances, have always thy
welfare in view. Why dost thou not, O best of monkeys,
cast thy looks towards them and Sugrivay O king, these


EISHRINDHARANDAM. 763


thy counsellors, thy wives headed by T4rd, and all these
‘citizens are bewailing around thee. O slayer of foes, do
thou despatch thy counsellors to the city and we shall
all enjoy in this forest, excited with amour.” The other
she-monkeys, worked with sorrow, raised up Tar bewailing
thus being exercised with grief consequent upon the demise
of her husband. Thereupon Angada along with Sugriva,
overwhelmed with grief, weeping, placed his Sire’s body on
the funeral pile. And putting fire duly, he circumambulated his
Sire, bound for a journey for good. Having duly cremated
Vili’s body,the foremost of monkeys arrived at a river of aus-
picious water with a view to perform the watery ceremony,
And all these monkeys along with Sugriva and Tar&, placing
Angada before them, sprinkled water. And the highly power-
ful Kikuthsha, equally aggrieved like Sugriva, being as poorly,
conducted duly the obseqnious ceremonies of Vali. Thereupon.
cremating Vali, gifted with unequalled prowess, slain with
one shaft of the foremost of Ikswakus, and like unto flaming
fire, Sugriva appeared before Rama who was in the company
of Lakshmana,


SECTION XXVI.


Aro thereupon those foremost of monkeys waited there,
surrounding Sugriva exercised with grief and wearing wetted
cloth. And they all, approaching the mighty-armed Rama
of unwearied actions, stationed themselves with folded hands
like unto the great ascetics around the Grand-Father (of the
celestials), Thereupon Hanumin, the son of Marut, resem-
bling a golden hill and having a countenance resembling
the rising Sun, spake with folded hands, saying i—"By thy
assistance, O Kakuthstha, O lord, this great ancestral kingdom
of the highly powerful monkeys, having sharpened teeth,


764 RILAPANA.


incapable of being acquired by the high-souled ones, hath been
attained to (by Sugriva). Being commanded by thee, he
along with his friends, entering this city, shall perform the
royal duties. And being duly bathed he shall worship thee
particularly, with garlands, jewels, scents and oshadhis. It
behoveth thee to enter this pleasant mountain cave and
satisfy these monkeys by installing (Sugriva on the throne).”
Being thus accosted by Hanuman, the highly intelligent
Raghava, skilled in speech and the slayer of foes, replied :—
“O gentle Hanum&n, abiding by my Sire’s mandate, I shall
not enter a hamlet oracity for these fourteen years. Let
Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, enter this magnificent
celestial cave and do ye all instal him speedily on the throne.”
Having thus addressed Hanumin, Rama spake unto
Sugriva, saying:—'Conversant with customs as thou art,
‘do thou instal this generous and heroic Angada, gifted with
prowess and honoring customs, as the heir-apparent of the
throne. This brave and eldest son of thy elder brother—
Angada, is truly worthy of the heir-apparentship. O gentle
one, this month of SréSana, which is the first of those four
months which make up the rainy season, hath set in and this
is not the time therefore to institute any enquiry about Sita.
Do thou therefore enter thy auspicious city and I shall live in
this mountain along with Lakshmana, Pleasant indeed is
this mountain cave, spacious, filled with air, water and many
lotuses. Thou shalt engage in endeavours to bring about the
destruction of Ravana, after Aartka sets in. This is not
the proper time, O gentle one, and do thou enter thy own
city. And being installed on the throne do thou enhance the
joy of thy friends.” Being thus commanded by Raima,
Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys entered the pleasant city of
Kishkindha, reared by Vali. Encircling that lord of monkeys
thousands of them entered the city. Beholding the lord of
monkeys, the subjects bowed unto him, lowering their heads
pn the ground. Welcoming the subjects and raising them


KISHKINDHARANDAM. 765


up, the highly powerful Sugriva entered the pleasant inner
apartment of his brother. On his entering the city, his friends
installed the highly powerful foremost of monkeys--Sugriva,
on the throne like unto the celestials placing the thousand-
eyed Deity (on the kingdom). The monkeys brought for
him a copper-colored golden umbrella, white chowries, a
magnificent golden staff, diverse jewels, various seeds and
medicating drugs, roots and flowers of glomerous fig
trees, white clothes, white sandal paste, fragrant garlands,
flowers growing in water and on land, celestial sandal and
various scents, fried grain, gold, Priyangu* honey, clari-
fied butter, curd, tiger-skin, a pair of excellent sandals,
gorochanat and red Arsenic, Carrying all those things
there came sixteen maids, highly delighted. Thereupon
those monkeys pleased the foremost of twice-born ones
with jewels clothes and eatables, with a view to instal
that best of monkeys. And these conversant with mantras
threw clarified butter, sanctified by maztras, into flaming
fire burning on a Auca bed. And placing him on an excellent
throne facing the east, uttering duly mantrds in that golden
room situated on the summit of the picturesque palace and
beautified with magnificent coverlets and garlands, and
collecting pure water from various rivers, sacred places and
oceans, those foremost of monkeys kept it in golden jars.
Gaya, Gabaksha, Gabaya, Sarava, Gandhamadana, Mainda,
Divida, Hanuman and Jambub4n, installed Sugriva with
auspicious horns of a bull and golden jars according to the
tites prescribed by Sastras and sanctioned by the great
saints like unto the celestials installing the thousand-eyed
Deity with pure, fragrant water. Sugriva being installed
See

* A medicinal plant, and perfume, commonly known by the name Priyangu
and described in some places as a fragrant seed—T.

+ A bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine of a cow, or committed


in the shape of scibule by the animal, or according to some found in the
head of a cow,—T,


766 RAMIPANA.


thus, these high-souled and foremost of monkeys, by hundreds
and thousands, began to clatter with delight. Abiding by
Rama’s words, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, embracing
Angada.conferred on him the heir-apparentship of the throne.
And Angada being thus installed, those best of monkeys,
highly delighted, adored the high-souled Sugriva, extolling
him again and again. Angada and Sugriva being thus
established, they al!, greatly delighted, praised again and
again the high-souled Rima and Lakshmana. And the city
of Kishkindha,filled with stoutly built people and adorned with
pennons and flags, appeared beautiful in the mountain cave.
Communicating unto the high-souled Rama the news of
installation the highly powerful lord of monkey hosts (Sugriva)
getting back his wife Ruma, regained the kingdom like unto
the lord of celestials.


SECTION XXVIII.


On Sugriva being installed and the monkeys entering
the cave, Rama, along with his younger brother, got at the
Prasrabana hill, resounded with the noise of tigers and deer,
filled with terrible lions, covered with diverse trees, creepers
and bowers, inhabited by bears, monkeys, Gopuchyas and
cats, resembling a collection of clouds and always auspicious,
Rama, along with Saumitri, selected for his habitation, a
spacious cave, situated on the summit of that hill. Making
the above condition with Sugriva, Rama, the pure-souled
descendant of Raghu, spake unto his humble younger brother
Lakshmana, the enhancer of-wealth, the following sound words,
worthy of being spoken on that occasion—"O Saumitri, O
slayer of foes, in this pleasant and spacious mountain cave
filled with air, we shall pass the rainy season. O son of a king,
this summit of the hill is excellent and picturesque, beautified


KISHKINDHAKINDAM. 767


with white, black and coppery stones, filled with diverse
metals and river frogs, covered with diverse trees and plea-
sant creepers, resounded with the musical notes of various
birds and cries of peacocks and beautified with various
flowery trees,such as Ma/ati, Kundas, Sindubara,(a) Sirisa,(6)
Kadamba, Arjuna,(c) and Sarja.(d) O son of a king, this
pond filled with full blown lotuses shall always be near
ourcave. This cave shall be worthy of our habitation, O
gentle one, having its north-eastern part low and the western
part high. There is, O Saumitri, at the entrance of the cave,
a level, beautiful, spacious stone, black like unto collyrium.
Behold O my brother, on the north, the summit of the bill,
resembling collyrium and a rising cloud, There appears on
the south a beautiful white hill resembling the Kailaga filled
with various metals. Behold before the cave the mudless
stream, flowing towards the east like unto Fanhavile) in the
Trtkuta(f) mountain. This rivulet appears like unto a damsel
ornamented and clothed, being filled with various trees, such
as—Sandal, Tilaka, Séla, Tamalas, Atimuhtas, g) Padmaka,
Saralas,(h) Asokas, Baneeras,i) Timidas, Vakulas, Ketakas,
Hintalas, Tinicas, Neepas, Vetashas, Kritamalakas growing
on her banks. This rivulet resounded with various notes
of hundreds of various birds, filled with Chakrabakas attached
to each other, crowded with geese and Szrasas, having
picturesque banks, and various jewels, is as it were laughing


(a) As emall tree—Vitex negundo—T.

(8) A kind of tree—Acacia Sirisa.—T.

(c) A tree—Pentaptera arjunee—T.

(@) The Sala tree (Shorea robusta) another tree (Pentaptera Arjuna.—T.
__ © The river Ganges—titerally—the daughter of Yanku a saint. The Ganges
is called so on account of her supposed origination from the thigh of the great
saint.—T,

@ The name of a mountain—literally it means—having three peaks.—T.

() A tree (Dalbergia onjeimaisis)—Mountain ebony.—T.

(4) A sort of pine, (Pinis longifolia)—T.

(A sort of cane of ratan, (Calamas Rotany).—T.


768 RAMAIPANA.


on all sides. Here it appears covered with violetilotuses, here
with red lotuses and there again with celestial white water-
lilies, This pleasant and picturesque stream is filled with
various water fowls and Chakravakas and served by many
a saint. Behold there the rows of pleasant sandal trees
and those Kukuvas which have grown up as it were like unto
mental emotion. Picturesque indeed is this place, O slayer
of foes, and we shall happily live here, O son of Sumitra.
At no distance, O son of a king, from this place is situate
the pleasant city of Sugriva—Kishkindha, filled with forests.
Hear then, O best of conquerors, the sound of music, and
the clatter of monkeys mingled with the sound of Mrzdangas.
Forsooth is rejoicing Sugriva—the foremost of monkeys,
getting back his wife, regaining his kingdom, and attaining
to regal splendour.” Having said this, Raghava, along
with Lakshmana, dwelt in that Prasravana hill abounding
in caves and bowers. He did not attain to a best felicity
although he lived in that pleasant hill filled with many
things. Pondering over the ravishment of his spouse, dearer
than his life, beholding the setting of the Sun in particular,
he did not go to sleep, although he laid himself on the bed
in the night. His younger brother Lakshmana, equally ag-
grieved, spoke unto Kakutstha, thus bewailing being exercised
with grief and almost beside himself with sorrow, consequent
upon Sita’s bereavement, saying:—‘It doth not behove
thee to lament thus, being exercised with grief—it is not
unknown unto thee that people, thus bewailing do exhaust
themselves by and by. O Raghava, thou art devoted to
pious actions and the services of the Deity in this world—
and pious, energetic and dost believe in the existence of
God. Without being persevering thou shalt not be able to
destroy in conflict thy enemy—that terrible, willy Rakshasa.
Do thou renounce thy grief and take recourse to energy and
thou shalt be able to slay that Rakshasa with all his family.
What of the destruction of Ravana,‘thou art O_Kakutstha,


KISHKINDHARANDAM. 769


capable of uprooting the earth with oceans, forests and hills,
Rains have set in and do thou wait for the autumn when thou
shalt encompass the destruction of Ravana with his kingdom
and kinsmen. I, too, am exciting thy latent energy like unto
fire hidden in ashes with oblations. Welcoming the
auspicious and well-meaning accents of Lakshmana, Raghava
again spake unto him the following affectionate words :—
“Q Lakshmana, truly do thy words become thee, affectionate,
devoted, truthful and intent on my welfare as thou art.
Renouncing this grief standing in the way of all business,
Ishall calt forth, the more, this my energy on the occasion
of displaying my prowess. I shall live here, awaiting the
autumn and abiding by thy words and awaiting as well
Sugriva’s pleasure and the clear currents of the rivers.
Heroes receiving favours always return them ; the ungrateful
lose the friendship of the honest.” Considering Rama’s words
as highly sound and welcoming them therefore, Lakshmana,
with folded hands, spake unto Rama of graceful appearance,
displaying his own intelligence—“O lord of men, I fully
approve of all thou hast said. The monkey-chief shall soon
engage in our service. Resolved on the destruction of thy
enemy, do thou spend here this rainy season awaiting the
autumn. Subduing thy wrath, and awaiting the autumn, do
thou with me spend these four months in this hill filled with
deer, capable as thou art of encompassing the destruction of
thy enemy.”


SECTION xxvill.


—_——


Tuerevron encompassing the destruction of VAli, install-
ing Sugriva and dwelling on the summit of the Malyabana
hill, Rima spake unto Lakshmana, saying, “This is the time
—the beginning of the rainy season—do thou behold the sky

o7


770 RAMAPANA.


enveloped with clouds resembling so many hills. The sky,
drinking the liquid contents of the ocean through the rays of
the Sun, and being enceinte for nine months, is giving birth
to showers. Ascending the sky by the steps of clouds, one
can ornament the Sun with garlands of Kuéajas and Arjunas.
Like unto a wound covered with a torn cloth, the sky is
enveloped with cool clouds, coppery with the rays of the
setting Sun, and yellow at another end. The sky, having
mild breezes as its breath, sprinkled with sandal-like evening
rays and covered with yellow clouds, is appearing as it were
like one stricken with amour. The earth, afflicted with pers-
piration and filled with new water, is emitting forth vapour
like unto Sita racked with sorrow. Xetaka smelling breezes
may be drunk up in the cavity formed by putting the
hands together, like unto cold water discharged off the
clouds and mixed with camphor. This hill, having blown
Arjunas and Xciakas and rii of its enemies like unto
Sugriva, hath been bathed with showers. These hillocks,
having clouds for dark deer-skins, heavy showers for sacred
threads and having caves filled with air, are appearing like so
many Brahmins who have finished their studies. The sky,
being struck by thunders like unto so many golden lashes,
is, as if, groaning under a deep mental agony. Methinks, the
lightning, shining by the violet clouds, is appearing like unto
the poor Vaidehi at the lap of Ravana. These quarters,
enveloped with clouds and having therefore the Moon and
stars hidden, are indeed very pleasant unto those who are
under the influence of Cupid. Behold, O Saumitri, on the
summits of the hill the flowery Auéajas enveloped with the
vapour arising out of the earth, gladdened at the approach
of the rainy season and exciting my amour who am stricken
with grief. {In this season) the dust is watered, the air is
saturated with dews, all the evils of the summer are stopped,
the kings no longer proceed on royal marches and those
journeying in a foreign land return their native homes. The


KISHRINDHARAND AM. 778


Chakrabékas along with their mates are proceeding, being
desirous to live in the Ménasa Saravara; and in consequence
of incessant rains, chariots and other conveyances cannot
pass along the wayfares. Somewhere hidden, somehere open,
the sky, covered with clouds, appears like a vast ocean, being
encircled here and there with hills. There speedily pass
by the hill streams, being resounded with the cries of peacocks,
carrying with the current Sevja and Kadamva flowers and
having their coppery contents mixed with the metals of
the mountain. People (in this seasou)live upon many a sweet
rose-apple ; and ripe mangoes, of diverse colors, being shaken
by the wind, fall on the earth. The clouds, resembling the
summits of a mountain, having lightnings for pennons and
cranes for garlands, are muttering like unto infuriated
elephants in a field of battle. The forest-lands, having their
green pastures emerged in water, with peacocks dancing all
around with joy and clouds discharging their watery volumes
incessantly, are appearing more graceful in the evening.
(In this season) clouds, surrounded by cranes and heavily .
laden with water, are constantly moving, sometimes resting
on the high summits of the mountains and emitting a mutter-
ing sound. And rows of cranes, fond of clouds, rising
up in the sky, delighted and moved by the wind, are appear-
ing like a garland of white lotuses, spread along the welkin.
And the earth, covered with green grass and variegated
with newly born insects, is appearing like a damsel clothed
with a white blanket spotted here and there ‘with lac,
(In this part of the year) sleep is gradually overcoming the
great God Nérdyana, the river is flowing speedily towards
the ocean, the delghted cranes are approaching the clouds
andthe damsels are proceéding towards their lovers. The
peacocks are dancing at the forest skirts, the Kadamva trees
are covered with flowers, the bulls have become attached
unto kine and the earth has become charming with corns and
forests. The rivers are flowing by ; the clouds are discharg-


972 RAMAYANA.


ing waters; the infuriated elephants are emitting terrible
roars ; the forest-lands are growing more charming ; persons,
separated from their wives, are growing more anxious; the
peacocks are dancing with delight and the monkeys are
greatly comforted for Sugriva’s attaining to the kingdom.
By the fountains in the forests, the infuriated elephants
delighted with the fragrance of the Ae‘aka flowers and mad-
dened with the noise of the water falls, are emitting terrible
roars along with the peacocks, The black bees, resorting to
the branches of the Aadamdéa trees and overwhelmed with
showers, are, as if, slowly discharging their temporal juice—
namely the honey of flowers collected by them ere while.
The branches of rose-apple trees containing enough of fruits
like unto a collection of char coal are so appearing as if the
black bees are drinking the juice thereof, The dense clouds,
ornamented with pennon-like lightnings and emitting terrible
roars,are appearing like so many elephants, mad after fighting.
The infuriated lord of elephants, following in the track and
ranging in the hills and forests,hearing the muttering of clouds
and taking it for the uproar of another elephant, has turned
back, with a view to enler into conflict with him. Somewhere
the bees are humming, somewhere the peacocks are dancing
somewhere are ranging the infuriated elephants—and in
this way the forest-land has assumed diverse appearances.
It appears like unto a drinking-place,covered with Kadaméas,
Sarjas, Arjunas and lotuses growing on land, filled with
water resembling honey and with the dance and cries
of mad peacocks. The birds, having their wings discolored,
being wet with water, delighted and thirsty, are drinking the
drops of clear water falling on leaves and discharged by the
Lord of celestials.* The sonorous humming of the bees, being
accompanied by the gutteral sound of the frogs and the
mutterings af the clouds, resembling the sound of Mridangas,
an organised music, as if, hath begun in the forest. Sometimes


* According to Hindu mythology Indra is the god of rains.—T.


KISHKINDHAKINDAM. 273


dancing, sometimes setting up loud cries, sometimes placing
themselves against the tops of the trees, the peacocks, having
beautifully ornamented exteriors, have commenced music
in the forest. And rising from their perpetual sleep by the
muttering of clouds, the frogs, assuming various shapes and
making diverse sounds, are setting up cries being distressed
with new watery showers. The rivers, carrying Chakrabékas
as their breast and leaving behind their old banks,are approach-
ing, being excited, their own lord with various new presents,
Clouds, big with new waters coming in contact with violet
ones are’appearing as such ; and sometimes, touching the
hills burnt by forest-fire, are appearing like deep-rooted
hills. The elephants are ranging in this charming forest-
land, carrying the fragrance of Necpas and Arjunas, having
its green swards filled with /ndragopas* and with delighted,
peacocks dancing all around. The black bees, delighted,
are drinking honey, embracing the shower-distressed and new
filaments of the lotuses and Aadamva flowers. (In this
season) the elephants are infuriated, the bulls are delighted,
the lions have grown more powerful, the hills are charming—
the kings are devoid of all active pursuits, and the Lord
of celestials is engaged in sport with clouds. The clouds
ranging in the welkin and discharging heavy showers, are
roaring like unto ocean ; and the rivers, ponds and pools are
deluging the earth with their watery contents. (In this
season) heavy showers set in—the wind bloweth mightily and
the rivers breaking down their banks flow quickly blockading
the wayfares. The mountains are, as if, displaying their own
beauty and grace being as it were bathed by the cloud-like
jars, conferred by the lord of celestials and brought by the
wind like unto aking sprinkled by men. The sky is enveloped
with clouds and neither the sun nor the stars can be seen—
the earth is satisfied with new showers—and the quarters
being covered with darkness cannot be seen. The high


* Aninsect (Coccinella of various kinds) —T,


774 RAMAYANA.


summits, of the mountains, being washed by showers and
beautified by far-stretching waterfalls resembling pearls, are
appearing more graceful. The heavy mountain waterfalls,
losening the rocks and stretching over the caves filled with
the cries of peacocks, are appearing like a pearl-necklace.
And the quick streaming waterfalls, of the mountains, wash-
ing the summits of the hills, and resembling the pearls, are
being deposited in the cave at the foot. And watery drops
resembling the pearls of the necklaces used by celestial
damsels are pouring on all sides. The setting of the Sun is
announced by the birds taking to their nests, lotuses growing
pale and 4/4/atis blossoming. The royal marches are all stop-
ped, and the soldiers, who have already marched are waiting in
the way—hostility and wayfares have been equally blockaded
by water. This month of Bhddra is the time of study-
ing for those Brahmins, who chant Séma Vedas. Having
roofed all his houses and stored up his food, Bharata, the
king of Kogala hath set upon the performance of Ashara
sacrifices, The river Savaju is now brimful with water.
Seeing me return as if Ayodhya herself is making a delightful
noise. Clearly manifest are now all the signs of the rainy
season and Sugriva, rid of his enemies, established on the
vast kingdom, and regaining his wives, hath attained to best
felicity. And I am, O Lakshmana,waning every day like unto
the banks of a river, being separated from my spouse and
deprived of my vast kingdom. Immense is my grief, in-
accessible is this rainy season and mighty is my enemy,
Ravana; methinks it is impossible for me to bring about
the discomfiture of my foe. Owing to the unfitness of the
season (for marching against my foe) and the wayfares being
inacessible, 1 cannot possibly request Sugriva (to march)
although he is prepared to abide by my mandate. Moreover
after a good deal of affliction he has regained his wives,
and my service is of very great difficulty ; so I do not wish
to request that monkey-chief now. Forsooth, shall Sugriva


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 778


think of the benefits (he has received from me) after enjoying
rest for sometime, when the time for action shall arrive.
Therefore 1 shall, OQ Lakshmana, live here, awaiting the
pleasure of Sugriva and the clear currents of the rivers (the
autumn). Heroes receiving benefits, do always return them.
The ungrateful lose the good wishes of the great ones.” Being
thus accosted, Lakshmana, with folded hands, respecting
highly his words, spake unto the graceful Rama, pointing
out his own welfare. ‘“Forsooth shall that lord of monkeys
carry out all thy wishes. Do thou therefore spend here the
rainy season, awaiting the autumn.”


SECTION XXIX.


Benorpwerthe clear welkin, void of clouds and light-
nings, filled with Savasas and sprinkled with the charming rays
of the Moon, Hanumin, the son of Marut, versed in religious
lore and political economy, and conversant with effects proper
to the time or season, approaching the Lord of monkeys,
addressed him with various sound, reasonable and pleasant
words, well-meaning, true and teaching the; means of
acquiring forgiveness, piety and wealth. Acquiring riches
“Sugriva hath grown careless for the collection of righteous-
ness and wealth, is following the track of the vicious, and is
addicted to the satisfaction of sensual appetites—having all his
actions stopped and desires attained—and given to enjoyments
with damsels. Having attained all his desires and wishes,
his own wife and the much-desired-for Tara, Sugriva is
sporting with them, day and night, without any affliction, like
unto the Lord of celestials with Gawdharbas and Apsaras.
Placing all the royal affairs at the hands of the counsellors,
without looking to them, and confiding fully in their abilities


776 RAMAYANA.


he is living like one under the influence of passions—'Thou
hast attained thy kingdom, fame, and thy vast ancestral
wealth. It now behoveth thee to perform thy duties by thy
friends. Truly doth his kingdom, fame and prowess increase
who is cognizant of the seasonableness of time and doth
good to his friends. O king, truly doth he attain to a vast
kingdom, who hath the same wealth, soldiery and body with
his friends. It becometh thee, therefore, who art crowned with
a good character, and who dost wend a blameless track, to
work out thy friend’s well-being (as promised by thee). He,
who doth nat engage in the service of his friends renouncing
all business, becometh void of all énergy and involved in
unnecessary troubles, And ‘be, who engageth in his friend’s
service after the proper season is over, does nothing to his
well-being, though he performs a great thing. O slayer of
foes, soon shall the time for performing thy friend’s service, be
over; do thou therefore encompass Raghava’s good, namely
the searching out of Vaidehi. king, Rama, conversant
with the scasonableness of time and wise as he is, is not
informing thee of it, though the proper time is past; and
though he is in hurry, he is waiting for thee. Raghava,
as well as Lakshmana, who are the instruments of thy attain-
ing to this vast kingdom, and thy friends for so long
atime, are persons of incomparable prowess by virtue of
their unequalled accomplishments. He hath already per-
formed thy service, and it behoveth thee now, O lord
of monkeys, to command the foremost of monkeys to engage
in his service. To engage, out of season, in a service, uncalled
for, is not blameable; but to defer the performance of an
action in proper time after promising is indeed an object of
censure. O lord of monkeys, thou dost engage even in the
service of one who doth thee no good, then why shalt thou
not engage in the benefit of Rama who hath favoured thee
by encompassing the destruction (of V4li) and securing for thee
thy kingdom? O lord of monkeys and bears, truly thou art


KISHKRINDHAKANDAMP 777


gifted with prowess and strength, why dost thou not prepare
thyself for satisfying D&carathee’s commands? Dagarathee
himself is capable of subduing the celestials, Asuras and great
serpents—he is simply awaiting the fulfilment of thy promise.
He hath performed a great service at the risk of his life—we
shall therefore find out Vaidehi whethershe is in this earth
orin the welkin. Even the celestials, Dinavas, Gandharbas,
Asuras, Marutas, Yakshas are afraid of him in the battle-
field—what of the insignificant Rakshasas. O lord of
monkeys, it therefore behoveth thee to do good by all
means unto the powerful Rama, who benefitted thee before.
O lord of monkeys, who is there amongst us, who shall
not at thy command proceed unto water, sky or the region
under the earth? O blameless one, there are more than
one éotd of invincible monkeys under thee, do thou com-
mand, who shall proceed and to what quarter?” Hearing
these words of Hanuman, said on a very proper occasion,
the intelligent Sugriva, made up his mind for a worthy
end. Thereupon the highly intelligent Sugriva ordered
the ever active Neela, to collect soldiers from various
quarters. “Do thou so arrange as all my hosts and soldiers
with their commanders soon come here. Do thou soon bring
here at my behest all the energetic and quick-coursing
monkeys and commanders spreading their conquests to the
end of the earth. (After their arrival) do thou thyself
inspect and count all those monkeys. He who shall not
reach here within fifteen days shall be punished with the loss
of his life. There is no need of scrutinizing my orders.
Abiding by my order, do thou see along with Angada all
the elderly monkeys.” Having thus arranged, that best of
monkeys entered the inner apartment.


98


978 REMAPANA.


SECTION XXX.


——


Sceriva having entered his palace, and the sky being
cleared of the clouds, Rama, racked with grief, passing the
rainy season and beholding the yellow welkin, the clear disc
of the Moon, the autumnal night sprinkled with the rays of
the Moon, the amourestricken lord of monkeys, the
ravishment of the daughter of Janaka, and the season
well-nigh expired, became overwhelmed with sorrow and
senseless. And regaining his sense after sometime, the
highly intelligent king—Raghava began to think of Vaidehi
although always present in his mind. And beholding
the clear sky void of lightnings and clouds and filled with
the noise of Sérasas, Raghava began to lament piteously,
stationing himself on the summit of the hill oraamented with
metals of golden hue. And beholding the autumnal sky
he engaged in the meditation of his beloved spouse. How
shall that Sarasa-voiced damsel be pleased to-day, who, while
sporting in the hermitage, used to warble like Sérasas, to
invite them. Beholding Asaza trees, as if covered with golden
flowers and not beholding me how shall that damsel be
pleased? How that exquisitcly fine damsel having a sweet
voice shall be pleased to-day, who used formerly to awake
at the sounds of the drakes? Hearing the noise of her
companions—-Chakrabékas, how shall that one, of expan-
sive eyes resembling lotuses, live? Without her having the
eyes of a fawn, I do not attain to felicity to-day, ranging at
large by ponds, streams, pools and in forests and woods, For-
sooth shall Cupid excited by the approach of the autumn,
distress her the more on account of my separation and her
personal charms.” Thus bewailed that best son of a king like
unto the bird Séranga soliciting water from the lord of celes-
tials, And the graceful Lakshmana, returning from the pic-


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 779


turesque mountain-summits where he had sojourned in quest
of fruits, beheld his elder brother. And beholding in that
lonely forest his brother, racked with anxious thoughts hard to
bear and almost beside himself (with grief) the high-minded
Saumitri, prompted by his brother's grief, spoke unto him
very poorly, saying:—“O worshipful one, what hast thou
perpetrated by placing thyself under the control of passions
and defeating thy manliness? Thy deep and devout medita-
tion hath been purloined by thy grief ; and it is by religious
contemplation that thy grief shall be terminated now. O
brother, after going through the ceremonies of bathing and
so-forth, and acquiring peace, do thou bring all thy time
under thy control by virtue of the concentration of soul; and
being of unmitigated strength do thou resort to power and
help, the key-notes for the accomplishment of thy great object.
O lord of men, Janaki, husbanded by thee, is not capable of
being easily possessed by others. O hero who getting ata
flame of fire, doth not burn himself?” Thereupon R&ma
spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted with royal marks, address-
ing him with natural and resolute words and saying :—~
“What thou hast said, is sound, well-meaning, sanctioned by
polity and speaks of piety, wealth and forgiveness, It
should therefore, without the least doubt,be performed by me.
It behoveth me to engage in contemplation about the eternal
truth regarding the Deity and in ascetic observances. Or
else O Prince, it is not proper to think of the fruits of a
difficult, highly developed and energetic action.” Thereupon
thinking of Maithelee, having eyes resembling lotus-petals,
R&ma spoke unto Lakshmana with a dried countenance.
“Having satisfied the earth with a profuse discharge of
water, produced crops and thus finished his work, the
thousand eyed Deity is sitting silent. O son of a king,
the clouds, muttering a long and deep sound and approaching
the hills and trees, are calmed having discharged their liquid
contents. Having made the ten quarters dark blue, the


780 ' RAMAYANA.


clouds, resembling blue lotuses, have become calm, like unto
elephants without temporal juice, O gentle one, high gales
accompanied with rains, big with water and fragrant with
Kutaja and Arjuna flowers being driven before hither
and thither, have now become silent, O innocent Laksh-
mana, the sounds of clouds, elephants, peacocks, and
fountains, have been all stopped. Hills, having variegated
summits, being washed by dense clouds and thus free from
dirt and impurities, do appear elegant being sprinkled by
the rays of the Moon. Forsooth hath the autumn set in,
dividing its grace in the branches of Saptachada trees, in
the rays of the Sun and Moon with stars and in the gaits of
the excellent elephants. Surely hath the autumnal grace
resorted to many things. And it hath appeared more
profusely in the lotuses blossomed by the first rays of the Sun.
Scented sweet with the flower uf Saptachada trees, borowing
the musical notes of bees, tollowing the wind and subduing
the pride of infuriated elephants, the autumn is appearing
very elegant. The swans are playing with Chakrabakas
having splendidly spacious wings, fond of cupid, crusted with
the filaments of lotuses, and arriving at the banks of the
rivers. The antumnal grace is appearing more elegant
being divided in infuriated elephants, in proud kine, and in
streams of clear currents. Beholding the sky divested of
clouds, without manifesting the beauty of their tails
and renouncing their attachment unto their beloved
mates, amusements and beauty, the peacocks are as if all
engaged in meditation in the forest. The forest-lands
are as if a-blaze with many a sweet-scented picturesque
Priyaka trees, having a golden hue and their tops low-
ered down with the weight of flowers. The gaits, of
the elephants rendered idle with a profuse discharge
of temporal juice, fond of forests and water lilies, smell-
ing the fragrance of the flowers of Saptachhada trees
and accompanied by their mates, have become slow. The


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 781


sky is clear like unto a sword—the streams have become
of feeble currents—the wind, cool and scented with the fra-
grance of white esculent waterlilies, is blowing—and quarters
have become devoid of darkness. The mud has been
dried up by the rays of the Sun and the earth is filled
with dust—this is the time for preparation for inimical
kings (to enter into conflict), The bulls, having their
beauty enhanced by the autumn, and their body covered

with dust, delighted, infuriated and hence desirous of
entering into skirmish, have been setting up terrible
roars in the midst of kine. The she-elephants, moving
slowly, fond, passionate ani accompanied by other members,
have been following their passionate mates, in the forest,
embracing them. Leaving behind their excellent orna-
ments—the tails, the peacocks, getting at the banks of the
rivers, have been going away poorly and with depressed
hearts as if being remonstrated with by the Sdrasas. Having
terrified the Kérandavas and Chakrabakas with their mighty
roars, the elephants, having cleft trunks and being agitated
again and again, have been drinking water in the ponds
filled with full blown fotuses. The drakes have been jumping
delightedly into the rivers, mudless, covered with sands, full
of clear water, filled with kine and resounded with the notes
of Sdrasas. Now hath stopped the noise of rivers, clouds,
fountains, water, the high winds, the peacocks and the
mirthless frogs. And venomous snakes of vareiagated colors,
having lived for a pretty long time during the rains
without food, have on the approach of the autumn, come
out of their dens, hungry, in quest of their prey. The
red-dyed evening hath renounced the welkin, being de-
lighted at the touch of the rays of the Moon and opening
.@ little her eyes—the stars. Having the rising Moon for
ler elegant countenance, the stars for her excellent
open eyes and the rays for a piece of white garment,
the night appeareth like a damsel wearing a white cloth


782 RAMAYANA,


Having fed on ripe white rice, the excellent rows of
delighted Sérasas are flying quickly up to the sky like unto
a well-strung garland shaken by the wind. The water, of the
lake filled with sleeping drakes and water lilies, is appearing
like the sky in the night, devoid of clouds and filled with
the Fuil Moon and stars. The ponds, having the drakes
scattering hither and thither for their girdles and
engarlanded with full blown lotuses and water lilies, are
appearing like so many damsels ornamented with diverse
ornaments. The sound set up by the wind in the dawn
like unto that of a pipe accompanied by the music of a
trumpet, being mixed with the noise of the caves and
bulls are as if multiplying each other. The banks of
the rivers are being dressed by the newly blossomed
flowers shaken by the mild breezes and Kégas like unto clean,
washed silken clothes. The black bees, bold, given to drin-
king honey, rendered yellow with the filaments of lotuses
and Asana flowers, delighted and accompanied by their mates
are following the wind in the forest. The clear water, the
blossoming flowers, the noise of Craunchas, the ripe
white rice, the mild breezes, the clear Moon announce
the approach of the Autumn—the removers of the rains. The
rivers, having fishes for their girdles, have become of
slackened course like unto damsels moving slowly in the dawn
being enjoyed by their husbands. The mouths of the rivers,
filled with Chakrabékas, covered with aquatic plants and
clothed with Adgas are appearing like unto the countenances
‘of damsels pasted with yellow pigments. The most powerful
Cupid hath taken up his terrible bow in this forest filled with
Asana flowers appearing like unto arrows and the hum of
delighted bees. Having satisfied the people with a profuse dis-
charge of water, filled the rivers and pools and covered the
earth with crops, the clouds have disappeared renouncing the
sky. The rivers in this season of autumn have been gradually
‘ showing their banks. O thou of excellent looks, the ponds (in


E°  RISHEINDHAKANDAM. 783.


this season) appear exquisitely fine, being filled with Kurara
birds and Chakrabdkas. O son of king, this is the time of
preparation “for inimical kings, desirous of defeating one
another. O son of a king, this is the best time for royal
marches, but I do not find Sugriva preparing himself for that
end, There appear on the summits of the hills flowers
Asanas, Saptaparnas, Kavidéras, Bandhugeebas,and Tamdlas.
Behold, O Lakshmana, the banks of the rivers filled with
gwans, Sdrasas, Chakrabékas and Kuraras. Stricken .as
I am with grief, these four months, the season of rains,
appeared unto me like a hundred year, not beholding Sita.
Like unto Chakraddkas following their mates, Sit&, taking
the terrible forest of Dandaka for a picturesque garden, used
to follow me there. O Lakshmana, Sugriva, is not inclined
to show any commiseration towards me, who am separated
from my “beloved spouse, deprived of my kingdom, banished
and striken with sorrow. Regarding me as one without any
to back him, deprived of his kingdom, insulted by Ravana,
wretched, of a distant land, under the influence of amour and
therefore seeking his help, (Sugriva hath not felt pity
for me). O subduer of foes, O thou of excellent looks, for
these reasons, I: have been insulted by that vicious-souled
king of monkeys—Sugriva. Having appointed the time to
institute enquiries about Sit&, that wicked-minded one hath
now forgot it on the accession of his new dignity. Do thou
therefore repair to Kishkindhd and speak of me unto that
stupid lord of monkeys—Sugriva, addicted to rural enjoy-
ments. And do thou tell him—‘He, who breaks his promise
made unto a powerful benefactor who solicits his favour, is
regarded by people as vile. He is a true hero and an
excellent person who verifies his words whether good or bad.
Ungrateful they are who do not, after attaining their ends,’
engage in the service of those of their friends who have not
accomplished their objects; even those living on raw flesh
do not feed on their gore after their death. And ask him if


784 RAMAYANA,


he wishes to behold in battle-field the golden bow resembling
a lightning. And ask him more, if he wishes to hear the
terrible twang of my bow resembling the noise of thunder,
when I am enraged in battle. O hero, O son of a king, when
apprised of my prowess assisted by thee, will he not recapi-
tulate in his mind (that he may be destroyed by us like unto
Vali)? O conqueror of enemies’ cities, does not that lord of
monkeys,after accomplishing his object, think of the conditions
under which our friendship was contracted? Does not that
lord of monkeys think that he has spent four months in
enjoyments, having promised and appointed the season, after
rains, (for making) enquiries about Sita? Does not Sugriva
feel pity for us, who are racked with sorrow, being addicted
to drinking with friends and counsellors? Do thou go, O
hero, O thou of mighty strength and relate unto Sugriva
these my angry words. ‘O Sugriva, do not neglect thy
promise and wend the way trodden by Vali. I killed Vali
only with my shaft in the battle-field ; but if thou dost deviate
from the path of truth I shall destroy thee along with thy
kinsmen and relatives.’ O thou best of men, do thou speedily
relate unto him all those benefits which we shall reap by his
actions, for the proper season is well-nigh past. O best of
monkeys, do thou carry out thy promise remembering the
eternal existence of virtue, Do thou not behold the spirit
of Vali in the abode of Death, being killed by the shaft
discharged by me.” Beholding his elder brother thus enraged
and bewailing, the fiery-spirited Lakshmana, the best of men,
became enraged with Sugriva.


KISHRINDHAKANDAM. “785


SECTION XXXi.


‘Laxsimana again addressed his high-minded elder
brother, the son of a king, influenced by pission, stricken
with grief, and poorly, wi-h the following words. “That
monkey shall not follow the actions of the picus, shall not
think of the great fruit (the accession of kingdom) reaped
by our friendship; he shall not enjoy the riches of the
monkey-kingdom because he has not the right understanding
to make good his promise. Owing to the wane of his under-
standing in consequence of thy favour he is addicted to rural
enjoyments and hath forgot to return thy benefits. O hero,
killed let him espy his elder brother Vali. It is not proper
to confer kingdom upon that wicked-minded one. I am
unable to bear the outburst of my ire—forsooth shall I
kill to-day—that liar Sugriva. May the son of V4li with other
principal monkeys engage in quest of that daughter
of a king.” Beholding him rise up from the seat with
bow in his hand and greatly wrought up with anger and
hearing him thus announce his intention about the destruction
of Sugriva, Rama, the slayer of foes, spake unto him the,
following humble words worthy of being spoken on that
occasion. “Persons like thee on this earth do not perpetrate
the crime of destroying their friends. He is truly a great
hero and an excellent person who subdues anger by his
tight understanding, O Lakshmana, it is not Pioper for thee
to bring about the destruction of thy friend; do thou
follow thy former friendship and good feelings. Avoiding
harsh words do thou address Sugriva, who has violated
his promise, with soothing words.” Being thus duly coun-
selled by his elder brother, that best of men, the heroic Laksh-
mana—the slayer of foes, entered the city. Thereupon
the highly intelligent Lakshmana of right understanding,


99


736 RALAPANA.


and ever intent upon the welfare of his brother, taking up
a bow like unto Indra’s, resembling the summit of a hill
and terrible as Death himself, entered, wrought up with ire, the
abode of the king of monkeys like the hill Mandara. Intelli-
gent like Vrihaspati and ever abiding by his elder brother's
‘behest, Lakshmana, revolving in his mind what he should
say as well as Sugriva’s answers, and enveloped with the
fire of auger arising from the excitement of his brother's
‘amour, and therefore. displeased, proceeded quick as air.
And on be proceeded, felling down by his velocity, Sdla,
Téla, and Asvakarna trees, throwing aside the mountain
summits and other trees, breaking rocks into pieces with
his feet and striding very quickly like unto a fleet-coursing
elephant. And that best of Ikshwakus, beheld that splendid
city of the king of monkeys, hard to enter, surrounded by
monkey-herds, and mountains. And having his lips swollen
with anger for Sugriva, Lakshmana beheld the terrible
monkeys walking outside the city. Beholding that best of
men—Lakshmana, the monkeys resembling elephants entered
the mountainous stronghold and took up the summits of the
hill and huge trees. And observing them armed, Lakshmana
was doubly inflamed with anger like unto fire kindled with
‘fuels. And beholding Lakshmana, highly enraged, terrible
as Death himself at the time of dissolution, the monkeys,
stricken with fear, fled away, by hundreds, into various quar-
ters. Thereat those foremost of monkeys, entering the
palace of Sugriva, communicated unto him, Lakshmana's ire
and approach. That amorous chief, of monkeys, attached
unto Tara, paid no heed to the words of those foremost of
monkeys, Thereupon those terrible monkeys, resembling
hills, elephants and clouds, went out of the city being com-
manded by the minister. Some of them had sharpened
teeth and nails, some were grim-visaged, some had teeth
like those of tigers, some had the strength of ten elephants,

ome had the strength of hundred elephants and some


KISHKINDHARKANDAM. 787


had that of thousand elephants. Thereupon Lakshmana,
angry, espied the city of Kishkindhd, hard to enter and
surrounded by mighty monkeys with trees in their
hands. And getting over the ditch around the city walls,
those terrible-looking monkeys stationed themselves openly.
And meditating upon Sugriva’s error and his brother's
jaterest, the self-controlled Lakshmana, heroic, proceeded
onwards. Sighing hot and hard, that best of men—Lakshmana,
with reddened eyes appeared like unto smoky fire. He
appeared like unto a terrible serpent of five mouths,having the
top of the arow for his tongue,the bow for his expanded hood
and his own prowess for the poison. Beholding him like the
flaming fire of dissolution and enraged lord of serpents,
Angada, out of fear, became exceedingly sorry. Thereupon,
the far-famed Lakshmana, having his eyes reddened with.
ire, spoke unto Angada, saying’—O child, do thou inform
Sugriva of my arrival. O conqueror of foes, do thou tell him :—
‘Lakshmana, the younger brother of Rama, being stricken.
with grief on account of his brother’s disaster, hath come
to thee and is waiting at the gate. If it pleascth thee, do.
thou make good thy promise.’ Saying these words do thou
speedily return, O my child, O conqueror of foes.” Hearing
Lakshmana’s words, Angada, overwhelmed with grief, aproa-
ching his uncle said—‘Saumitree hath arrived here,’ Being
greatly agitated with harsh words, Angada, with a pale and
poorly countenance issued out speedily and approaching, touch-
ed first the king’s feet and afterwards with reverence Rum&'s
feet. That one of exceeding prowess first touched the feet
of his uncle then saluted again his mother and afterwards
touching the feet of Rum& related unto them every thing
in full. That monkey, possessed by amour and under
the influence of liquor, being asleep could not hear (what
Augada had said), Beholding Lakshmana highly enraged, the
monkeys, possessed by fear, began to make noise as they
were welceming him. They, approaching Lakshmana began ta


788 RAMAYANA


set up a terrible roar like unto thunder and resembling
the uproar of lions and the noise of water-falls. By that
terrible sound awoke that monkey-chief, having coppery
eyes, agitated, adorned with garlands and possessed by
liquor. Hearing the words of Angada, the two counsellors of
Sugriva, intelligent and of magnificent looks, along with him,
approached that lord of monkeys. And those two ministers
Yaksha and Pravaba, to give him proper counsels, informed
(that monkey-chief) of the arrival of Lakshmana. Satisfying
Sugriva with words pointing out his welfare, they sitting by
him, spake unto that lord of wind resembling the king of
celestials, saying :—Of those two great and truthful brothers
Rama and L.tshmana, who are born as men, worthy of attain-
ing to kingdom and who have gained for thee thy kingdom,
Lakshmana, with a bow in his hand, is waiting at thy gate.
And afraid of whom, the monkeys, trembling, are setting up
terrible roars. That Lakshmana, Raghava’s brother, having
words for his charioteer, and perseverance for his chariot,
hath approached thee at his brother’s command. O blame-
less king, by that Lakshmana—Tara’s darling, Angada
hath been despatched unto thee. O king, of monkeys,
that highly powerful one, having his eyes full of ire, is wait-
ing at thy gate, as if burning down with his eyes all the
monkeys. O king, along with thy children and friends do thou
repair unto him speedily and bowing unto him with thy
head down do thou pacify his wrath. And do thou, O king,
with a composed heart, perform what the virtuous-souled
Rama hath ordered thee to do and thus fulfil thy promise.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 789


SECTION xxx.


Hearne the words of Angada as well as of Lakshmana’s
wrath, the self-controlled Sugriva along with his counsellors,
left his seat. Ascertaining the weight and lightness of the
present occasion, that one, expert in counsels and abiding
by their advice spake unto the expert counsellors,saying rt]
have not done him any wrong, nor have I spoken unto him any
improper word. I do not know why Raghava’s brother Laksh-
mana hath become offended with me. Lakshmana hath been
falsely apprised of my imaginary weakness by my enemies,
always looking to my dark sides. It behoveth ye all, to ascertain
now speedily according to your knowledge and right under-
standing (the cause of Lakshmana’s wrath). Ido not fear
Lakshmana or Raghava; but friends enraged without any
cause do invariably produce fear. It is easy to contract
friendship but very difficult to sustain it; for owing to the
fickleness of our minds, a very slight cause brings about
separation. I have not done him any good proportionate to
what the high-souled Rama had done for me ; and it is for
this reason that I am afraid of him.” Being thus addressed
by Sugriva—Hanumin, the foremost of monkey-counsellors,
spoke, according to his own understanding, saying :—"It is
no wonder, O lord of monkeys, that thou hast not forgot
the unexpected benefit, (thou hadst received at the hands of
Rama). To encompass thy well-being, Vali, powerful as the
Lord of celestials, was fearlessly destroyed by the heroic
Raghava. There is not the least doubt, that Raghava, out of
love, is enraged with thee, and hath despatched his younger
brother Lakshmana, the enhancer of prosperity. O thou
foremost of those conversant with time, the auspicious autumn,
green with Saptackhada flowers, hath set in and thou,
given up to enjoyments, doth not percieve it. The sky,


790 RAMAYANA.


having the clouds removed, is full of clear stars and planets.
The quarters, the ponds and rivers are all clear. O best
of monkeys, finding thee forgetful, Lakshmana hath come
here to inform thee that the proper time hath arrived. Do
thou patiently hear all these harsh words of the high-souled
Rama, racked with sorrow and separated from his spouse,
which Lakshmana, shall relate unto thee. Thou hast acted
improperly towards him, and I do not find any thing tending
to thy welfare but thy satisfying Lakshmana with folded
hands, The kings should be addressed with auspicious words
by their counsellors always ministering unto them proper
counsels. And it is for this reason, lam addressing thee with
these sound words. R&aghava, taking up his bow, while
enraged, can bring under subjection the entire world, inhabited
by the celestials, Asuras and Gandharbas. Remembering
his former service, it doth not behove thee, grateful as thou
art, to excite his wrath, who should be pleased again. Bow-
ing unto him, with thy children and friends, do thou, O king,
satisfying thy promise, seek his shelter like unto a wife
placing hersclf under the control of her husband. O lord of
monkeys, it doth not behove thee, to neglect even in thought,
the behests of Rama and his younger brother; for thou art
fully aware of the prowess of Raghava like unto the lord of
celestials, and passing human power.


SECTION XXXII.
——00-——


"Turrevron, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes, command-
ed, entered, at the behest of Rama, the pleasant city of
Kishkindh& situated in the centre of caves. Beholding
Lakshmana, the highly powerful monkeys, having huge
persons and waiting at the gate, stood all with folded hands.
And seeing Dagaratha’s son highly enraged and sighing again


KISHKINDRAKANDAM. 791


‘and again, the monkeys stood silent and did not interrupt
him. The graceful Lakshmana espied that huge picturesque
and celestial cave adorned with jewels and flowery gardens.
It was filled with palatial buildings, various jewels and
flowery trees, producing at all times wished-for fruits. It was
beautified with good-looking monkeys—children of the
celestials and Gandharbas wearing celestial garlands and
clothes and assuming shapes at will. It was fragrant with the
sweet smell of sandal wood, Agurs and lotuses and its high-
ways were equally fragrant with the smell of honey. And
Lakshmana beheld there many spacious buildings like unto
the hills Péndhya and Merz and rivers of clear water, And he
also surveyed the picturesque dwellings of Angada, Mainda,
Divida, Gavaya, Gabaksha, Gaja, Sarava, Vidhutmali, Sampiti,
Suryaksha, Hanum&n, Beerabahu, Subahu, Nala, Kumuda,
Sushena, Tara, Jambaban, Dadhibaktra, Neela, Sunetra and
Supatala like unto sable clouds adorned with excellent
garlands, filled with rice and jewels and beautiful damsels.
Unobstructed the highly powerful Saumitri entered the
picturesque abode of Sugriva like unto the Sun entering into
a collection of dense clouds. The abode of this lord of
monkeys was like unto the palace of the Lord of celestials,
ornamented with the tops of white buildings resembling the
summits of the Kailaga hill and flowery trees producing at
all times, wished-for fruits; covered with beautiful trees
having cool shades and bearing celestial fruits and flowers
resembling the molten-gold. And that virtuous-souled one,
crossing the seven rooms filled with conveyances and seats
beheld the secret apartment (of that monkey-chief), having
many a gold and silver bed-steads with excellent coverlets
and fine seats. No sooner had he entered the inner apart-
ment than he heard a musical sound, well-measured and
accompanied by the music of the stringed instrument. And
that highly powerful one beheld in the abode of Sugriva
many a beautiful damsel proud of their youth and beauty,


792 RAMAYANA.


sprung from respectable families, adorned¥with splendid
ornaments, engaged in stringing excellent garlands. And
he observed Sugriva’s servants, well fed, contented, not
hurry in offering their services and without splendid
ornaments. Hearing the sounds of women’s girdles and
their Nupurs,* the graceful Lakshmana became highly
ashamed, And highly enraged at the sound of the ornaments,
the hero filled all the quarters with the twang of his bow.
Lakshmana of mighty-arms stood silent in a nook, thinking
of his improper conduct of entering into (Sugriva’s) seraglio,
albeit he was wrought up with ire in consequence of Sugriva’s
neglecting RAma’s service. Thereupon Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, being apprised of Lakshmana’s approach by the
twang of his bow and terrified, trembled on his throne,
and thought aside :—Forsooth hath Saumitri, fond of his
brother, come, whose appruach was announced by Angada
before. Informed before by Angada of his approach, and
made doubly sure by the twang of the bow, that monkey
came to know of Lakshmana’s arrival and turned pale.
Thereupon Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, wrought
up with fear, addressed the fine looking Tara with the
following well-meaning words:—“O beautiful lady, dost
thou know, why hath the mild-natured younger brother
of Rama, arrived here enraged 2° O blameless lady,
dost thou perceive any cause of the Prince’s wrath?
Forsooth, that best of men, is not enraged for a slight
cause. Considering aright, dost thou speedily inform
me if I have performed any improper act towards Rama.
O fine lady, do thou approach him in person and pacify
him with soothing words. Beholding thee, that pure-souled
one shall not be worked with ire; great men do never behave
roughly towards the females. Approaching him do thou
console him and thereafter I shall see that conqueror of foes
having eyes resembling lotus-petals.” Thereupon Tard,
* An ornament for theirgtoes or feet. —T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 793


with faltering feet and eyes wild with wine, the golden
chains of her zone flowing (about her hips),—graced with
auspicious marks, saught Lakshmana’s presence with downs
cast looks. Beholding T4r&, the queen of the lord of
monkeys, Lakshmana, the high-souled son of a king,
restraining his anger on the approach of a female, stood
with his head hung down, conducting himself like an
ascetic. Renouncing modesty under the influence of liquor,
vand finding the king’s son well pleased, Tard spake unto
Lakshmana, bold and loving words, in order to console ‘him.
“O son of a king, what is the cause of thy wrath? Who
is there who hath not abode by thy commands? Who
can remain without anxiety, beholding fire in a forest filled
with dried trees?’ Hearing the soothing words of T4ra,
Lakshmana, undaunted, spoke again, greatly manifesting his
friendship :—“O thou intent on thy husband's welfare, dost thou
not perceive that thy husband is by and by losing piety and
wealth, being addicted to amorous enjoyments? O T&ra,
thy husband doth not think of us who are moved with sorrow—
but is addicted to sensual enjoyments only, being surrounded
by parasites. (Having promised that he would institute
enquiries about Sita after four months), that lord of monkeys
hath well-nigh spent the entire period, being influenced
by liquor and addicted to enjoyments along with thee. For
the attainment of piety and wealth, drinking is not a proper
course. It is by drinking that people lose picty, wealth
and desire. He who doth not return the services of his
benefactor, loseth piety. He who loseth friendship with a
qualified friend, loseth wealth. He is the best friend who is
gifted with wealth and is truthful ; and thy husband hath relin-
quished such a friend gifted with these two qualities. And,
therefore, he doth not abide by the virtue of preserving
friendship. O thou expert in business, this being the case,
do thou-advise us as to what we should do.” Hearing the sweet
words of Lakshmana consonant with piety and wealth,


100


794 RAMAYANA,


Tara again addressed him about R&ma's business, yet
remaining unaccomplished, with words inspiring con-
fidence,—-"O son of a king, this is not the time for dis-
playing thy wrath; it is not proper to be angry with one’s
own friends. O hero, it behoveth thee to put up with
the error of him who hath thy welfare in view.
© prince, who, accomplished with excellent virtues,
gets enraged with one of inferior merits? O
prince, who, like thee, an offspring of asceticism, is
worked up with ire against the virtue of forgiveness? I
know the (cause of the) wrath of that heroic monkey’s friend.
I know the time for action. I know what thou hast done
for us. I know what is due [rom us to thee. And, O fore-
most of men, I also know the irrisistible force of Kama. I
know by whom Sugriva has been taken captive, and that
his heart is not now in the work. As thou hast come under
the governance of anger,thy mind has not felt the influence of
desire. Even a human being that hath conceived love.does not
stay for place or time or interest. Do thou forgive that lord
of the monkey race, thy brother, influenced by carnality, who
is by thee, and who through the urgency of lust, has
banished shame. Even Maharshis finding delight in religion
and asceticism, setting their hearts upon satisfying lust,
(ultimately) become fast bound by ignorance. But this is a
monkey, volatile by nature, and hath, furthermore, been
enjoying regal state—why should 4e not act thus?” Having
thus said unto Lakshmana of immeasurable intelligence
words fraught with high import, that female monkey, her
eyes drooping with languor, again sadly spake in this wise
for the behoof of her husband, “O foremost of men, although
Sugriva has come under the sway of desire, he hath, to secure
thy good, ere this issued orders for preparations to be made.
And monkeys by hundreds and thousands’ and otis, in-
habiting various mountains, possessed of exceeding prowess,
‘nave already arrived (here). Do thou.therefore, O mighty-


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 795


armed one,come. (Having rushed towards the inner apartment),
thou hast not suffered in character. For the good to behold
others’ wives in a friendly spirit, cannot bring on unrighteous-
ness.” Permitted by Tara, that long-armed repressor of
foes, urged on by (the required) speed, entered the inner
apartment. There seated on a superb seat spread with a
costly carpet, he found Sugriva resembling the sun himself,
his person decked with noble ornaments, of a dignified
presence, famous, wearing gay garlands and attire, invincible
like unto the gredt Indra. And surrounded by dames
adorned with elegant ornaments and wreaths, Sugriva with
his eyes still more reddened in wrath, looked like the Des-
troyer himself. Then deeply embracing Uma, the large-
eyed hero of the hue of fine gold, seated on an excellent seat,
saw the powerful Saumitri having expansive eyes. 2


SECTION XXXIV.


100:


Senne that foremost of men, Lakshmana, exercised with
wrath, as he entered in without let, Sugriva was seized
with sadness. And secing Dagaratha’s son, wroth, and
breathing hard, and flaming up in energy, and burning in
consequence of the calamity that had overtaken his brother,
that chief of monkeys started up, leaving his golden seat,
like unto the mighty ornamented standard of the great Indra.
And as Sugriva rose up, Um& and the other females rose
up, like unto stars appearing in the sky when the full moon
.has risen. And with eyes reddened, and his hands folded,
the graceful Sugriva came (before Lakshmana) and stood
there like a mighty Kalpa tree. And the wrathful Lakshmana
spake unto Sugriva stationed among women, having Um&
for his second, and resembling the moon with the stars,


796 RAMEVANA,


saying,—'’The king that is nobly endowed by heredity, and
is kind, that hath subdued his senses,and is grateful and truth-
telling, obtains renown in this world. And who is more
wicked than that king who, rooled in unrighteousness, makes
false promises unto friends intent upon his welfare? He
that speaks a falsehood with reference to a horse, becomes
guilty of the deaths of an hundred horses : he committing
himself to a falsehood relative lo a cow, reapeth the demerit
of slaying a thousand kine ; while he that uttereth an un-
truth touching a person, destroys self as well as his kindred.
That ungrateful wight that, having at first attained benefit
at the hands of his friends, doth not requite it, is, O lord of
monkeys, worthy of being slain by all creatures. Seeing
an ingrate wretch, the wrathful Brahma sang the (previous)
sloka, bowed down unto by all the worlds. Do thou under-
stand that, O monkey. The pious provide deliverance for
the cow-killer, the wine-biber, the thief, and the violator
of vows; but for the ungrateful person there is no deliver-
ance whatever. Thou art ignoble and ungrateful and lying,
O monkey, since, having been formerly benefitted by Rama,
thou dost nol requite his services. Having been benefitted
by Rama, thou, anxious to repay his kindness, shouldst
exert thyself in search of Sit& But, of false promises,
thou hast been indulging in gross enjoyments,—nor doth
Rama know thee for a serpent, croaking like a frog.* A
sinful wretch and of wicked soul, thou hast obtained the
kingdom of the monkeys through the agency of the eminent-
ly virtuous, kind and high-souled Rama. Thou dost not
acknowledge the good offices rendered unto thee by the
high-souled R&ghava; and therefore, slain by means of
sharpened shafts, thou shalt soon see Vali. The way that
hath been wended by the slain Vali, is not yet narrowed. Do
thou, O Sugriva, desist in time: do not walk in the wake


* Crying through the voice of the frog in its mouth, Another meaning
is, ‘croaking like a frog, to allure frogs to it.”—-T.


AISHEIN DHAKANDAM. 797


of Vali. Do not behold the shafts resembling thunder-bolts
shot from the bow of that best of the Ikshwakus. Then,
attaining happiness, thou shalt pass thy days in peace. Nor
do thou mentally neglect Rama’s business.”


SECTION XXXV.


eee


Wuen Sumitra’s son, Lakshmana, had spoken thus,
flaming in energy, Tar& of face fair as the moon, said unto
him, “‘O Lakshmana, thou ought not to speak thus: and this
brd of monkeys does not deserve to hear this harsh speech
rom thy lips, in especial. Sugriva is not ungrateful, or
sunning, or heartless ; nor doth he, O hero, deal in falsehood ;
or is he deceitful. Nor hath the heroic monkey, O hero,
forgotten the good, incapable of being done by others in battle,
hat the hero, Rama, -hath done in his behalf. And, O
ctor of foes, through R&ma’s grace, Sugriva hath here
ttained fame and the enduring empire of the monkeys, tas
ell as Uma and myself. Having lain down miserably before,
ugriva, now that he hath attained this supreme happiness,
not heed his urgent duties, like the ascetic Vigwamitra.
ched unto Ghritachi, O Lakshmana, the pious and mighty
tic, Vigwamitra looked upon ten years as one day;
that best of those conversant with time, VigwAmitra of
hty energy, did not perceive that the time (for doing a
ertain act) had arrived. What is to be said of other people ?
O Lakshmana, it behoveth Rama to forgive one who hath
all the bodily exigencies, who is fatigued, and who is not
satisfied with the pleasures of Kama. Nor, O Lakshmana,
doth it behove thee, without ascertaining the exact import of
things, to become suddenly subject to wrath, like any inferior
person. O chief of men, persons endowed with the quality
of goodness, like unto thee, do not suffer themselves to come


798 KAMAVANA.


under the sway of passion, without (at first) heedfully revolv-
ing matters. I crave thy favor with concentrated mind, O
thou that knowest morality. Renounce the mighty grief
that springs from thy ire. This is my conviction that for
compassing Rama’s welfare, Sugriva can resign Um& and
nyself, and Angada, and the kingdom and wealth and corn
and animals, Slaying that worst of Rakshasas, Sugriva will
bring Raghava with Sita, like unto the moon accompanied
by Rohini, Without slaying hundreds, of thousands of
Kotis, and thirty six Ayutas, thousands, and hundreds of
irrepressible Rakshasas wearing shapes at will, (Rama) can
not slay Ravana, by whom Maithili hath been carried away.
They are incapable, O Lakshmana, of being slain (by Rama)
in battle, unless he is supported (by others), Ravana isa
wily warrior, and hence is the special need of Sugriva.
That knowing lord of monkeys, Vali, had told me all this.
I do not know how Ravana had secured this host: I say what
Thad heard from Vali. For rendering thee assistance, the
foremost monkeys have been despatched in order to summon
to the conflict numerous principal monkeys. Expecting
these powerful and exceedingly slrong ones, for attaining
Raghava's end, this lord of monkeys doth not (yet) sally out.
Things, O Saumitri, have beforehand been so satisfactorily
arranged by Sugriva, that this very day the mighty one will
be joined with all those monkeys. This very day billions
of bears and thousands of go/angu/as as well as innumerable
Kotis of monkeys flaming in energy shall join thee. There-
fore, O subduer of enemies, banish thy anger. Seeing this thy
face wrought up with wrath, and thy eyes appearing like red
sores, the wives of the best of monkeys experience no peace,
and they are agitated by the fear that exercised them of late.”


t


KISHKINDHAKANDAM 799


SECTIONEXXXVI.


:0:0:———


Hoemsty addressed in these words informed with moral-
Sumitra’s son, resuming his native mildness, accepted
em. ° On his accepting the speech, the lord of monkeys
ke a wet cloth cast off from him the feat he had conceived
account of Lakshmana. Then Sugriva—lord of monkeys—

: away the gaudy and variegated garland on his neck—
with many a virtue, and became deprived of energy.

nd that master of all the monkeys, Sugriva, gladdening
akshmana of dreadful prowess, humbly observed unto him,
Thou son unto Sumitr3, by the favor of Rama have I receiv-
back my lost luck, my fame, and this eternal monarchy
the monkeys. QO king’s son, who is capable of repaying
in part an action like that of the divipe (&ma)
owned by means of his own acts? By vfNucof native


'y, and merely with my help, the righty us Raghava
recover Sita and slay Ravana to boot. What need of
‘ance to him who with a single shaft rived seven giant

a mountain, and the Earth. O Lakshmana, what is:

ise of help to him the sounds of whose stretching bow

the Earth tremble with her mountains ? O best of men,

that foremost of men shall set out for slaying his enemy,

na along with those going before him, I will follow him. If

my confidence, or presuming upon our amity,
transgressed in any way, (Rama) ought to excuse his

v—for there is no servant that duth not transgress.”

AWhen the high-souled Sugriva had said this, Lakshmana
became well pleased, and he spake from love,—“ Having, in.
especial, thec endeued with humility, my brother, O monarch
of monkeys, is every way strong, O Sugriva. Such
is thy strength, O Sugriva, and such thy self-denial, that thou
art fully worthy to enjoy the good fortune of the king of
Monkeys. O Sugriva, by thy help, the puissant Rama shall


800 RAVALANS.


speedily’slay his foe. Of this there is not the least doubt,
O Sugriva, what thou, virtuous, grateful and never turning
away from fight, hast said is fit and proper. What knowing
person,excepting, O foremost of monkeys, thyself and my elder
brother, can speak so ? Resembling Rama himself in strength
and prowess, thou, O chief of monkeys, hast been ordained
his help by the gods, But, O hero, do thou speedily go out
with me and soothe thy friend aggrieved for the ravishment
of his wife. And do thou, my friend, forgive what rough
speech, on hearing the utterances of Rama sunk in grief, I
re given thee.”


-7 SECTION xxxyit,


I HUS ady. essed by the magnanimous Lakshmana,Sugriva
said unto [Jatyim4n, staying beside him, “Those that dwell
on the summifs of Mahendra, BY ~s , Vindhya and Kailliga ; |
on Mandara,the peaks of Pande cm five hills ; ; On mount.
ains wearing the hue of the inff 4 ..n, and ever bright; and
those inhabiting the West, beyond the sea; on mountains in
the mansions of the sun, looking like the evening sky, and
those dreadful foremost of monkeys that inhabit
Padmachala, those monkeys that, resembling colly-
rium-like clouds, and having the strength of the lord of
elephants, dwell in the Anjana hill; monkeys, possessing the
splendour of gold, inhabiting the caverns of Maha¢aila ; those
resorting to the sides of Meru, as well as those dwelling in
the Dhumra mountains; and those, having the hues of the
infant sun, dwelling in the Maharuna mountain, drinking the
Maireya wine ; and those dwelling in mighty fair and fragrant
forests and romantic hermitages all round, lying on the
skirts of woods—do thou at once bring all these—all the


KISHKINDHARANDAM. . Soe


‘foremost monkeys of the world, by means of gilts and con-
Ciliation, and through the agency of more than usually fect
monkeys. [ know those monkeys that I have first despatched,
to be gifted with great velocity*,—yet, for urging speed upon
them, do thou seid other foremost of monkeys. Do thou
directly bring up here those monkey-chiefs that are given
up to lust or are dilatory. Those wicked ones, that finding
fault with the royal mandate, do not (come in) at my cofa-
mand within ten days, must be slain. Let’ those hundreds
and thousands and 4ofis of leonine monkeys that abide by
my mandate, hie (hence) at my behest. Let (monkeys)
resembling clouds or mountains, cover up the sky; and let
the foremost monkeys of dreadful forms march hence at my
“command. Let all the monkeys on earth, acquainted with
motion, hying themselves and summoning speed at my
command, bring all the monkeys.” Hearing the words ef
the monkey-king, the son of the Wind-god despatched power-
ful monkeys in all directions. Despatched by the king, the
monkeys, ranging the sphere of birds and stars, immediately
went through the welkin. And on oceans and mountains,
in forests and tanks, the monkeys began to sénd away all the
apes on behalf of Rama. Hearing the mandate of that king
of kings, Sugriva, resembling the Hour of deatli, the monkeys,
conceivég , fear for Sugriva, set out. And monkeys resembling
collyrius: (in hue), numbering three dofes, endeued with huge
might, set out from the Anjana hill for the place where
Raghava was. And ten fofis haviig the splendour of molten
gold, inhabiting the mountain where the sun sets, set out.
And a thousand 4ofzs, hued like the lion’s mane, came from
the peaks of Kaildga. And of thosé dwelling in Himalaya,
subsisting on fruits and rovts, numbering a thousand and
éotis, a thousand appeared. And thousands of dreadful
monkeys of térrible deeds, hued like charcoal, numbers
""* The commentator slipa the sense here, According to him, the meeniag la,
Those monkeys whom I hide first aut, dite kucbn to hd 7.
10K


Fis: ; . RAWAYANS.,


otis, rushed suddenly from Vindhya. And there exists no

record of the number of those inhabiting the shores of the

ocean of milk, and the dwellers in the Tamala forests, as well as

those subsisting on cocoanuts. And, as if drinking up the sun,

the mighty monkey host came from forests and caves and

rivers. And it came to pass that those heroic monkeys that

had gone away to spur others on, found a mighty tree on

Himavat. On that sacred mount in days of yore there took

place a pleasing Mahegwara* sacrifice. There the monkeys

found grateful fruits and roots sprung from the streams of
sacrificial oblations, and resembling ambrosia. He that

partakes of those excellent fruits and roots sprung from the

sacrificial ingredients, doth not experience hunger for a
month. Those prime monkeys, feeding on fruits, gathered:
those sapid fruits and roots and medicinal herbs. And for

compassing the good of Sugriva, repairing thither, the

monkeys brought ordorous blossoms from the sacrificial

ground. And all those foremost of monkeys, taking all the.
monkeys of. the earth, hastily set off in the van of the herds,

And in a short'while,those fast-fleeting apes speedily reached

Kishkindha, where the monkey Sugriva was. And taking

the healing herbs and the fruits and roots, the monkeys made

them over to Sugriva, and said, “Having traversed mountains,

rivers and forests, all the monkeys of the earth bend their

steps towards thee in obedience to thy command.” Hearing

this, Sugriva—lord of monkeys—was well pleased, and with

a glad heart accepted all those presents.


SECTION XXXVINI.


Havine accepted all thase presents, (Sugriva), after
soothing the monkeys, dismissed them. Having dismissed


* The celestial horse-sacrifice—T, *


KISHKINDHAKANDAM 823


the thousands of apes, who had performed their task, he.
deemed himself’ as well as the mighty R&ghava as having
secured success. Then Lakshmana in sweet words spoke’
unto the exceedingly strong chief of monkeys—Sugriva—
gladdening him, “If it please thee, O placid one, I will go
out of Kishkindh3.” Hearing Lakshmana’s soft speech,’
Sugriva, highly delighted, said, “Be it so. Let us go. I abide
by thy behest.” Having said this unto Lakshmana of auspi-
cious marks, Sugriva dismissed the women with Tar at theic
head. Then Sugriva in a loud voice summoned the foremost
monkeys, saying, “Come (hither).” Hearing his words, those
monkeys that could present themselves before the females,
did so with joined hands. To them, who had present-
ed themselves, said the king, of splendour resembling
that of the Sun, “Do, ye monkeys, bring hither a car.”
Hearing his words, monkeys uniling vigor with celerity,
brought a car lovely to behold. Seeing the car brought up,
the lord of monkeys said unto Sumitra’s son, “O Lakshmana,
ascend speedily.” Having said this, Sugriva in company
with Lakshmana swiftly ascended the golden car resembling
the sun, yoked with numerous steeds. With a pale umbrella
held over his head, and white chowris waving around, with
conchs and trumpets blowing, eulogized by bards, Sugriva
marched out, having obtained supreme regal auspiciousness,
And surrounded by hundreds of high-spirited apes and
armed people, he proceeded whither Rima was staying.
And having arrived at the excellent spot which was the home
of Rama, that highly energetic one alighted from the car
along with Lakshnana. And having come to Rama, Sugriva
(stood) folding his hands. And when Sugriva had folded his
hands, the monkeys also did so. And beholding the mighty
host of the monkeys resembling a tank filled with lotus buds;
Rama was well-pleased with Sugriva. And raising up the
monkey-king who had bent his head at Rama’s feet, Raghava
embraced him from love and regard. Having embraced


804, RAMAFANA,


Sugriva, that righteous one said unto him, “Be seated.”.
And seeing Sugriva seated on the ground, Rama said, “He;
O best of monkeys, is a king who, O hero, in season follows
righteousness, pleasure and profit, always dividing the same
(among all.) He that, renouncing righteousness and. the
good, devotes himself to pleasure solely, is like a men that
falling asleep on the top of a tree, wakes when he hath fallen.
down. That king is verily virtuous that, engaged in uproot-
ing foes and advancing friends, attends to all the three ends,
O destroyer of foes, the time is come for exertion: do thou,
© lord of monkeys, bethink thyself along with thy monkey.
ministers.” Thus addressed, Sugriva said unto Rama, "O
mighty-armed one, my lost luck, and repute, and the entire
monkey kingdom I have received back through thy gift,
owing to thine and thy brother's grace, thou foremost of
victors, He that, having received a good office, doth not
requite it, reapeth obloquy among persons. These hundreds
of prime monkeys, O destroyer of enemies, have come here,
bringing with them all the monkeys of the world. O
Raghava, bears and monkeys, heroic Gol&ngulas—acquainted
with woods and forests and strongholds, and of terrible
shapes—and monkeys who are the sons of deities, wearing forma
at will—stay on the way, O Raghava, surrounded by their own
armies, And, O hero, O repressor of foes, monkeys surround-
ed by hundreds, and hundred thousands, and otis, and
eyutas, and sankus,® and arvudas, and hundreds of arvudas,
and madhyas, and antyas, wait (here). And samudras, and
pardrdhas of monkeys—leaders of herds—inhabiting Meru ,
and Vindhya, resembling clouds or hills, and in might
resembling the great Indya, are on their way unto thee, O.
king. They will join thee for battling the fiend in the field;
and, slaying Ravana in fight, shall bring Mithila’s daughter.”


"3A Sanku is a thousand Arvudes ; a Madhya is an Arouda ten times; an-
Aniya (is a Madhya ten-times ; a Samndra is a Madhya twenty times; anda,
Pardrdka, 2 Samudra thirty times. —T.


KISHEINDHARANDAN. Sos


Thereat the puissant son of the Earth’s lord, witnessing the
preparations made by the heroic monkey, remaining under
bia command, appeared like a blown blue lotus.


SECTION XxXxIX.


—


As Sugriva was speaking thus with joined. hands, that
best of. the righteous, Rama, embraced him with his arms,
and then replied, “That Indra poureth down showers, is no
wonder, nor that this thousand-rayed Sun dispells darkness
feom the sky; nor yet that, O mild one, the Moon by his rays
causes the clear-night. (And ina similar way), friends like
thee bring delight, O subduer of foes. O mild one, that
‘whatever is graceful, should be harboured in thee is not
strange.* I know, O Sugriva, that thou always speakst
what is for my good. Assisted by thee, my friend, I shalt
in battle vanquish all my foes. Thou being my friend and
my. ally, shouldst assist me, That worst of R&kshasas hath
varried away Maithili, to bring down destruction upon himself,
even. as Anuhiada ravished Puloma’s daughter, Sachi, deceiving .
her-sire, That Ravana I will at no distant date slay with
my sharpened shafts, even as that slayer of enemies, he of an
hundred sacrifices~slew the haughty father of Paulomi,”
Presently appeared volumes of dust, and the hot and fierce
rays of the sun were hid in the sky. And darkened by. the
gloom, all sides became bewildered. And the entire earth
with her mountains, forests, and woods, trembled. Then the
whole. ground was covered with innumerable monkeys gifted
with.great strength, and having sharp teeth, and resembling


ee ee

* The commentator in his usual way of reading between the lines, says
thatthe sense is‘—TZhat thou hast gathered forces Sor serving thy friend, is not
strange. O placid one, it-is well. J give the sense the -sloha naturally -yields.
oT. :


Bob RAMA ana.


kings of men. Then, surrounded by leaders of monkey-herds,

and retinues numbering hundreds of kofzs, and monkey chiefs

from rivers, and mountains, and seas, endowed with prodigious"
strength, and other apes inhabiting forests, having voices
resembling clouds—and monkeys hued like the infant sun,

or white like the moon, or colored like the filaments of the

lotus, or pale, having their homes in the Golden mountain—in

all, numbering ten thousand 4o¢7s,—appeared the graceful and

heroic monkey, named Satavali. Then, having the splendour

ofthe Golden hill, the puissant sire of Tara was seen at the,
head of many thousand fo/zs. Then Um&’s father, that lord,

the father-in-law of Sugriva, arrived, accompanied with other

thousands of otis (of monkeys),—resembling the filaments

of the lotus, of face like unto the youthful sun, intelligent,

the foremost of monkeys—supreme among them all. And

Hanum&u’s father, the graceful Kegarin, appeared ian company

with many thousands of monkeys. And Gavaksha—sovereign

of Golfingulis—endowed with dreadful might, appeared,

‘urrounded by thousands of fotis of monkeys. And Dhumra

of bears endowed with terrific speed—destroyer of foes—

appeared, surrounded by two thousand kotis. And the leader

of herds, named Panaga, of exceeding prowess, came, accom-

panied with three fof7s, mighty and dreadful. And the Jeader-
of herds, uamed Nila, of huge body, resembling a mass of
blue collyrium, appeared with ten ofits. Then the exceed:

ingly powerful Gavaya—leader of herds, having the splendour
of the Golden mountain, arrived with five Zo¢is. And that

powerful leader of herds—Darimukha, came, surrounded by

thousands of Zo#7s, and took up his post by Sugriva. And

Mainda and Dwivida—sons of Agwi both—of mighty strength,

appeared with 4ofis upon thousands of £otis of monkeys. And

the powerful and heroic Gaya (came), surrounded by three
hotts. And the king of bears, Jimbavin by name, (came),

surrounded by ten 4oéis, and enlisted himself under -the

command of Sugriva. And (the monkey) named Rumana,


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 8a7


possessed of energy, and strong, came swiftly, surrounded by.
an hundred otis of powerful monkeys. Then, followed at his
back by hundreds and thousands of ots, came the monkey,
Gandham&dana. Then came the young prince Angada, in
“prowess resembling” his sire,—accompanied by a thousand
padmas and an hundred sankhas. Then appeared ata distance,
accompanied by five fofis of monkeys endowed with dreadful
" prowess,—Tara, having the splendour of a star. And then ap-
peared Indrajanu, the heroic monkey and leader of herds—lord
of eleven 4ofi's—surrounded by them. Then followed Rambha,
resembling the infant sun,accompanied by an ayuda, a thousand,
and an hundred. Then appeared to the view the stout monkey,
named Durmukha, heroic lord of herds, surrounded by two otis.
And Hanuman showed himself, surrounded by a thousand
kotis of monkeys, resembling peaks of Kailiga, of dreadful
vigor, And the exceedingly energetic Nala came, attended
with an hundred 4of7s, a thousand, and an hundred monkeys,
living in trees. Then surrounded by ten Aofis (of monkeys),
came the shapely Darimukha before the high-souled
Sugriva, from a country bordering on a river. And Sarabha,
Kumuda, Vahni, the monkey Rambba,—and many other
monkeys—lords of herds—passing ennumeration—wearing
shapes at will, came, covering the entire earth with her.
mountains and forests. And all the monkeys of the world were
some of them coming and others putting up. And monkeys—
some ‘of them dripping, and some leaping, and some roar-
ing—gathered round Sugriva, like clouds gathering round the
sun. And, crying in various tones, prime monkeys furnish-
ed with arms, with bent heads spoke humbly to that lord of
monkeys—-Sugriva,. And other foremost of monkeys, gather=
ing together duly, came before Sugriva with joined hands.
Sugriva standing with joined hands, expeditiously informed
Rama of the arrival of the monkcy-leaders in hot haste; and
then spake (to them), saying, “O chiefs of monkeys, stationing:
the forces duly near mountain-rills and all the woods, let him


808 aAMALPANS.


that is conversant with the army, ascertain who have come
and who have not.”


SECTION XL.


—


Taen that lord of monkeys, the successful Sugriva, spake
unto Rima—lion among men and destroyer of hostile hosts—
saying, “Those foremost monkeys endeved with strength and
capable of weating any shape at will, and possessed of the
splendour of the mighty Indra,—that inhabit my territories,
have come and stationed themselves. And these monkeys—
dreadful, and resembling Daityas and Danavas—are accom-
panied by powerful monkeys of terrific prowess, who‘
have displayed their virtue in many a field,—and are of
famed renown in battle and, powerful, and who have
mastered languor and are celebrated in prowess and
sterling in their profession. O Rama, these Aotis of
apes that have arrived, inhabiting earth and water and
various mountainous tracts, are at thy service. All abide
by thy command—all are intent upon the welfare of their
master, and, O subduer of foes, they are competent to bring
about thy end. And in company with many thousands and -
innumerable ones that have shewn their ability in thany a *
field, have come monkeys dreadful, and resembling Daityas .
and Dinavas. If, O lion among men, thou conceive that «
the time is ripe, tell it (unto me). It behoves thee to com-
mand those forces, remaining under thy sway. Although I
am full well acquainted with the work in which they até to ©
be employed, yet thou ought to order them as to what they
are to accomplish.” When Sugriva had spoken thus, |
Dagaratha’s son, Rima, embracing him with his arms, daid, :
“Q placid one, do thou learn whether Videha’s daughtet’ is
alive or not; as well as ascertain the country, where, O'thou


KISHKINDBREKANDAM. 809


endowed with eminent wisdom, liveth Ravana. Having come
at Vaidehi and Ravana’s abode, shall I then appoint the time
along with thee. O lord of monkeys, I am not the master in
this matter, nor Lakshmana: thou art the cause of this under-
taking, as well as, Q monarch of monkeys, the lord. Do
thou therefore, O ford, command these as to what is to be
done by them in my behalf. O hero, thou certainly knowest
my business. My second friend (Lakshmana being first),
thou art potent, wise, conversant with seasonableness, cogni-
sant of profit, and engaged in our welfare.” Thus addressed,
Sugriva in presence of Rama and the intelligent Lakshmana,
said unto a leader of herds and lord of apes, named Vinata,
having the splendour of a hill, blazing and emitting sounds
as those of clouds, “O foremost of monkeys, accompanied
_ with apes resembling the sun and the moon, thou cognizant
of time, place and morals, and sagacious in deciding course
of action,—surrounded by hundreds and thousands of active
apes, march towards the Eastern quarter, furnished with
woods, forests and hills. There, in mountain fastnesses, and
forests and rivers, do thou search Videha’s daughter, Sit&, as
well as the abode of Ravana. And while on the search
around for R&ama’s beloved wife, Sit&, daughter-in-law unto
Dagaratha, thou shouldst search the beautiful Bhagirathi, and
the Sarayu, and the Kauciki; the Kalindi, and the charming
Yamuné, and the mighty hill bordering thereon; aad the
Saraswati, and the Sindhu, and the Sona with water resem-
bling ruby; and the Mahi and Kalamahi, garnished with
woods and hills—-the large tracts—Brahmamilas, Videhas,
and Malavans, and K&cikosalas, and M&gadhas, and Pundras,
and Angas; and grounds native to silkworms, and contain-
ing mines of silver ; and mountains and cities embosmed in
the sea. Do thou also search through the houses in Mandara,
—belonging to people having ears resembling cloths, reach-
ing their nether lips, and mouths resembling iron,—one-
footed aad fleet withal; and whose descendants never


102


810 . RAMBPANA.


deteriorate s—and to anthropophagi; and hunters dwelling
on islands; haying sharp hair, gold-hued, pleasing, and subsist
ing on raw fish; and to creatures—tiger-man forms—terrible
to behold; and, ye dwellers of woods, do ye carefully search
those places that are accessible by crags and bounds,—and
the island of Yava, adorned by seven several kingdoms, and
the island of Suvarna, and Rupayaka,—thronged by gold
miners. ‘An, going beyond the island of Yava, (one comes
upon) the hill called Sisira, which pierceth the heavens by
its peaks, and is inhabited by gods and demons. ‘In all these
mountain fastnesses, cascades and woods, do ye together
search for the renowned wife of Rama. Then, arriving at'the
‘rapid red waters going under the name of Sona,and repairing
to the other shore of the ocean, the abode of Siddhas and
Ch&ranas, do ye search all round for Ravana in company
with Sit@ in the sweet sacred spots and picturesque woods.
And ye should explore forests, mountain-sprung streams, wild
‘tracts subject to storms, and mountains containing ceverns.
Then it behoves you to examine horrible ocean islands,
heaving with waves, terrific, resounding,—of haughty bearing
.in consequence of -winds. There, huge-bodied Asuras, hun-
gering for a long period, permitted by Brahma, capture
creatures, resorting to shades. And adroitly arriving at that
great sea, like unto clouds at the universal diesolution, inhabi-
ted by mighty snakes, sending loud sounds,—and there, after
‘passing the terrific sea of red waters called Yellow, ye will
behold a.mighty knarled Salmali, There, built by Vigwa-
karman, peak-like, gigantic, resembling Kailaga, (towereth) the
mansion of Vinata’s offspring, named Mandeha. There, grim
Rakshasas named Mandehas, resembling hills,. of diverse
shapes, capable of inspiring fear, hang head foremost on the
rocks. Day after day at sunrise, these Rakshasas heated (by
solar rays) and struck dead by Brahma energy,* again and
again (hang on the crags). Then wilt thou, O. thou that art


Ree NN eee Sse NE ED he oe “ae CP eee ee
+ *-The-commentator explains : Exergy darted ~from the three orders.—T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. Six


hard to repress, proceeding,. view the sea named Kshiroda,
Naving the hue of pale clouds, and looking like a necklace,
because of the ripples (on its surface). In it there are the
mighty white mountain going by the name of Rishada,
covered with trees bearing oderous blossoms; as well as
the tank known under the name of Sudargana, swarming with
swans and shining silver lotuses having golden filaments.
Desirous of sport, resort lo this tank delighted troops of
Vivudhas and Charanas, Yakshas, Kinnaras and Apsaras,
Leaving behind Kshiroda, ye monkeys, ye will soon,
after behold the Jalada sea, striking terror into all beings;
There presideth that mighty ire-born Energy of him,*
{embodied in) the mouth of a mule, This wondrous (universe)
containing mobile and immobile things and fraught with
great impetus, is the aliment of this Energy. There are
heard the cries of feeble creatures inhabiting the sea, who
began to wail on witnessing the mouth of the mule. On the
north of the Swadu sea, lie thirteen yojanas (of land), named
Jatarupacila,t. exceeding spacious, and of the splendour of
gold. There, ye monkeys, ye will behold that serpent, the
holder of Earth—resembling the moor, and with expansive
eyes like lotus-petals—seated at the summit of the mount,—
that one worshipped of all deities, having a thousand-heads,—
the god Ananta, clad in blue apparel.. And by the dais
(there) at the top of the mount is the golden palm, planted
by that high souled one,—which.is-Jike-a banner. The chief
ofthe celestials reared it in the Eastern region,- After that
is the fair Rising mountain. Its golden peak measuring a
hundred yojanas, reaching unto the heavens, rises nobly, with
mountains at its base ; and looks beautiful with Salas, palms,
Tamalas, and flowering Karnikaras,—golden, splendid and
resembling the sun. There,{ spreading a yojana around,


““« Sage Aurvii—T. "-$ Lit. of gold and stone—T.”
$ The-commentutor says that this locative refers to the summit of the Ris-
ing bill.—T.


Sis RAMAYANA,


towering up ten, is the peak named Saumanasa—all certainly
of gold. There, formerly on the occasion of invading the
earth with three paces, that foremost of persons, Vishnu,
planting his first foot, planted the other on the summit of
Meru. The sun, having passed by Jamvudwipa on the
north, and, arriving at that mighty and eminent summit,
(Saumanasa), ‘again becometh visible to the dwellers of
Jamvudwipa. There are seen those Vilakhilya Maharshis,
named Vaikhanasas,—wearing the hue of the sun, leading an
ascetic mode of life. This is the island of Sudargana, before
which all creatores inspire energy and have their sight
granted to them. You should search for Ravana with Vaidehi
all round the top of that mountain as well as in its forests and
woods, (Here) the first twilight enfolded in the glory of the
golden hill and that of the high-souled Sun, appeareth roseate.
As this is the first gateway of both Earth and Heaven, and as
the sun first rises in this quarter, this is called the East. Ye
should search the breast of its mountain, and fountains, and
caves for Ravana in company with Vaidehi. Beyond that, is
theexceedingly impassable Eastern quarter, thronged by
the celestials,—covered with darkness and devoid of the
‘snnand the moon. Do ye search for Janaki in all those
rocks, woods and streams as well as in such spots as
F have not mentioned. Ye foremost of monkeys, the
monkeys wre competent to proceed thus far. Beyond
this, of the tract withoat sun and without limit, | know
nothing. Meeting with Vaidehi and (arriving at) Rivana’s
mansion, do ye, having reached the Rising hill, turn
back, when it shall be a full month. Do not stay longer than
amonth. If ye do, ye shall be slain by me. Having attained
your end, de ye tura back, having met with Maithili. Having
adroitly expjored (the tract) loved of Mahendra, plated with
‘weods, do ye, ye monkeys, having come at Sith—the beloved
pli witthes deggendant of Raghu—desist, attaining happiness.”


KISHKINDHAKIND 4M. 813


SECTION XLI


——00:-—


Ten having sent away that mighty host of monkeys,
Sugriva despatched to the South others competent to perform
the several tasks entrusted to them. And appointing the exceed-
ingly mighty Angada as the leader of those heroic monkeys,
that hero, the lord of monkey bands, conversant with the
countries intended to be explored, despatched heroes endow-
ed with speed and prowess, headed by Angada, Nila the son
of Fire, and the monkey Hanuman, and the exceedingly
energetic Jambavan, son unto the Great-father, and Suhotra,
and Sar&ri, and Saragulma, Gaya, Gavakshya, and Gavaya,
ineetie Vrishabha, Mainda, Dwivida, and Gandham&dana,
Nags Ulkamukha and Ananga—sons of Fire both. And the
‘lord of monkeys began to describe unto the monkey-chiefs
those tracts in those directions, that were difficult of access.
““Ye will behold Vindhya having an hundred summits, and
furinshed with various trees and shrubs, and the romantic
river Narmada, frequented by mighty serpents; and the
Godivari,* and that mighty river, the captivating Krishnaveni,
and the Mekhalas and Utkalas, and the cities of Dacirna;
and Avravanti and Avanti, and the Vidarbhas and Nishtikas
and the charming Mahishakas.t And ye will see also the
Matsyas and Kalingas and Kaugikas all round, and-the forest
of Dandaka, with mountains, rivers and caverns ; and the river
Godavari,t and the Andhras, and Paundras, the Cholas, the
Pandyas, and the Keralas. Then shall ye repair to the
mountain Ayomukha,§ plated with ore, having taking sum-


* The commentator says,“‘The Godavari flowing through the countries to
the east of the Vindya mountains,”—T.


¥ Some texts read—Rishtikas instead -——T.


$ The tract, according to RamAnuja, watered by the Godavari in the vici-
nity of Dandaka. —-T.


§ Another name of this hill is Malaya —T.


814, RAMALANS, ©


mits, graceful, furnished with picturesque flowering woods,-
the mighty mountain having groves of excellent sandal. A
tiie foot of the Malaya mountain endeued with exceeding
energy, ye will behold the noble stream Kaveri, of pleasant
waters, where sport troops of Apsaris. (There) yc will see
that foremost of saints, Agastya, resembling the sun, Per-
mitted by that gratified high-souled one, ye will cross over
the great river, Tamraparni, abounding in alligators. Like a
youthful female in relation to her lover, she (Tamraparni),
with both her waters as well as islets concealed under beauti-
ful sandal woods, bathes in the sea. Proceeding (therefrom),
the monkeys shall see the grand golden gates belonging to
the walls of the capital of the Pandyas. Then arriving at the’
main, ye shall ascertain your ability or otherwise of crossing*
the same. In the bosom of the deep there, Agastya bath;
placed that foremost of mountains—the charming Mahendra,
having picturesque plateaus ; golden, and beautiful,—with a.
portion of it sunk in the great ocean. For aye, He of
a thousand eyes at Parvas visiteth this mountain embellished
by various blossoming trees and creepers; beauteous with
divinities, and saints, and the foremost Yakshas and Apsaras;
thronged by numbers of Siddhas and Charanas ; and of -sur-
passing loveliness. On its other shore is an island extending
over an hundred yo/anas, inaccessible to men,* and of splendid.
aspect. Do ye explore it all round. There, in particular, ~


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 815


unbounded energy. In the sea extending over an hundred
yojanas, a lovely hill, named Pushpitaka, the abode of Siddhas
‘and Charanas ; resembling the rays of the sun or the moon,—
resting on the waters of the ocean, looks splendid, piercing
the heavens with its giant peaks. Of this (mountain), there
is a particular golden summit, which the sun approaches. It
is incapable of being beheld by the ungrateful or the atheisti-
cal, Bowing your heads down unto this hill, let the monkeys
search on, Leaving behind that irrepressible one, (ye will
come upon) a mountain difficult of approach, extending over
fourteen yojanas, named Suryyavan. Passing by that also, (ye
will see) a mountain, named Vidyut, filled with trees, beauti-
ful at all seasons, and bearing all desirable fruits. There,
feeding upon excellent and costly fruits and roots, and
oe delicious honey, let the monkeys pass beyond it.

here is the hill named Kunjara, grateful both to the eye and
‘the mind,—where Vigwakarm& had built the abode of
Agastya.* There (rises) that stately golden pile, adorned
with various gems, extending over one yojana, and ten in
height. In itt also there is that palace, which is the abode of
snakes; having spacious ways, incapable of being captured,
guarded around, and protected by dreadful snakes and sharp-
toothed serpents of virulent poison; where dwelleth V&suki,
the exceedingly terrible king of snakes. Proceeding heed-
fully, ye must explore that Bhogavati palace ; as also whatever
concealed places may lie there. Going beyond that place,
(ye will see) the mighty mountain named Rhrishava, in the
form of a bull, full of all gems, and possessed of grace,—
where are produced excellent Gogirshaka, Padmaka, and
Haricydma sandals, and which in effulgence resembles fire.
But, seeing that sandal, ye must by no means ask any
questions : certain Gandharbas, named Rohitas, are on guard
over that wood—the lords of Gandharbas, in splendour like


* é.e.in thet hill.
t i.e. in that hill,


86 : RAMAPANA.


unto five suns,—Cailusha, Gramani, Ciksha, Cuka, and Babhru.
After that, (Rhishava), at the extremity of the Earth is the
abode of persons of pious acts, whose bodies are composed of
the Sun, the Moon and Fire. And there reside persons who
have won the heavenly regions. After that are the awful
regions of the ancestral manes, which ye must not ap-
proach. This is the metropolis of Yama, covered by deep
gloom. Ye heroic monkey chiefs, ye can seek thus far,
Further there is no course for those endeued with
motion. Having examined all these, as well others that may
come within your ken, it behoves you, after having ascertained
Vaidehi’s course, to return (hither), He that, returning with-
ina month, shall say,—°I have seen Sit&,’ shall pass his days
in happiness, enjoying affluence like mine own and indulg-
ing all pleasures. He shall be dearer unto me than life itself,
and none dearer (unto me) than he ; and although he might
commit innumerable wrongs, still should he become my friend.
Possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, and sprung
from lines crowned with sterling virtues, do ye strive manfully
in such a glorious way that the king’s daughter may be
recovered.”


SECTION XLII.
10:0:


: Havine Gespatched those monkeys in a southern direc-
tion, Sugriva spoke unto the monkey named Sushena,
resembling a mass of clouds. Approaching his father-in-law,
T&ra’s father, possessed of dreadful prowess, the king, bowing
and with joined hands, spoke unto him. And Sugriva
commanded the Maharshi's son, Maricha, and the mighty ape,
Archishmat, surrounded by the heroic foremost of monkeys,—
possessing the splendour of Mahendra, gifted with sense


KISH KINDHAKANDA af. 817


and vigor ; and resembling the offspring himself of Vinat& in
brightness ; and Marichi’s son —the M&richas—the mighty
Archirmalyas,—all these sons of the saint*—(to march) towards
the West, saying,—"Ye monkey-chiefs, let twice hundred
thousand monkeys led by Sushena (set out) to search Vaidehi.
Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye explore the Saur&shtras,"the
B&hlikas, the Chandrachitras, and (other) populous and fair
provinces and spacious cities, and Kukshi, dense with
Punndgas,t and filled with Vakulas and Uddélakas; as well
as the tracts covered with Kefaka trees; and auspicious
streams bearing their cool waters westward; and the forests
of ascetics; and mountains embosoming woods. There having
explored tracts resembling deserts, and cold cliffs towering
high,and the West,covered with mountain ranges,aad extreme-
ly difficult of access,—and proceeding at a little more to the
‘west, it behoves you to have a view of the sea. And
proceeding on, ye monkeys, ye shall see {the ocean), whose
waters abound in whales and alligators, ye monkeys.~ Then
the apes shall sport in tracts covered by Kefakas, and dense
with Zomdlas and woods of cocoanuts. There shall ye
look for Siti and the mansion of Ravana, in hills and
woods on the shores of the sea ; and (explore) Murachipattana,
and the delightful Jatapura, and Avanti, and Angalapa, as
well as in the wood (called) Alakshita, and spacious
monarchies, and emporiums. There is a mighty mountain
where the Sindhu falls into the sea, Somagiri by name;
having an hundred summits and tall trees. In its plateaus
there are certain birds (called) Sinhas. These lift up to their
nests whales and elephants. The proud elephants carried to
the nests and remaining on the summits of the mountain,


* Marichi.—T.

t Rottléia linctoria.—T.

$ The grammar of these siokas is exceedingly vicious; and it has cost the
Translator no small amount of labor to assign the necessary logical nexus in
a geod. many places.—T.


103


818 . RAMAYANA.


possessing the roar of clouds,having been gratified (with food),
range around this extensive table-land filled with water.
The monkeys, capable of wearing shapes at will, should
swiftly search its golden summit towering to the sky and
filled with graceful trees. Proceeding further, the monkeys
shall behold the golden summit of Pariyatra rising from the
sea and extending over an hundred yoyanas. There dwell
all around in a body four and twenty otis of ascetic
Gandharbas, resembling fire, dreadful, practicising impiety,
and like unto flames of fire. The monkeys of dreadful prowess
should not present themselves before those, nor should they
take any fruits from that country. Those heroes are hard
to approach; and they are truthful and possessed of great
might. And there they of dreadful prowess stow away their
fruits and roots. There ye should heedfully search for Janaki.
Ye have no fear whatever from them; do ye only follow your
native nature as monkeys. There, in hue like lapises, abound-:
ing in various kinds of trees and plants, is a mighty hill of
an adamantine basis, called Vajra; beautiful, famous, and
measuring an hundred yoyanas in height and area. There let
the monkeys carefully explore the caves. On the fourth side
of the Ocean is a mountain named Chakravin. There
Vigwakarm& forged the discus (called) Sakasrdra. There,
slaying Panchajana and the Danava, Hayagriva," the Best of
mate beings obtained the discus as well asthe conch. In
those beautiful plateaus and huge caves, ye should every-
where search for R&vana with Videha’s daughter. Sunk in
the depths of the sea, is a very great mountain named Var&ha,
having golden peaks and measuring four and sixty yoyanas.
In it is a city named Prigijyotisha, all of gold. There dwells
the wicked D&nava named Narakat There do ye every-
where search for Ravana along with Vaidehi in the beautiful


plateaus and huge caves. Passing beyond that foremost of


nr
© Lit, horse-necked.—T.


+ ie. in the Vartha hill-—T.


EISHRINDHAKANDAM. Seg


ing to it,. elephants, and boars, and lions, and tigers, on all
sides roar ceaselessly, wrought up by the echoes their own
cries have produced. This is the mountain named Megha,
where the graceful green-horsed vanquisher of Pika, Mahen-
dra, was installed king by the gods. Having passed by that
mountain protected by Mahendra, ye shall repair to sixty
thousand hills of gold; in hue like the infant sun, and blazing
on all sides and embellished by blossoming golden trees. In
the midst of them is established as king, Meru, best of
mountains. Formerly the Sun being well pleased, conferred
a boon on this mountain, and he addressed the mountain,
saying,—'By my grace all the hills that are under thy
protection, shall be golden day and night; and also
those gods Gandharbas and Danavas that shall dwell in
thee, shall be filled with reverence for me and to the boot
attain a golden glory.” Coming to the excellent mountain
Meru, Vigwadevas, the Vasus, the Maruts and the celestials,
adore the Sun in the western twilight. Adored by them, the
Sun, becoming invisible, repaireth to the Setting hill.* In
half a muhurta, the Sun swiftly passes over this (mountain),
measuring, as it does, ten thousand yoyaxas, On its peak rises
an edifice; resembling the sun (in splendour) ; consisting of
_ palatial mansions built by ‘Vi¢wakarm& ; and graced by goodly
trees rife with various birds,—the residence of the high-
souled Varuna, bearing the noose inhis hand. Between Meru
and the Setting hill, towers a tall palm having ten heads.
Golden and graceful, it shineth on a variegated dais. In alt
“these, difficult of access, as also in rivers and tanks, ye should
thoroughly search for R&vana along with Vaidehi. There
dwells there the righteous aud famous Merusavami, sanctified


* The commentator remarks : “Although not expressly stated, it is implied
that the islaadwto the-west of it are also to be searched.”—T.


820 RAMAYANA.


by virtue of his own asceticism, and like unto Brahma himself.*
Bowing down your heads to the earth, ye should ask the
Maharshi Merus&varni, resembling the sun, touching Mithil&’s
daughter. On the departure of night, the sun dispclls the
darkness of the world to this extent, and then enters the Set-
ting hill. Ye foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are able to
proceed thus far. Beyond this, of what is sunless‘and bound-
less | know nothing. Having come to Vaidehi and R&vana’s
mansions, and arrived at the Setting-hill, do ye return on the
month being complete. Ye must not stay above a month ; and
if ye do, ye must be slain by me. And along with you goeth
that hero, my father-in-law. Ye, abiding by his orders,
should listen to all that he sayeth. My mighty-armed father-
in-law, gifted with great strength, is my spiritual preceptor.
All of you possessed of prowess, yourselves certainly consti-
tute the measure whereby to ascertain the wisdom or
otherwise of acourse. Making this one also into a measure,
survey the western quarter. Having requited the good that
hath been done to us, we shall attain our end, De ye also
determine what else is agreeable (unto R&ma), and in
consonance with place, season and profit, should be performed
by you in the matter of this business.” Then those monkeys—
the monkey-chiefs headed by Sushena, having heard Sugriva’s
deft speech, set out for the quarter protected by Varuna.


SECTION XLitt.


SU EEERneseEt


Havre directed his father-in-law to proceed to the
Weat, that best of monkeys, the all-knowing king Sugriva,
lord of apes, then spake unto the heroic monkey, named
Satavala, words fraught with good unto himself as well as


* Like unto Prajipati dwelling by Mabameru—T.


KISHEINDHAKANDAM Ser


unto Rama,— Surrounded by hundreds and thousands of
rangers of the forest like thyself, in company with the
offspring of Yama as well as the counsellors in a body, do
thou, O thou possessed of prowess, entering the northern
quarter furnished with the Himagaila, search every-
where for the illustrious spouse of Rama.—Having performed
this task satisfactorily, and brought about what is dear unto
Dagaratha’s son, we shall, O best of those that achieve suc-
cess, be freed from our debts. The high-souled Raghava hath
done us good. If we can serve him in turn, our life shall be
crowned with success. Even the life of him that accomplishes
the work of one to whom the former is not obliged, is
successful,—what then is to be saidin respect of him that hath
served one formerly ? Pondering this, those that are engaged
in our welfare, should so act that Janaki may be discovered.
And this formemost of men is worthy of being honored by
all creatures; and Rama—captor of hostile capitals—hath
also found delight in us. Endowed with sense and prowess,
do ye explore these many inaccessible places, rivers and
mountains, Having searched there Mlechahhas, Pulindas,
Surasenas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Kurus, and Madrakas, and
Varadas, as well as the cities of Kambojas, Yavanas and
Sakas, do ye explore Himavan. And in tracts of Lodhras and
Padmakas, and in Devadaru woods* do ye search thoroughly
for Ravana along with Videha’s daughter. Then, coming
upon the hermitage of Soma, frequented by gods and Gan-
dharbas, do ye repair to the mountain called Kala possessing
spacious plateaus. In those mighty mountains, as also in
others and in their caves, do ye search for that exalted lady,
the blameless wife of Rama. Having passed beyond that
mighty mountain containing gold in its womb, it behoves
you to go to the mountain called Sudargana. Then (lies)
the mountain called Devasakh4, the home of feathered tribes;
abounding in Various fowls,and embellished with diverse trees.


* Belonging, according to the commentator, to Himavén.—T.


82s RAMAYANA.


Tn its golden tracts, fountains and caves, do ye search for
Rivana along with Videha’s daughter. Going beyond it,
{ye come upon) a vacant land, measuring an hundred Voyanas,
without mountains, or rivers, or trees; and void of all living
beings. Speedily passing that desert land capable of making
one’s hair stand on end, ye shall feel delighted, on coming
to the pale Kailiga. There (ye will behold) the charming
mansion of Kuvera,resembling pale clouds, of burnished gold, .
built by Vigwakarma ; where (lies) the spacious tank over-
flowing with lotuses and lilies, thronged with swans and
K&randavas, and frequented by troops of Apsaras. There
king Vaigravana, the lord of Yakshas, bowed down unto by,
all creatures,—the graceful giver of riches—sporteth’ along
with the Guhyakas. In the offshoots belonging to Kailaga
resembling the moon,as also in their caverns,do ye thoroughly
search for Ravana in company with Vaidehi. And coming to
the Krauncha mountain,ye should,having your wits about you,
enter its inaccessible cavern ; for that is well known as diffi-
cult of entrance. There dwell certain Maharshis, high-souled,
of effulgence resembling that of the sun—complete god-like
shapes,—who are sought by the deities themselves. And ye
should thoroughly explore the other caves of Krauncha, its
plateaus and. peaks ; its passes and sides. (Then is) the tree-
less MSinasa—abode of birds—the scene of Kama’s austerities. ,
Way there is none for creatures, or for gods, or for Rakshasas.
That also must be explored by you,—that mountain with
plains and plateaus. Going beyond Krauncha, (ye shall see)
the mountain, named Mainaka, There is the residence of the
D&nava, Maya, reared by himself. Main&ka also with its
plains, plateaus and woods must be searched by you. There
are all over, the homes of fem:les with faces resembling those
of horses. Going beyond that part, (ye shall come to) the
asylum inhabited by Siddhas ; where are ascetics—V&lakhilyas,
Siddhas and Vaikhanasas. Saluting those Siddhas, who have
been cleansed of their sins on account of their asceticism, ye


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 833


should in humble guise ask them concerning Sita. There is
the Vaikhinasa tank filled with golden lotuses; and ranged
by graceful cranes of the hue of the infant sun. Kuvera’s
vehicle, the elephant known (by the name of) Sdrvabhauma,
ever rangeth that country in company with she-elephants.
Going beyond that expanse of water, (ye come upon) a sky
void of stars, and where the sun and the moon have been put
out ; and that land is visible by the rays, as if of the sun,
proceeding from (the persons of) self-luminous, god-like ones,
who are reposing there, after achieving success 1n austerities.
Leaving behind that region, (you come to) a stream named
Sailod&. On its both banks are bamboos named Kichaka,
These take the Siddhas to the other shore and bring them
back again. There (are seen) the northern Kurus, the abode
of those that have acquired religious merit. And there are
tanks there with their waters crowned with golden lotuses,
There are rivers by thousands with copious blue lapis leaves.
And the pools here,resembling the tender sun, are embellished
with assemblages of golden red lotuses. And that tract is every
where filled with costly gems, and jewels, and woods of blue
lotuses, having filaments splendid like gold ; and with round
pearls and costly jewels. And the rivers there have islets
covered with gold ; and are crowded with lovely hills of gold,
bright as fire;furnished with all kinds of precious stones. And
the trees there, thronged with birds, bear flowers and fruits
daily ; and, charged with savoury juices, publishing superb
perfumes, and of delicious feel, they confer every wish. Other
excellent trees bring forth attires of divers kinds, and orna-
ments decked with pearls and lapises,— coveted alike by males
and females*. And other excellent trees bear fruits fit to be
partaken at all seasons. And other exccllent trees bring forth
precious beds dight with costly jewels and furnished with


* The present text, according to Kataka, drops a sloka, whose last line is,]
“Beings possessed of powerful effulgence, sport here always in company with
iemales,"—T.


824 : RAMAYANA,


variegated covers. And other trees bring forth charming
wreaths, and costly drinks, and various kinds of viands, And
females adorned with every accomplishment, and endowed
with youth and beauty, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras, and
Siddhas and Nagas and Vidy&dharas, of blazing splendour,
ceaselessly sport there in company with females. And all of
righteous deeds, and all engaged in amorous disports, and all
furnished with desire and profit,—dwell in that place in asso-
ciation with their females. And there are continually beard
there the sounds of instruments and the voice of song mixed
with sweet hilarous laughter, capable of taking all creatures.
No one is depressed there ; nor doth any one there want any
desirable object ; and day after day the delightful qualities find
their developement there. Passing beyond that is the Northern
ocean. In the bosom (of the deep) is the mountain named
Somagiri, golden and of great dimensions. Albeit without the
sun, yet through the brightness of the Soma mountain, the
land shines forth with all the loveliness and reality of one
warmed by the sun. There that Soul of the Universe, the
adorable Sambhu, fraught with the spirits of the eleven
Radras—that lord of the gods—Brahma—dwelleth,surrounded
by the Brahmarshis. Ye cannot proceed to the north of the
Kurus ; nor is there way in that region for any other crea-
tures. And that mountain is named Soma,incapable of being
entered even by the gods. Sighting this, you should speedily
turn back. Ye foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are com-
petent to proceed thus far. Beyond that, of regions sunless
and limitless 1 know nothing. Ye should search all these
which I have described ,unto you); and ye should also turn
your attention to others besides, which I have omitted to
mention. Ye that are comparable unto the wind or fire, by
accomplishing the work of beholding Videba’s daughter, ye
will do what is held as cxceedingly dear unto Dagaratha’s
son as well as highly grateful to me. Then, having achieved
success, do ye, along with your friends, honored by me, and


KISHEINDHAKANDAM. 8:5


crowned with every virtue, ye monkeys, with your enemies
slain, range the earth in company with your wives,-~the sup-
port of all beings.”


SECTION XLIV.


——


Sucriva had declared his conviction that he relied parti-
cularly upon Hanuman. And convinced as to the ability
of that best of monkeys to accomplish the work, Sugriva,
that lord of all the dwellers of the woods, well pleased, spoke
unto Hanuman, son unto the wind-god, saying,—“O
foremost of monkeys, neither on the earth, nor in the sky,*
nor in the etherial regions,t nor yet in water, find I any
obstacle to thy course. The entire worlds with Asuras, and
Gandharbas, and Nagas, and men, and gods, with oceans,
and the earth and the regions beneath—are well known unto
thee. And thy motion, vehemence, energy and fleetness,
are, O hero, O mighty ape, even like those of thy sire, the
powerful wind god ; and there exists no creature on earth
that is like unto thee in energy. Therefore do thou bethink
[thee how Sitd may be recovered. Even in thee, O thou
~versed in policy, are strength, and wit, and courage, and
tpolicy, and conduct in consonance with season and place.”
prcren, understanding that success in the task depended
upon Hanuman, and also knowing what Hanuman was,
R&ghava reflected,—“This lord of monkeys is every way
‘confident concerning Hanuman; and Hanuman himself is
ven more confident of achieving succes in the work. He
that hath been tested by his deed, and who hath been consi-
deed worthiest by his master, having been commissioned
in this business,—success in the work is certain.” Then


* Antariksha—regions above the earth in which the birds fly.—-T,
+ Amvara—Upper air.


104


826 RAMA PANA.


beholding that mo ikey who was the fittest for the task, that
exceedingly energetic one, (Rama), with his mind and senses
exhilarated, considering himself as already crowned with
success, felt the excess of joy. And well pleased, that
subduer of enemies handed to Hanuman a ring inscribed
with his name, as a sign unto (he king’s daughter. “By this
sign, O foremost of monkeys, Janaka’s daughter will be able
to see thee fearlessiy, as one that hath come from me. Thy
firmness, O hero, and sterling prowess, as well as Sugriva’s
saying, tell me greatly of success.” Thereupon, taking that
(ring), and raising his joined palms to his head, thal furemost
and best of monkeys, saluting (Rima’s) feet, went away.
Then taking with him that mighty host of monkeys, that
hero, the son of the wind, resembled the moon of bright
disc in the sky, garnished by the stars, after the clouds have
departed. “O thou of excessive strength! I take refuge
in thy might. O thou endowed with the prowess of the
foremost of lions! do thou, O son of the Wind, O Hanuman,
exert thyself so, summoning the great strength thou art
master of, that we may obtain Janaka’s daughter.’”*


SECTION XLV.


Summonine all the monkeys, that foremost of monkeys,
king Sugriva, spake unto them all touching the success of
Rama's work. “The monkey-chiefs, knowing the stern
command of their Jord, should search in all these places.”
Then, covering up the earth like locusts, they marched away.
Expecting tidings of Sita, Rama remained that month in
the vicinity of that cascade, in company with Lakshmana.
And that heroic monkey Satavali swiftly set out for the


* The commentator says that this speech is equally attributable to Rama
and Sugriva. But I think, it would fit Rama’s lips to a nicety—T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 827


northern regions covered by the monarch of mountains.
And that leader of monkey herds, Vinata, proceeded towards
the eastern quarter. And that monkey, Hanuman—leader
of monkey-herds—in company with Tara, Angada and
others, went to the South, inhabited by Agastya. And that
lord of monkeys, Sushena, lion among monkeys, went to the
terrible western quarter, protected by Varuna. Then, having
properly despatched (his forces) in all directions, that general
f the monkey hosts, being pleased, gave himself up to sport.
[Thus despatched by the king, the monkey-chiefs proceeded
apace respectively towards their destined quarters. And
the monkeys possessed of great strength cried and howled
and roared aud shouted and rushed and sent up loud ululations.
Thus despatched by the king, the leaders of monkey-herds,
said, “We shall bring back Sit&, and slay Ravana. I alone
shall slay Ravana engaged in conflict. And slaying (him),
I shall this very day swiftly carry off Janaka’s daughter,
trembling because of fatigue, (saying unto her), ‘Rest thou,’
I single-handed shall recover Janaki even from the nether
regions. I shall uproot trees and rive mountains. [ shall
cleave the earth and vex the deep.” (And some said), “I can,
without doubt, clear a Yojana at one bound ;”’ and another
said, “I can clear an hundred ;” and a yet another, “I can
more than an hundred. And neither on earth, nor in sea,
mountains, wuods, nor nether regions, can my course be
obstructed.” Thus did the apes proud of their strength,
severally speak in presence of the sovereign of the monkeys.


SECTION XLVI.
00:
On the monkey-chiefs having departed, Rama said unto


Sugriva,—“How is it that thou knowest all the quarters of
this earth?” Thereupon, the self-controlled Sugriva, howing


828 RAMAYANA,


low, said unto Rama,—‘Do thou listen to my words, I shall
relate everything. When V4li pursued the Danava Dundavi,*
wearing the form of a buftalo, towards the Malaya mountain,
Mahisha entered a cave of that mountain. And Vali also, desir-
ous of slaying the Asura, entered Malaya. And 1 was made
to stand at the mouth in lumble guise ; nor did’ Vali issue out,
although a good year rolled away. Then the cave became filled
with blood gushing ont vehemently. Seeing this, | became
amazed, and exercised with the poison of grief on account of
my brother. And I, losing my sense, thought that my superior
had for certain been slain. And I placed a crag huge as a


hill at the mouth of the cave. (And thought I), ‘Mahisha, .


unable to issue out, needs must meet his end.’ And despair-
ing of his (Vali’s) life, 1 retraced my steps to Kishkindha.
And obtaining the spacious kingdom along with Tar& and
Um5, I began to pass my days in peace in company with
his counsellors, Then came thal foremost of monkeys,having
slain him (Mahisha). Thereupon, J, influenced by fear, in
consideration of his dignity, made over to him his monarchy.
But Vali, his senses exercised with sorrow, anxious to slay
me, in company with his counsellors, pursued me, who


took to my heels. Hotly pursued and chased by Vali,


I surveyed various streams and woods and cities. And


I surveyed the earth like the hoof-print of a cow, or the,


image reflected from a mirror, or a fire-brand whirled (in the
air.)t Then repairing to the East, J see various trees, and
mountains, and charming caves, and diverse tanks. And there:


T behold the Asceuding mountain decked with gold,—and that”


daily abode of Apsaras—the sea of milk. And chased by


* The real name of this D&nava is mAy4vi. He is confusedly called Dunduvi
and Mahisha,the latter, in consequence of the implication that bis father having
assumed the shape of a buffalo, he has also a like shape.—T,


+ The commentator remarks that “like the hoof-print of a cow” expresses-


the ease with which Sugriva travelled the earth ; “ike a fire brand whirled”


conveys his vehement speed ; and “like the image reflected on a mirror” signi-
fies the lucidity of his perception.—T.


one KISHKINDHAKANDAM 829


Vali, and flying.on, I suddenly veered round, and then again,
O master, off I went. And changing that direction, I again
made for the South crowded with trees belonging to Vindhya,
‘and embellished with sandal woods. Then seeing Vali in the
mountain among trees, from the south I, pursued by Vali,
betook myself to the western quarter. And beholding various
countries,and arriving at that foremost and best of mountains—
Asta*—I turned to the north; and (passed) Himavat, and
Meru, and the Northern sea. But pursued by Vali, refuge
find Inone. Then out spake Hanuman endeued with under-
standing, ‘O king, now I remember me how that lord of
monkeys, Vali, was cursed by Matanga in this very hermitage.
If Vali enters (into this asylum), his head becomes cleft in
hundred. There we shall dwell happily without anxiety” O
king’s son, thereupon, we went to the Rhisyamuka mountain.
nor did then V4li enter there from fear of Matanga. Thus,
O king, did I actually see all the world. And from that place
T came to this cave.”


SECTION XLVIt.


Tae principal monkeys, having been ordered by the
monkey-king, speedily went in all directions to their destina-
tions for the purpose of seeing Vaidehi. And on all sides they
explore watery expanses, and streams, and !awns, and com-
mons, and cities, and tracts rendered impassable by torrents.
And the leaders of monkey-herds search all those countries,
described by Sugriva,—containing mountains, woods and
forests. Engaged during the day in search of Sita, at
night the monkeys seek the ground (for sleep). In every
place, by day coming to trees aye enjoying every season,
and crowned with fruits, the monkeys prepared their beds at


* The Setting hill.—T.


830° KAMAYANA,


night.* Counting that day} as the first, the principal
monkeys, after the month had run out, resigning all hope,
came to the Fountain and met with the monkey-king. And
having explored the Eastern regions, as directed, the exceed-
ingly strong Vinata not having been able to see Sita, came
back, in company with his counsellors. And then that mighty
ape, Satavali, daunted in spirits, arrived with his forces, after
having searched all through the North. And having search-
ed the West in company with his monkeys, Sushena, on the
month heing complete, presented himself before Sugriva.
And coming to Sugriva seated along with Rama behind the
Fountain, and saluting the former, Sushena said unto Sugriva,
—'Searched have been al! the mountains, and deep woods,
and streams, and islands embosomed in the ocean, and the
various provinces. And also searched have been all the caves
which have been described by thee ; and searched have been
all the groves entertwined with plants ; and thickets ; and
difficult and uneven grounds. And huge animals have been
sought out and slain (by us). And all the impracticable places
we have explored again and again. O lord of monkeys,
possessed of great strength and nobly born, it is Hanum&n
who will be able to ascertain the whereabouts of Mithila’s
daughter. And the Wind’s son, Hanuman, hath followed even
the path by which Sita hath gone.”


SECTION xLvi


Tue monkey Hanumfn in company with Tara and Angada
swiftly set out for the quarter assigned by Sugriva. And
having proceeded far along with all those foremost of monkeys,


* The sense is rather obscure, it being difficult to understand the relation
their beds bore ta the neighbouring trees —T.
+ de, the day of their departure,—T,


KISHKINDHAKANDA UM. 83


he explored the caves and woods of Vindhya; spots inaccessible
in consequence of streams intervening in front of mountains;
and tanks ; and tracts filled with trees ; and various mountains
rife with wild trees. And having searched in all directions,
the monkeys could not find Maithili, Janaka’s daughter
Sita. And subsisting on various fruits and roots, they were
overcome with fatigue, after searching dreadful forests, void
of water, still and tenantless, as well as other forests of a
Similar nature. And having searched that country as well
mighty forests containing caves, those leaders of monkey-
herds fearlessly explored other places, difficult of access,
where the trees are fruitless, and without flowers and foliage ;
where the streams are waterless, and where roots even are
rare; where there are no buffaloes, or deer, or elephants, or
tigers, or birds—or any other animals that are found in forests.
And there are there neither trees, nor annual plants, nor
creepers, nor herbs,—and in that place there are no pleasant
pools, with cool leaves, and filled with blown lotuses; and it
hath been renounced by the black-bees. There dwelleth a
Maharshi, Kandu by name, an eminently pious, and truthful
ascetic, irascible, and irrepressible because of his practice of
self-discipline. In that wood his son, a boy of ten years,
his sands having run out, breathed his last ; and it is for this
that the mighty ascetic hath come under the influence of
passion. And cursed by that high-souled one, the entire
Amighty forest hath become unfit to harbour (any creatures);
“difficult of entrance ; and devoid of birds and beasts. They*
carefully search the skirts of its woods, mountain-caves, and
the sources of its streams. And those high-souled ones,
devoted to the good of Sugriva, did not find Janaka’s daughter,
or her ravisher, Ravana. And entering (into a wood), they saw
a terrible Asura, concealed by the shrubs and plants—of dread-
ful deeds, and cherishing no fear even of the gods. And
ereing that dreadful Asura, seated like a hill, and resembling


* de, the monkeys,


832 : RAMAYANA.


a mountain, they all tightened their cloths. And that strong
one also, saying unto the monkeys, “Destroyed are ye,” and
uplifting his clenched fist, rushed after them in rage. And
as he darted suddenly, Angada, the son of V&li, knowing,
“This is Ravana,” administered unto him a slap. Struck by
Vali’s son, that Asura, his mouth vomitting blood, fell down
to the earth like a hill toppled down. And on his having
breathed his last, the monkeys, elated with victory, thoroughly
searched that mountain cavern. And when they had satisfied
themselves that the cave had been searched all through, the
dwellers of the woods entered another fearful mountain cavern.
And after having searched {that place) also, they came out
fatigued ; and with desponding hearts sat them down at a
distance under the shade of a tree.


SECTION XLIx,


"Tuen the eminently wise Angada, fatigued, spake unto
all the monkeys, cheering them,— Woods, and mountains,
and rivers, and impenetrable wilds, and valleys, and
mountain caverns have been thoroughly searched. But Janakh
we have failed to find anywhere,—or that wicked wight, thd
Rakshasa that hath ravished Sité. And we have spent
great part of the term that had been assigned by Sugriva af
stern commands, ‘Therefore, banishing languor, sadness, and
invading drowsiness, do ye together search all round, Do
ye sv search Sit4, that she may be found out (by us). Hig {
spirits, ability and forwardness in action, are said to conducé
to success. Therefore it is that I speak thus unto you.
dwellers of the wood, do ye to day rummage this impenetra,
ble Wood ; renouncing grief, do ye again search through this
forest. Those who act, for certain behold the fruit of their
endeavours; but if people once give way to grief, they cannot


KISHREINDHAKANDAM. 833


again attain vigor. Ye monkeys, king Sugriva is irascible;
and inflicteth sharp punishments. He should be always feared,
as also the magnanimous Rama. I tell you this for your
good. Act accordingly, if ye list. And do ye also express
what else ye are capable of.’ Hearing Angada’s words
Gandhamadana said in candid words faint from thirst and
fatigue,—What Angada hath said unto us is worthy of him,
and is beneficial and good. Do you follow his speech. Let
us afresh search hills, caves and rocks, vacant forests and
mountain cascades,—in accordance with what the high-souled
Sugriva hath laid down. Let all in a body rummage the
ood, and the mountain caverns.” There rising up, the
pies monkeys again began to range the South close with
rests belonging to Vindhya. And the monkeys ascended
e Silvern Hill resembling the autumnal welkin, graceful,
Yud furnished with summits and valleys. And eager to behold
Sita, those excellent monkeys began to search the Lodhra
wood, and the Saptaparna forests. And ascending its top,*
jose ones endeued with immense prowess, experiencing
fatigue, could not find Vaidehi, the beloved spouse of Rama.
And having surveyed that hill having many a grot, so far
as the eye could range, the monkeys looking all round,
. descended (the eminence). And having descended to the
earth, the monkeys, bewildered, and losing their conscious-
ness, rested for a while at the foot of a tree. And their
fatigue having gone off a little, the monkeys, having been
refreshed for a while, again prepared to explore the whcle
South. And the monkey-chiefs, headed by Hanuman, having
set out (on the search), began to range all through Vindhya.


* i.e, the top of the Silvera Hill—T.


834 RAMAAANA,


SECTION L,


—_—


Tue monkey, Hanuman, in company with Tara and Angada
searcheth the caves and woods of Vindhya,—caverns all
around haunted by lions and tigers, and in vast inaccessibls
cascades in that foremost of mountains. And they came
to the south-western summit of the mountain. And when
they sojourned there, their (appointed) term had not expired,
And that spacious country, consisting as it did, of caves and)
grots and woods, was difficult to search, And there the
wind-god’s offspring searched all over the mountain. ctr
each apart remaining at no great distance from the otheré,
Gaya, Gavakha and Gavaya, Sarava, Gandham&dana, Mainda,
Dwivida, and HanumSn, Jambavan, the youthful prince
Angada, and T&ra, remaining in sight of the wood, after
having searched the Svuth—lands covered with mountain
ranges, were searching (about), when they espied an
unenclosed cavity, difficult of entry, named Vrikshavila,
guarded by a Danava., And tried by hunger and thirst, worn
out with fatigue, seeking for water, they found that cavity
surrounded by trees and plants. And, with their bodies
drenched and reddened with lotus dust, Kraunchas and swans
and cranes and Chakravakas, came out of the cavity. And
drawing nigh to that fragrant and inaccessible cave, those
superior monkeys were struck with amaze, and became eager
(to enter into it). And with their minds filled with doubt, those
vigorous foremost of monkeys gladly approached that cave;
abounding in diverse animals, resembling the residence of
the lord of Daityas,* dazzling, and dreadful, and impenetrable
on all sides.—Then Hanuman the son of the wind-god,
possessed of the splendour of a mountain-summit, cognizant
of woods and forests, said unto the grim-visaged apes,


* g.¢, the subterranean regions.—-T.


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 835


“Having explored the South, (containing) countries enveloped
with mountain chains, we have all got fatigued, but we
have failed to find Mithila’s daughter. And from yonder
eave came out swarms of swans and cranes and éraunchas
and chakravdkas, drenched with water. For certain here
is a well or a watery expanse. And at the mouth of
the cave there are these cool trees.’ Hahum&n having
waid this, all the monkeys went into the cave covered
with darkness; without the sun or the moon, capable of
making one’s down stand on end. And seeing lions, and
birds and beasts (ranging around), those tiger-like monkeys

ntered that cave covered with darkness. “And (there) neither

heir ken, nor their vigor, nor yet their prowess was baffled ;
and their speed resembled the wind, and their sight remained
‘unimpaired albeit in darkness. And those foremost of
monkeys rushed into the cavity ; and behcld displayed (before
them) an excellent and charming scene. Aad embracing
each other in that fearful cave rife with various trees, they
passed over an hundced yoyanas. And deprived of their
sense, and tried with thirst, and bewildered, and thirsting for
water, they for a time vigilantly descended in darkness down
the cave. And emaciated, with woc-begone faces, and spent,
those monkeys despairing of their lives, (at last) saw light,
And those mild ones, coming to a spot free from darkness,
saw golden trees, possessed of the brightness of flaming fire,
And Salas and palms, and Tam4las, Punnagas, Vanjulas, and
Dhavas, Champakas, Naga trees, Karnikaras in flower; with
variegated golden bunches and twigs, and crests of clusters,
and plaats,—embellished with golden garniture; resembling the
infantine sun,—on daises composed of lapises ;—golden trees
with resplendent bodies, having the hues of purple lapises;
and lotus-plants flocked with fowls ; and (spots) surrounded
by large golden trees, like unto the infantine sun ; and tanks
with large fishes of gold and lotuses, containing pleasant
waters—all these they saw there. And the monkeys saw


836 wKAMAYANS.


there golden as well as silvern vehicles, and elegant dwelling

all round veiled with nets of pearls ; having golden baleonys

with their grounds paved with gold and silver ; and furnishe:
with lapis lazulis. And on all sides they saw trees bearing
fruits and flowers resembling coral; and golden blact
bees, and honey all round, and various spacious seats
and beds about dight with gold and jewels. And seareh-
ing in that cave, the exceedingly effulgent heroic
monkeys saw heaps of golden, silver and bell-metal vessels ;
and heaps of excellent aguru and sandal; and pure fruits
and roots; and costly vehicles and various kinds of sapid,
honey ; and loads of costly attire; and lots of variegated
woolen cloths and deer-skins ; as well as a female, from near.
And they found her there, wearing a black deer-skin,—
a female ascetic, with restrained fare—as if flaming in
energy. Amazed, the monkeys sat them down in a body.
And then Hanum&n asked her,—“Who art thou? And te
whom doth this cave belong?” And Hanuman like unto a
hill, bowing down unto the old women with joined hands,
asked her, saying,—‘‘Who art thou? And tell me, to whom
belong this cdifice and the cave as well as all these jewels.”


SECTION Li.


Hawine said this unto that female clad in a piece of
black deer-skin, Hanuman asked that highly religious ascetic
practising pious offices, “Having rashly entered this cave
enveloped in gloom, we have been exercised with hunger and
thirst; and are extremely faint. And, having entered this
mighty cave underneath the earth, we have become thirsty.
And, seeing all these wonderful phenomena, we have become
afflicted, and bewildered ; and have lost our sense. To who
pélong these golden trees resembling the infantine sun; a:


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. 837


the pure fruits and roots; and the houses and vehicles of
gold and silver,—veiled in networks of jewels, and furnished
with golden windows? And, by whose energy are these
golden trees (here, bearing flowers, crowned with fruits,
grateful to the sight, and breathing rich odour? And golden
fie spring in lucent water,—how golden fishes are dis-
oveyed in it along with tortoises! Have these sprung from
thw power; or do they owe their existence to the ascetic
ergy of any other? It behoves thee to relate all this unto

is who are ignorant of everything.’ Thus addressed by
‘anuman, the female ascetic practising righteousness, and
gaged in the welfare of all beings, replied unto Hanumin,—
foremost of monkeys, there is one, named Maya, spreader

f illusions. By him hath this entire golden grove been
constructed through his wonderful power of construction. He
“that hath reared this excellent golden grove, and this charm-
ing mansion, was formerly the Vigwakarm&* of the principal
Danavas. Having for a thousand years practised austerities
in this vast forest, he obtained a boon from the Great-father,—
in virtue of which he had attained consummate mastery in
his art, as well as absolute control over the materials required
therein. Having accomplished everything, that powerful one,
commanding every enjoyment, for a time happily dwelt in
this mighty forest. Then he, happening to conceive a passion
for an Apsara, Hem (by name), Purandara,vigorously wielding
his thunder-bolt, struck him dead. Then Brahma conferred on
Heth this fine forest and this golden mansion, with the per-
petual privilege of enjoying every pleasure herein. 1, Sayam-
prabh&’ by name,—the daughter of Merus&varni, guard
this house of Hem3, O foremost of monkeys. Hema, skilled
in dance and song, is my dear friend. Having received her
blessing, I guard this vast forest. What is thy errand? And
why is it that ye have arrived at these lone woods? And
how have you managed to see this inaccessible forest ?


.* The name of the celestial architect —T.


938 RAMAFANA.


Having partaken of these fruits and roots intended for use,
and drunk, do ye detail all this to me,”


SECTION LIE


Ten to all the monkey-chiefs, after they had rested, t
female ascetic, engaged in righteous practices, eagerly sa
these words,—-"‘Ye monkeys, if your pain hath gone off
consequence of the fare of fruits which you hay partake
and also if it be fit to be heard by me, I would listen to yor
narration.” Hearing her words, Hanum&n, the son of th
wind-god, in all candour began to relate everything faithfully,
“The Sovereign of all this world, resembling Mahendra or
Varuna, Rama, the gracetul son of Dagaratha, entered the
woods of Dandaka, in company with his brother, Lakshmana,
as well as his spouse, Vaidehi. His wife hath been forcibly
carried off by Ravana. His friend is that heroic king, the
monkey named Sugriva. By that monarch of the foremost
monkeys have we been despatched (hither, And we have,
joining company with these prime monkeys headed by
Angada, come to the South, protected by Yama, and
inhabited by Agastya. And we have been commissioned, ‘Do
ye all search for the Rakshasa Ravana, wearing forms at will,
along with Videha’s daughter,Sita”’ Having searched through
the forest as well as the ocean on the South, we, becoming
hungry, sat down at the foot of atree. And with pallid
countenances, we all, absorbed in thought, sank in a wide sea
of anxiety, which we could not cross. And casting our eyes
around, we spyed a huge cave covered with trees and plants
and enveloped in gloom. And (it came to pass that) from
this (cave) came out swans, drenched with water, with
crops of water on their wings,—and plumed /uravas and
cranes, ‘Let us enter here’, said I unto the monkeys. And


KISHKINDHAKANDAM 839


they also arrived at that conclusion.* And thereupon they,
bestirring themselves, entered into the cave. And firmly
each other's hands, they at once made entry into

cave covered with darkness, This is our errand; and it

on this job that we have come. And having come to thee,
hungry and exhausted, we,who had been sore tried by hunger,
been entertained with fruits and roots, agreeably
‘code regulating hospitality. And as thou hast


(me),—what benefit shall the monkeys do thee

Thus addressed by the apes, the all-knowing
Sayamprabha replied unto the monkey-chiefs, saying, —"Well
pleased am I with the fast-footing monkeys. But by one
engaged in my duties, there is no work that is desiderated.”
Thus accosted in excellent words fraught with asceticism and
righteousness, Hanuman spoke unto that one of faultless
eves, saying, —‘We all take refuge in thee, practising piety.
The term that had been fixed by the high-souled Sugriva in
respect of us, shall all be spentin this cave. Therefore it
behoveth thee to deliver us from this place. And it be-
hoveth thee to save us, exercised with fear for Sugriva,—who,
happening to override Sugriva’s command, shall lose our
lives. And, further, O thou that practisest righteousness,
gteat is the task that is to be performed by us. But if we
‘stay here, that work of ours shall remain unaccomplished.”
Thus addressed by Hanuman, the ascetic said,—Once enter-
bg, hard it is for any one to return (hence) alive, But by
the potency of my asceticism acquired through self-discipline,
I shall deliver all the monkeys from this den. Ye foremost of
monkeys, do ye close your eyes. No one is able to issue out of
this place without closing one’s eyes.” Then they,eagerly desir.
ous of going out, closed their sightt with their hands furnished
with tender fingers, And the magnanimous monkeys, with


* Namely, that water was to be found there—T.
+ The text has nimilitah—and thus they closed their eyes, This redundant


840 RAMI PANA,


their faces covered with their palms, were in the twinkling
an eye, liberated from the den by her. And then
pious anchoret spoke unto them there. And when they £
come out of the fearful den, cheering them up, she said,
“This is the fair Vindhya mountain filled with various trees a,
herbs, This is the Pragravana hill; and this is the gre
deep. Fair Fortune! I go to my abode,ye foremost of monkeys
Having spoken thus, Sayamprabha entered that captivatir
cave,


SECTION tits.


Tren they saw the ocean—abode of Varuna—shoreless,
resounding, rife with dreadful billows. Exploring the mount-
ain fastness of Maya,* they spent the month that had been
set by the king. Then sitting down at the foot of the
Vindhya mountain, containing blossoming trees, at that timet
those high-souled ones indulged in reflections. And behold-
ing vernal trees bending beneath the load of flowers, and
environed by hundreds of plants, they were inspired with
apprehension, And each knowing that spring had appeared,
they, the term apppointed for their task having run out,
dropped down on the ground. Thereat, with bland words
properly honoring the aged apes and the rest dwelling in the
woods, that monkey having the shoulders of a lion or a bull,
and plump and broad arms—the youthful prince Angada,
endowed with high wisdom, spoke,—“We have come out at
the mandate of the monarch of monkeys. While we sojourned
in the cave, a full month had passed away, ye monkeys!


epithet has been left out in the translation, as it would render the version ex:
tremely awkward.—T.

__ * Named Rhikshavila —T.

” $ de. at the beginning of winter—T.


a 3g


KISHKINDHAKANDAM. B4r


Vhy do you not understand this ? We set out,engaging that our
2m of search should reach no further than the end of K&rtika;*
ut that hath expired. Now, what next is to be done?
laving received the orders (of the king), ye, conversant with.
vlity, engaged in the welfare of your master, expert in every
vork,incomparable in execution,and renowned in every quarter,
ve come out, commanded by the lord of monkeys. Now,
ving. failed to attain our object, we shall meet with death,

ere is no doubt whatever about this. Who, having been
nsuccessful in doing the mandate of the king of monkeys,
njoyeth ease? Now all the rangers of the forest should fast
or death. Naturally stern, Sugriva, established as our
yaster, shall not forgive us, when we repair there, after having
ransgressed thus. Sit4 not having been found out, Sugriva,
or certain, shall commit this sin.t Therefore it is fit that,
orsaking our sons, and wives, and wealth, and homes, we this
ery day sit down to starve ourselves to death. Death at
ais place is preferrable to the unequal punishment (we must
ieet with at the hands of Sugriva). And, further, I have not
een installed heir-apparent by Sugriva: I have been
prinkled by that foremost of kings, Rama of untiring energy.
Intertaining enmity against me of old, the king, seeing this
pse, must be firmly determined to take my life by means ofa
vere sentence, Whiat is the use of suffering my friends to

k on my disaster at the Jast moment of my existence ?

erefore even on this sacred shore of the sea shall I sit

wn to starve myself.” Hearing the tender prince speak
hus, all those principal monkeys pathetically observed,—
Sugriva is harsh by nature, and Raghava loveth his wife
early. The time appointed having passed by, seeing us
some) without attaining success in the task, and seeing us
rrive without obtaining a sight of Vaidehi, (Sugriva) shall
ertainly slay us from the desire of doing what is agreeable to


* October.
+ ie slay us—T.


Sq2 RAMAYANA.


Raghava. Those who have transgressed, cannot come to the:
side of their master. Having come hither as the princi
servants of Sugriva, we shall either see Sita or obtain informay,
tion concerning her, or else, O hero, we shall repair to the
mansion of Yama.” Hearing the speeches of the monkeys
afflicted with fear, Tara said,—"No use of indulging in grief,
If ye relish it, let us all entering the cave, dwell there. This
place abounding in flowers and waters, meats and drinks,-;/;
which hath been brought forth by the power of illusion, is i
capable of being approached. Here we have no fear fro
Purandara, or Raghava, or the king of monk: , s.” Hearing the
welcome words of Angada, the monkeys, being convinced,
said,—Do thou this very day so order that we may not
be slain.”


SECTION LIV.


Wen Tara, bright as the moon, had spoken thus,
Hanuman felt as if Angada had already deprived (Sugriva)
of his kingdom.* Hanuman deemed Vi4li’s son as endowed
with intelligence consisting of eight elements; with power
of four kinds; and the four and ten virtues; as ever fraught,
with energy, strength and prowess; as growing in grace’
like the moon during the lighted fortnight; as resembling:
Vrihaspati in intelligence ; and in prowess, his own sire 7
and as ever listening to Tara’s counsels, as Purandara listens,
to the counsels of Sukra. And Hanuman versed in all branch.’
es of learning, finding Angada backward in the affair


_ © The sense is very obscure. One meaning is: Hanumdn thought that
Angada acquiescing in what Téra had said, must remain there,—and ultimately
endeavour to wrest the kingdom from Sugriva, Another meaning is’;
slsnuman conceived that remaining therein peace, Angada would consider his
position as enviable as if hc had extoried the kingdom from Sugriva~T.


RISHKRINDHARANDAM. 83


“his master, began to inspire him with fear.* He,
ralthy in words, laying under contribution the second of
four means,t had created division among those monkeys.
their being divided, he (Hanum&n) set about raising
da's apprehension by various fear-fraught speech, refer-
to punishments. “O Tar&’s son, thou art for certain more
Wable of fight than even thy sire; and thou art also able to
Mthe monkey-kingdom as firmly ashe. But, O foremost
monkeys, the monkeys are always inconstant in character.
wet of their wives and sons, they shall not bear thy behest.
id they shail never take to thee. This I tell thee in
esence of all. And I will tell thee what. Thou neither
the virtues of conciliation, charity and the rest, nor by
astisement, shalt succeed in drawing to thy side this
mbavin, or Nila, or the mighty ape Suhotra, or myself.
strong one wronging another that is weak, can live;
erefere a weak person anxious for self-preservation, should
ver wrong (a strong individual). Thou considerest that this
ive may serve for thy protectress,t having heard of it -(said
Tara) ; but to rive the same is but light work for the
afts of Lakshmana. Formerly this was cleft a little by
dra, with his thunderbolt hurled (against it)§; but now
kshmana would pierce it like a leaf-stalk, by means of
+ keen arrows. Lakshmana hath many an iron arrow like ©
ira’s thunderbolt or that of the sky,]] capable of riving even
yantains. Q subduer of enemies, soon as thou shalt set
here, the monkeys, making up their minds, shall forsake
ze. Remembering their wives and sons, ever anxious


* Toaching Tara—T.

$ Referred to above.—T.

} The word meaning cave is feminine in Sanskrit —T.
§ The commentator interprets the passage differently : “Formerly Indra did
ttle damage herein-~i. ¢. merely slew Maya, the architect of the mansion.”
sis ingenuity. I give the plain sense—T.

| Vajrdcani—Vajra is the thunder-bolt in the hand of Indra, and Arani~-
thandor-bolt produced by clouds.—T.


—)


844 RAMAPANA.
f


{on account of Sugriva:, pining for domestic happiness
and aggrieved (at their pitiable plight), they shal
turn their backs upon thee. Then forsaken by thy kindre:
‘as well as friends seeking thy welfare, thou shalt b
struck with affright even at a quaking blade of ‘grass
If thou’ make head (against Sugriva), the sharpened shaft:
of Lakshmana, terrible, of exceeding impetuosity and mig\t9
vehemence, and incapable of being baffled, shall be eager: i
slay thee. On the contrary, if thou in humble guise prese’
thyself (before him) along with us, he shall establish th:
jn the kingdom, in consideration of thy being the next heir,
A righteous sovereign, steady in vow, clean, and truthful
in promise, thy uncle, who cherishes affection for thee,
shall not by any means chastise thee. And he loves thy
mother, and his life is for her; and she hath no other som.
Therefore, O Angada, go along with us.”


SECTION Lv.


—:0:0:——


Hearne Hanumin’s speech,uttered meekly, fraught with
morality, and reflecting honor upon Sugriva, Angada said,—
“Firmness, and mental sanctity, mercy, candour, prowess}
and patience, are not in Sugriva. He that, while her sor
is living, appropriateth the beloved queen of his elder brother;
mother unto him by morality, is hated (of all beings). How
can he that could cover up the mouth of the cave, when he
had been desired by his brother gone on martial mission,
to guard the same,—-(how can 4c) know morality? Whose
good office remembereth 4e who could forget the renowned
Raghava himself of mighty deeds, after having, in the name
of truth, taken his hand? How can he reap religious merit,
that directed us to search Sita here, from fear of Lakshmana,
‘and not from fear of unrighteousness? What noble Ree)


is


KISHKINDHAKANDAH. 845
in especial, sprung in his race, shall any longer repose
confidence in that impious one of unstable soul who
chath run amuck-of morality? Meritorious or otherwise,
Show can Sugriva, having installed in the kingdom me,
gon (of his enemy) and the enemy sprung in his race,—suffer

eto live? How can I, whose counsels have been revealed,
fvho have transgressed, and who have been deprived of my
wer, repairing to Kishkindha like one forlorn and feeble,
live? For the sake of Lis kingdom, Sugriva, wily, cunning
and cruel, shall put me in solitary confinement. For me
fasting to death is better than being confined and suffering the
consequent misery. Do ye grant me your permision; and
goto your homes, ye monkeys. I vow before you, to the
palace I will never repair. At this very spot will I fast for
death ; as death is good for me. Bowing unto the king as
well as unto the powerful Raghava, ye should communicate my
well-being unto Sugriva—lord of apes—~and my health and
peace unto my mother Uma. And it behoves you also to
console my mother, Tara. Naturally fond of her son,
and overflowing with tenderness, that lorn one, hearing of
my death at this place, shall certainly renounce her life.”
Having said this, Angada, saluting the elders, with a woe-
begone face entered the earth covered with grass. When he
had entered, those foremost monkeys, stricken with sorrow,
weeping shed warm tears from their eyes. And censuring
Sugriva and praising Vali, they, surrounding Angada, deter-
mined to starve themselves to death. Taking to heart the
speech of Vali's son, those prime monkeys, sipping water,
sat down facing the East. And sitting on the edge of the
water on grass pointing to the south, the foremost monkeys,
wishing for surcease, thought within themselves,—“Even
this is fit for us” And as they spoke of the exile of Rama
and the demise of Dagaratha, the carnage in Janasthana, the
slaying of Jatayu, the ravishment of Vaidehi, the slaughter of
Vali, and the ire of Rama, the monkeys were seized with fear.


846


When those monkeys resembling mountain-summits had
entered in, they set up cries, which, like unto the rumbling of
clouds, making the sky resound, made that mountain with its
tills reverberate.


SECTION LVI.


Wres the monkeys had been seated in that mountain,
with the intention of putting a period to their existence
through fasting, a king of vultures happened to come to that
quarter. And that long-lived bird was named Sampati, the
beautiful brother of Jat&yu, famous for his strength and
prowess. Issuing from a cavern of the mighty mountain
Vindhya, he, seeing the monkeys seated, well pleased, said~
“Verily man* reapeth the fruit of his former acts ; and there-
fore it is that this food ordained to that end, comes to me
after a long time. I shall feed on these monkeys, one by
one, slaying them one after another.” Eying those apes,
the bird expressed himself thus. Hearing this speech of the
bird coveting his food, Angada faintly spoke to Hanuman,
"Behold! through Sit4’s simplicityt this one—the very son of
the Sun, Yama—hath come to this place, to exterminate the
monkeys. Rama's work hath not been done ; nor the royal
mandate. And this disaster hath arrived unthought of by
the monkeys. Ye have in detail heard all that, inspired with
the desire of doing what is good unto Vaidehi, that king of
vultures, Jat&yu, did here. In this way, all creatures, even
the brute species, compass the welfare of R&ma, renouncing
their lives, as we do. It is because of the love and tender-


-. © Although out of character, the epithet saram—man (acc.)—is used by
the vulture.—T.

+ Another reading is Gridhrdpadesana—through the oultur’s cunning.
This the commentator considers‘asipreferrable—T,


KISHRINDHARANDAM. 847


ss* they bear towards (Rama), that people do good unto
ch other. And therefore the righteous Jat&yu, of his
m accord laying down his life, hath done the pleasure of
ima. We_also,"overcome with fatigue and (almost) dying,
ve come to this forest ; but Mithil8’s daughter we find not.
appy is that king of vultures, having been slain by Ravana
battle. He hath got quit of the fear of Sugriva, and hath
so attained supreme state. In consequence of the death of
{yu and that of king Dagaratha, as well as owing to the
vishment of Vaidehi, (the lives of) the monkeys have come
to jeopardy. R&ma’s and Lakshmana’s abode in the forest
ith Sit8, Raghava’s slaying of V4li with a shaft, the slaughter
innumerable Rakshasas by the enraged Rama, and (finally)
is mishap—all these owe their orgin to the bestowal of the
von on Kaikeyi.’” Seeing the monkeys stretched, on the
wth, and hearing their piteous words describing their grief,
at magnanimous king of vultures, with his mind agitated,
id (this), And hearing the words that issued from Angada’s
outh, the sharp-beaked and high-toned vulture, said—
Who is it that, making my mind tremble, speaketh of the
sath of my brother, Jatayu, dearer unto me than life? How
ippened in Janasthana the fight between the Rakshasa and
e vulture? It is after a long time that to-day I hear the
ume of my brother. I wish to alight from this mountain-fast-
sss. I have been well pleased by listening after a long
me to the celebration of the virtues of my younger brother,
ygnizant of qualities and worthy of being extolled by reason
‘bis prowess. Ye foremost of monkeys, I wish to hear of
ve destruction of Jatayu, who dwelt in Janasthana. And
ow could Dagaratha, whose beloved eldest son is Rama,
jar unto his superiors, be the friend of my brother? I can


it move in consequence of my wings having been burnt by


:® The commentator explains in pure orthodox fashion: Because every~


‘ng is in Rdma, people serve each other From the love and tenderness, which
vtain to him—T,


848 RAMAYANA.


the solar rays. But I wish that ye may take me down from
this mountain.”


SECTION wuvir,


——-1:0_——.


Heaaaine his accents faltering through grief, the leaders
of monkey-herds, alarmed by his action,» did not repose
confidence in his speech, Seated for the pur, »se of fasting.
to death, the monkeys, seeing the vulture, with terror thought
within themselves,—‘He shall eat us all up. If he eat us
up, who have sat down to fast to death, we shall secure
success, and speedily attain our end.” Then those monkey-
chiefs resolved thus. And descending from the summit of
the mountain, Angada spoke unto the vulture,—“There was
a lord of monkeys named Rhikshardja, endowed with
prowess. That king, O bird, was my grandsire. He had two
virtuous sons, exceedingly powerful both—V&li and Sugriva.
My father, Vali, was famed in the world for his deeds. And
it came to pass that mighty monarch of all this earth,
descendant of the Ikshwakus, the great and graceful car-
warrior, Rima, son unto Dagaratha, intent upon the injunction
of his sire, resorting to the path of righteousness, entered the
woods of Dandaka in company with his brother, Lakshmana
and his wife Vaidehi. And his spouse was forcibly carried
away from Janasthana. And the friend of Rama’s father, the
king of vultures, named Jatayu, saw Videha’s daughter, Sita,
as she was being carried away in the sky. And after having
thrown down Ravana from his car, and placed Maithili on the
ground, (that vulture) old and overcome with fatigue was (at
length) slain by Ravana in battle. Thus slain by the power-
ful Ravana, the vulture, having had his funereal obsequies


* Karmana (instru.) by his action. The commentator explains: alarmed
by his speech about eating up the monkeys. The passage is obscure. —T.


EISHRINDHEKIENDAM. Sis


performed by Raova (Nintselfy, hath attained excellent state
The Righava niade friends with my unefe, tle Mgh-sooled
Sugriva; aad he also slew my sire. My father had debarved
Sugriva feom the kingdom along with his counseltors'; but
Rama, having slain Vali, installed him (Sugriva). Ane
established in the monarchy by him (R&ma), Sugriva is (now)
the master of the monkeys and king of all the foremost
monkeys. By him have we been sent. Despatched hithee
by Rama, we have searched for Sit& all round, bat Vaidehi
we have not found, as one doth not find the solar spleridote
at night. Aad it came to pass that, having heedfully exptore@
the Dandaka forest, we through ignorance entered a cave
lying open before. That cave, thou must kaow, was constructed?
by the illusive energy of Maya. And there we spent @
month—the term whick had been fixed by the monarch
Doing the behests of the king of monkeys, we, having over-
stayed the terms which had been appointed, have from fear
saat. here down for the purpose of fasting unto death. On that
K&kutstha being wrought up with wrath, as well as Sugriva
together with Lakshmawa, we, repairing thither, shall lowe
our. lives.”


—


SECTION Lviis.


Wiuw the monkeys, whose lives had’ welt nigh departed
out of them, had spokea these piteous words, the vulture, in
setemn accents, with tears. in his-eyes, said unto the monkeys,
Ye monkeys, ye have said that my younger brother, named
Jatayu, batty been slain in battle by the powerful Révana, On
account of my age and want of wings, |, withougt: hearing
thie, bear i, Nor have F strength to-day to clear stores
touching. my brother's ennrity. Formerly, while engaged in
the destruction of Vritea, he and I, burning for victory, soared

107


850 : RAMAYANA.


ia the sky near the flaming sun, garlanded by glory. Thence
impetuously wheeling round, we went to the celestial regions
along the etherial way. And it came to pass that, coming
midway of the sun, Jatayu was faint. Witnessing my brothey
severely struck by the solar rays, and exceedingly s .pified,
1 from affection shadowed him with my wings. Thereat, my
pinions scathed, I dropped down on Vindhya, ye foremost of
monkeys; and staying here, I could not know the ‘circume
stances that have befallen my brother.” Thus addressed by
Jat&yu’s brother, Sampati, the eminently wise prince Angada
answered,—' If thou art indeed the brother o° Jat&yu, having
heard what I have related, tell (us) if thou knowest touching
the abode of that Rakshasa. Tellus if thou knowest anent
that short-sighted worst of Rakshasas, Ravana, whether
staying far or near.” Thereat, rejoicing the monkeys, the
exceedingly energetic elder brother of Jal8yu spoke words
worthy of him,—‘Ye monkeys, my pinions have been burnt ;
and I am a vulture shorn of strength. Therefore I will help
Rama well by my words, I know the realms of Varuna, and
Vishnu's Trivikrama® worlds, the wats of the gods. \d Asuras,
and the churning for ambrosia. And albeit age hath Yeprived
me of energy, and albeit my life hangs loosely on me, yet, if
this is R&ma’s work, it should be done by me first. I have
seen a youthful and beautiful female, adorned with all orna-
ments, carried away by the wicked Ravana,—the lady (all
the while) crying, ‘O Rama!’ ‘O Rama?!’ ‘O Lakshmana!’ And
taking her ornaments from her person, she was chrowing them
on the ground. Her silken. cloth seemed like the solar
splendour on the summit of a mountain; and herself besid,

the sable Rakshasa, looked like the lightning in the welki

{beside clouds). From your relation of Rama, I conclude that
she must be Sit§. Now listen to me as I tell you about the
abode of that R&kshasa. Son unto Vigravana and brother


——
© i.e, the worlds enveloped by bis three steps during his Dwarf incayna-
tlon.—T.


RISHRINDHAKANDAM. 851


unto Vaicravana, the R&kshasa named Ravana resides in the
city of Lanka. And the lovely city of Lank&, reared by
Vigwakarma, lieth a full hundred yoyangs hence on an island
in the sea; furnished with golden gateways, filled with varie-
gated daises, lordly gold-gleaming palaces; and girt round
with great walls hued like sunshine. There stayeth Vaidehi,
forlorn and clad in a silken cloth,—confined in the inner
apartment of Ravana, and carefully guarded by Rakshasis.
In Lanka protected all round by the sea, ye shall behold
Janaka’s daughter, Maithili. At the end of the ocean aftera
full hundered yoyanas, arriving at its southern shore, ye shall
see Ravana. Ye monkeys, do ye hie thither speedily with
vigor. I perceive by my knowledge that having seen (that
place), ye shall come back, The first course belongs to fork.
tailed sbrikes and others living on grain; the second, to
those that live on animals and fruits; the third is ranged by
Bh&shas ; the fourth by Kraunchas, Kuvaras and hawks; the
fifth by vultures; the sixth belongs to swans endowed with
youth and beauty; and the next to the Vainateyas. We have
derived our origin from Vainateya.t (By despatching you
thither), I shall avenge the heinous deed perpetrated by the
cannibal, as well as the wrong done by Ravana unto my
brother. Resting here, I see Ravana and Janaki. We have
excellent Sauparnat clairvoyance. For this reason, as well
as owing to the energy consequent on our feeding on
certain kinds of flesh, we, ye monkeys, can see a little
further than an hundred yoyanas. Therefore (the Deity) hath
ordained such food for us as are fraught with the power of
making one see from a great distance. And the abode of
cocks and others being underneath trees, their sight is limited
to the extent which they require to see. Do ye look about


+ Aruna, son unto Vinaté.—T.

§ Clairvoyance attained by success in knowledge respecting the spiritual
Golden eyes. Thus far the commentator. We leave the abstruse point to the
apostles of theosophy and spiritism for iflucidation —T.


Bsa. RAMA ANE.


for means to cross ever the salt waters. Haviag met with
Vaidehi, do ye, having achieved success, come back. I wish
to be taken by you to the ocean—abode of Varmoa. £ will
offer water wato {the maues of) my high-sovled brother,
who hath gone to beaveo.” Thereat thos wseroes, the
monkeys possessed of exceeding energy, carried to the
destined spet on the shore of the ocean, Sampiti, whose
winge bad been scathed. Then carrying that lord of yul-
twres back do the self-same place, the monkeys, furnished with
information (concerning Sita),experienced great joy.


SECTION LIX,


Tres hearing. that ambrosial speech of the valture-king,
whe monkey-chiefs, being delighted, kept op parleying (on that
topic. Then Jambavian—foremost of monkeys—together
with alt the monkeys, arising suddenly fro. the ground,
spoke woto the vulture-king, saying,—‘Where \_ Sita? By
whom bath she been seen? And who hath carried away
Mithiig’s daughter? Do thou tell us all about this, and
(thus) prove the path of these rangers of the woods. Who
Hs there that doth not take beed of the force of Dacarathi’s*
aad Lakshmana’s arrows, speeding with the vehemence of
thunder?” Thereat, cheering up those monkeys, who had
risen from their attitudes of fasting, and who s#ere all atten-
tion to hear news concerning Sit’, he (Sampfti}), welt
pleased, said these words,—“Listen as to how I came to
fnow of the ravishment of Vaidebi, Sild, at this place; and
who it wes that told me where that one of expansive eyes
is. Fora long time I lay here, old, and of feeble jife and
energy. That best of birds, my son named Supirgwa,


coming to me, st the proper hour maintained me with food.


* Zit. Dasaratha's gon. The term is epplied in especial to Rima.—F_


RISHRINDHAK2ENDAM Gs¢


Gandharbas are exceedingly lascivious ; serpents are“excocd-
fugly wrathiul; fear is excessive im deer; and we have
excessive hunger. Oace ona time my son, going forth abou
sunsise to procure food for me who was suffering from
duager and (accordingly) eager Sor it, came back in the
eveaing without any fiesh. Hurt (by my speech uttered)
fa consequence af my non-receipt of food, that enhancer
i my joy, asking my fargiveness, said these words fraught
with fact,—‘Father, taking to my wings at the proper time
for procuring flesh, I (went) and stood, obstructing the pans
of the Maheadra mountain. There stood I looking dows,
obstructing the way of thousands of creatures ranging the sea.
There I saw semebody resemblisg a mass of crushed colly-
sium, going away, taking a female resembling the rising oma
dg splendour. Seeing them, I had made up my mind that
they should serve for thy fare, when he humbly in a pacifte
manner begged for way. Even among the mean, thene is
none on earth that can slay people who assume a midd
attitude. What shall I say, alas! of superior ones like
myself? And summoning celerity, he went on as if pushing
off the sky by his energy. Then the rangers of the air and
other beings worshipped me. And the Maharshis said unto
me,—By duck tt ds that Sitd ts still living.t—He together
with a female, having passed by thee, certatnly augurs good
Sortune unto thee.{—Then those eminently handsome Siddhas
spoke thus unto me—Zhkis rs Révana, the hing of the
Rédkshasas, said they unto me. And I (stood), beholding the
wife of Rama, son unto Dacaratha,—throwing off ler orna-
ments and silkea apparel, overnheimed by might of sorrow,
with hair dishevelled crying out the names of Rama and
Lakshmana. This O father, is the reason of my passiog the


+ The commentator supplies the elipsis thus,—' Coming within thy ken by
luck, Sitagis living.”

{ The passage is obscure. The commentator has glossed over this sloke, and
the meaning is none the cleaser for his explanation. —T.


854 | RAMAYANA.


time.’ That best of those skilled in speech, Sup&rgwa, said
all this unto me. Even hearing of this, I could not think
of putting forth prowess. How cana bird’ bereft of wings,
undertake any thing? But listen! I will tell vow as to what
I am capable of through speech, intelh .. and merit, and
what ye can exert your manliness in. I will do what is
agreeable unto you by my words‘and my intention. That
which is Dacarathi’s work is also mine. Of this there is no
doubt. Ye, foremost in intellige Ye, strong, intellectual,
and incapable of being overcome by the gods themselves,
have been despatched by the monarch of monkeys. And
R&ma’s and Lakshmana’s shafts furnished with the feathers
of the Kanka, are competent to afflict or save the three
worlds. And although the Ten-necked one is endowed with
strength and energy, yet to you who are competent, nothing
is hard to accomplish. There is no need of delay. Make up
your ininds. Persons like you do not give way to lazine:.
in enterprise.”


SECTION LX,


W HEN the vulture had offered oblations of water unto
the manes of his deceased brother and finished his ablutions,
the monkey-chiefs sat down in that charming mountain,
surrounding him. And inspired with confide sce (in the words
of the Nic&kara), Samp&ti, from delight, said unto Angada,
who was seated, surrounded by all the monkeys,—‘Remain-
ing silent, do ye, ye monkeys, heedfully hear what I say.
1 will tell you truly how I came to know Maithili. My body
being affected-by solar heat, and my wings burnt by the
rays of the sun, O sinless one, I formerly fell to this summit
of Vindhya. On regaining my senses after six nights, during
which I was insensible, I looked around in bewilderment,


EISHKINDHAKAN DAM. 855


ut could not recognise anything whatever. . Then closely
‘iéwing oceans and mountains, rivers and tanks, and woods
‘and countries, my thoughts came back tome. And seeing
place abounding in cheerful birds, containing woods and
with summits,I for certain concluded it to be Vindiya

the shores of the Southern sea. And here lay a sacred
,ylum, honored even by the celestials, and here dwelt a
ysaint named Nicakara, of fierce austerities. And after
| Nig&kara cognizant of virtue had gone to heaven, I bereft
of that saint, passed eight thousand years in this mountain.
Descending with difficulty from the uneven top of Vindhya,
I again came* to the earth covered with sharp-pointed grass.
I was eager to see the saint ; and (therefore), with much ado
I. came to him; and Jatdyu and myself saw that saint many
atime and oft. A fragrant breeze blew about the hermitage ;
and no tree was found that did not bear flowers and fruits.
Approaching the holy asylum, I, desirous of beholding the
worshipful Nicg&kara, waited at the foot of a tree. Then at
a distance I saw the saint, flaming in energy and irrepressi-
ble,—returning northwards. And as creatures gather round
a giver; bears and Srimaras, tigers, lions, and various
reptiles, were going along, surrounding him, And knowing
that the saint had arrived (at his home), the animals went
away, as go away forces together with counsellors, when the
sovereign hath entered (his palace).—The saint was glad on
seeing me. Then re-entering his asylum for a short space,
he came out and enquired for my mission. ‘O mild one, in
Consequence of thy feathers having undergone alteration, I
cannot recognise thee. Thy two wings have been blasted
by fire ; and thy powers in thy frail frame are (in the same
condition). Aforetime I saw two vultures like unto wind in
speed,—kings of vultures, brothers, wearing shapes at will,
Thou art I know, elder, O Samp&ti; and Jatayu is younger to
thee. Assuming human forms, you had taken hold of my feet.


* While the saint was staying here.—T.


a REREPANS,


Mow, what ailment hath attacked thee # And‘ why lave ely
plomes fatten off And who hath dealt this pusivhmest witty
Gee? Do thou tell alFthis unto me, who am asking thee.”


SECTION LXI,


—


"TD iteaive Sampati retatéed unto ff «ascetic all about Nik
fearful,arduous,and rash act of following up the sun. ‘O'revery
end site,in consequence of my body suffering from sorés, f, Hy
senses bewildered from shame, and myself fatigued, cantiot
wtter words. Fromr pride for power of flight, I and Jat&yu,
béing intoxicated by conceit, began to voyage the sky afar
Off, with the view of testing each other's prowess, binding
ourselves by the vow that we would follow the Sun so long
aé he did sot enter that mighty Setting mountain,—and
appéar before the ascetics on the summit of Kailaga. And’
simultaneously plurigitig (into the zrial dee, \ we saw on the
éarth beteatlh separate cities resembling \\-wheels ; and
here the sound: of musical instruments ; and there the tinkl-
tog’ of Gthaments, And (at places) we beheld many’ a
deti¥el clad! in: red attire, engaged in singing. And swiftly
darting Up itito'the sky and approaching the: path of the Sun,
We séw a wood interspersed with swards. And we saw tte
Garth’ covered with’ crags and masses of rocks, and iuter-
sectéd by streams resembling threads: And Himavin, and!
Vindhya;, atid that mighty mduntain, Meru, appeared’ or the
Gart like elephants in 4 tank. Then we began to sweat, and
to be filled with regret ; and fear seized us both. And we
Beoane bewildered ; and fainted away frightfully.* And we
Krew not the south, or the west, or the quarter presided over
by Fire: ;¥ and the world that was still bering at the end

© Consequent on Jathyu having dropped dowa.—T.

+ South-east.—T.


XISHRINDHAKAN DAM. 57


of a yuga, appeared (uato us) as if it had been consumed
quite.* And my mind, combined with my eyes waxed feebler.
’ And then fixing with might and main my eyes as well as my
mind (on the sun), 1 could by a violent exercise of my energy
behold the sun. And the sun shining, appeared unto us like
the earth in extent. Then, withoat asking me Jatayu dropped
,to the earth. Seeing him, 1 at once descended from the sky
and Jat&yu was not burnt in consequence of having been
shielded by my wings. And scathed through the agitationt
(fell through the zrial way. I guessed that Jat&yu fell in
Janasthina. And myself, my wings blasted, and rendered
inert, fell on Vindhya. Deprived of my kingdom, and my
brother, and my wings, and my prowess, I wishing to put 2
period to my existence, will hurl myself headlong from this
summit of the mountain.”


SECTION LXtt.


Havine said this unto that foremost of ascetics, I smit-
ten with grief, began to weep. Thereat, after, reflecting for
a while, that reverend one said,~-“Thy wings together with
two smaller ones shall grow again; as also thy sight, energy,
prowess and strength. And having heard of it, and also seen
it through ascetic power, 1 know that a great deed is going
to take place. There shall be a king named Dagaratha,
increaser of the Ikshw&ku race. He shall have a son, named
Rama, endowed with exceeding energy. And he (Rima)
shall repair to the forest in company with his brother,
Lakshmana; that one having truth for prowess, having been
commissioned to that effect by his sire. A friend named


* The passage is obscure. This is however, all the explanation that the
commentator has to give.—T,

t Ramasuya comments ; ‘the confusion seized them as the sun was midway,
They lost all sense of direction. The faint succeeded.—T,


108


858. RAMAYANA,


Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, incapable of being slain by
either the gods or the Danavas, shalt carry off his (Rima’s)
spouse in Janasthina. And albeit tempted by viands and
objects of enjoyment and desire, the famons ana highly
virtuous one, plunged in grief, shall not pertake of those
things, And knowing that Videha’s daughter (hath been fast-
ing for many a day), V&sava shall offer Vaidehi pdyara like
unto ambrosia, difficult of being procured even by the gods.
Receiving that food, Maithili, knowing that it hath come from
Indra,* took up a little of it from the surface, and dropped it
tothe earth for Rama, Whether my husband as well as his
younger brother live, or they have attained godhead, let this
food serve for them,’ Rama's envoys, having been despatch-
ed thither,t shall come hither. Thou shouldst relate unto
them all the facts connected with the queen of Rama. Do
not by any means go hence ; and in this case, whither, again,
wilt thou repair? Do thou stay here for season and place.
Thou shalt regain thy wings. I could this very day furnish
thee with wings. But, by staying here in this condition, thou
wilt be able to compass the welfare of t: \ worlds, Even
thou shalt do that act in behalf of those sons of the king, of
the Br&hmanas, of the spiritual preceptors, of the ascetics,
and of Vasava. I also am desirous of beholding the brothers,
Rama and Lakshmana. 1! do not wish to hold this life long.
T would renounce my life.’ That Maharshi, canversant with
the nature of things, told me this.”


* From the fact of the food not touching the earth, and other signs. Itis
humorous to read the explanation of the commentator as to thereason of Indra’s
supplying Sith with food. “If Sit remained fasting, Révana would forego
his attachment for Vaidehi, on seeing her altered appearance ; and thus bis
destruction could not take place. Further, if he saw Sit retaining her former
Joveliness, he could conclude that Sité, as also Rama, were superhuman
character, and that as such they could not be agents for his destruction accord-
Ing to the prophecy “Ravana shall be slain by a human being.” This inducing
him to persist in hia bellicose attitude towards Rama, would bring down ruia
wpon his bead.” —T.

t For going to Lanké.—T.


KISHRINDHARANDAM. 839


SECTION Lx.


—0o——


**HLavixe praised me with these and many other words,
and bidden me adieu that one skilled in speech, entered his
own habitation. Issuing out gently from the cave of that
Ynountain, I, ascending Vindhya, was expecting you. The
space covered by the time intervening between then and
to-day is a little over an hundred years ;* and laying up in
my heart the speech of that ascetic. I have been awaiting
season and place. Seltiug out on his great journey, on
Nig&kara having gone to heaven, I distracted with various
thoughts, have been consumed by grief.t My rising intention
of doing away with myself I have suppressed in consideration
of the words of the ascetic. The reason which he had im-
parted unto me for preserving my life, hath removed my
pains, even as a flaming fire (dispelis darkness). And know-
ing the prowess of the impious Ravana, I said in rage to my
son, versed in speech,—‘Hearing her lamentation, and know-
ing them} bereft of Sita, why didst thou not deliver her?’
My son did not do this good office unto Dagaratha, influenced
by affection for him.” As he was speaking thus in the midst
of the monkeys, his wings sprang up in presence of the
rangers of the forest. Thereupon, seeing his person furnished
with grown pinions hued like the infant sun, he experienced
incomparable raptures, and addressed the monkeys, saying,—»
“By the grace of that Rayarshi of immeasurable energy, my
wings, which had been burnt up by the rays of the aun, have
grown again. To-day I have got (back) the strength and
prowess which I possessed while my youth was yet present.
Do ye strive every way. Ye shall meet with Sita. And my
getting (back) my wings inspires (us) with confidence as to

© The commentator ays The period is one hundred and eight years."—T,


+ For the loss of my plumage. —T.
Rama and Lakshmana.—T.


S6e RAMAYANA.


success.” Having said this unto all the monkeys, that ranger’
of the sky and best of birds. : Sampiti, anxious to ascertain
his power of flight, flew up from the mountain summits.

Nearing his words, those powerful m--'_ys, with vigour

(enhanced), seeing success before them, telt the height of joy.

Then those foremost of monkeys, in vigor resembling the

Wind, getting occasion for displaying their prowess, intent

wpon searching the Janaka’s daughter, set forward towards the

quarter crested by Abhijit.§ \


SECTION vexiv.


——— od


Havine heard all this related to them by the vulture-
king, the monkeys possessing the strength of lions,filled with
delight, bounded and set up a roar. Hearing from Samp&ti
that Ravana was to be slain, the monkeys growing glad,
came to the ocean, with the desire o1 seeing Sita. And
coming to that country, these ones pr ysessing dreadful
prowess, beheld (the sea) reflecting the image of this entire
mighty world. And arriving at the northern side of the
Southern sea, those exceedingly powerful heroic monkeys
took up their quarters there. And seeing the sea, here as if
asleep, there, as if playful, and at another place with surges
measuring mountains; and thronged with the foremost
D&inavas inhabiting the nether regions ; and capable of causing
one’s hair to stand on end, those powerful monkeys were
seized with sadness. And secing the sea, incapable of being
erossed even as the sky, all the monkeys began to lament,
saying,—'What is to be done?” And that best of monkeys—
(Angada), seeing the army cast down because of the sight


$ Adhijittbhimubhdes (acc) Abhijit—the name of a star. Abhijit may
also mean—he who is to be conquered. Then the sense would be, “the regier
ta which Ravana was.’—T,


KISH RINDHRRENDAM. 6s


of the sea, began to comfort the monkeys, afflicted with
fear, “We should not indulge in grief. Grief is injurious.—
Grief destroys a person even as a wrathful serpent doth a
boy. He that, when the time is come for displaying his
prowess, indulges in sorrow, growing weak in energy, fails
to attain his object.” That night having passed away, Angada
in company with the monkeys, joined by the old ones, again
took counsel with them. Ani that monkey-host surrounding
Angada, resembled the host of Maruts environing Vasava.
Who save Vali’s son (stationed) at one place and at another
Hanuman, could be capable of stilling that force? Then salut-
ing the elders as well as the army, the graceful Angada—
repressor of foes—spoke words fraught with sense,—''What
person, endued with exceeding energy, shall now leap over the
main ? Who shall serve that subduer of enemics, Sugriva, ever
intent on truth ? What monkey can leap over an hundred
yoyanas? Who shall deliver leaders of herds from a mighty
fear? By whose favor shall we, crowned with success and
rendered happy, returning from this place, shall behold our
wives and our sons, and our homes? By whose favor shall
we joyfully meet Rama, and the mighty Lakshmana, and that
dwellerin the woods, Sugriva? If any monkey among you is
competent to bound over the deep, let him at once confer on
us Dakshin& in the shape of deliverance from fear.” Hearing
Angada’s speech, none said anything. And that host of
monkeys wavered. Then that foremost of monkeys again
addressed those monkeys, saying,—All of you are the fore-
most of strong ones, and of steady prowess. And ye have
sprung in blameless lines, and are ever honored (by the king).
And yet no one of you can promise to undertake this
journey? Ye best of monkeys, unfold your respective powers
in bounding.”


8s RAMATANA,


SECTION Lxv.
—0:0.———


Hearne Angada’s speech, those foremost monkeys
one after another began to speak, touching their respective
competence in coursing—Gaya, and Gav&ksha, and Gavaya,
and Sarabha, and Gandham&dana, and Mainda, and Dwivida,
and Angada, and Jambavan. And Gaya said,—"I can leap
over ten yoyanas,” And Gaviksha said,—"'I shall go twenty
yoyanas.” And the monkey Sarabha said to those
monkeys,—“Ye monkeys, I shall go thirty yoyanas.’ And
the monkey, Rhishava, said to those monkeys,—I shall,
without doubt, go forty yoyanas.” And the exceedingly
energetic monkey, Gandham&dana, said, —‘I shall, for certain
go filty yoyanas." And the monkey Mainda said unto the
monkeys there,—“I shall undertake to leap over sixty yoya-
nas.” And then the highly energetic Dwivida said,—"I shall,
for certain, go seventy yoyanas. And the highly powerful
Sushena, possessed of strength—foremost of monkeys said—
“I declare that in motion I am equal to eighty yoyanas." As
they were speaking thus, the oldest of them all, Jambavin,
saluting them, answered—‘Formerly we had power of motion.
But now we have waxed exceeding old. Although this is so,
yet we can not overlook this, as both Rama and the monkey-
king (by sending us) have become sure of success. At present
do thou understand the course that is ours. I shall go ninety
yoyanas. There is no doubt whatever about this.” Jambavin
said this unto those choice monkeys. But (formerly) my
prowess in leaping was forsooth not such.* Of old
in the sacrifice of Virochana’s son, the eternal Lord Vishnu,
when he had covered the entire universe with three steps,
was circumambulated by me. But I who was all this, have
waxed old, and my vigor sits feebly upon me. In my youth,


* Ge, it was greater —T.


EISHRINDHARANDAM. 363


" ‘however, my strength was exceeding great and incomparable.
| Now I can only by my own energy, course thus far. But
such a bound shall not bring success on our undertaking.
After this, saluting the mighty monkey, Jambavin, the wise
Angada spoke straight sense, saying,--“] can go over this
mighty hundred yoyanas; but there is no certainty as to my
power of returning.” Thereat, Jambavan, cognizant of speech,
said unto that foremost of monkeys,—"O foremost of leonine
ones, we know thy power of motion, thou art capable of
coursing a hundred thousand yoyanas, as well as of coming
back. But we say that even this is what is fit. My child,
the master must on no account be commanded by his servants.
O foremost of monkeys, all these should be commanded
by thee. Thou art our spouse, and (at the same time) occu-
pying the position of our husband. The master is the spouse
ofthe army. This is the way of the world, O repressor of
foes! O subduer of enemies, thou art the root of this bnsi-
ness. Therefore, my child, thou shouldest always be
‘ maintained by us like a wife. The root of any work must
( be preserved. This is the policy of those versed in business.
The root existing, all the virtues, obtaining fruit, certainly
\ meet with suceess, Thou, O thou having truth for prowess
k art the instrument of this undertaking, and, O subduer of
Voie furnished with sense and vigor,thou art the occasion
, herein. And, O foremost of monkeys, thou art both our
superior, and our superior’s son; and resorting to thee we
are enabled to accomplish our object.” Thereat that mighty
monkey, Angada, son unto V&li, answered the exceedingly
ise Jambavan, when he had spoken,—‘If I go not, nor any
chitgr powerful monkey, then we should for certain again sit
"him {bves down to fast unto death. Without doing the man-
righty ma intelligent lord of monkeys, we, repairing thither,
shaimygy, dpola ourselves alive. He is extreme both in
showing favor and in anger. Disregarding his order, we shall,
going there, meet with destruction. And his ire shall, not


6 RAMAPANA.


take any other course. Therefore it behoves thee, capable
of seeing issues, to reflect.” Thus addressed by Angada
that powerful and heroic monkey Jambavin answered Angada
in excellent words, saying,—~"That business, O hero, shail
not moult a feather. I shall despatch even him who shall
bring about success.”—Then that heroic monkey ordered the
foremost of monkeys, the highly heroic monkey Hanuma,
who stood apart, convinced (of the wisdom of Jambavin's
decision.)


SECTION LXVi.


Suavevine the monkey-host consisting of many hundreds
and thousands,—crest-fallen, Jambavan thus spake unto
Hanum&n,—"O hero among the monkey-multitude, O bert
of those versed in al! branches of learning, staying apart
silent, why dost thou not speak? O Hanuman, thou art al’
in energy and strength, equal to Sugriva, monarch of
monkeys, and to Rama and Lakshmana. Arishtanemi’s son,
the mighty Vainateya,* famous by the cognomen of Garutm&n,
is the foremost of birds. Many a time and oft I have seen
that exceedingly powerful, mighty-armed one, endowed with
strength of will,—raise up serpents in the ocean. The
atrength that is in his wings is equal to the might and virtue of
thy arm, Thy energy and prowess are not surpassed by him,
And thy strength, and thy understanding, thy energy, and
thy vigour, O foremost of monkeys, (is known among 3
creatures). Why dost not thou prepare thyself furnished « :
everything that is noble or great, (for this feat)? That '
most of Apsaras,—the famous Punjikathala, more fa lu, i
the name of Anjan, is the spouse of the mon


* Offspring of Vinat4, Garura’s mother —T.


" RISHKINDRAKANDAM. B65


Famed over the three worlds, and incomparable on earth by
virtue of her beauty, by an imprecation, my son, she was
born in the monkey-race, capable of wearing shapes at her
will. Once on a time, that daughter of the high-souled lord
of monkeys, Kunjara,—endeued with youth and beauty,—
decked in a delightful garland, and clad in silk,—assum-
ing a human form, was ranging on the summit of a mountain,
resenibling a mass of clouds in the rainy season. And it came
to pass that as that one of expansive eyes was standing on the
summit of the mount, the Wind gently stole away her elegant
yellow cloth with crimson skirts. And he had a sight of her
fair and fine face, together with her well-developed breasts,
Aud soon as the Wind saw that illustrious one of spacious
hips and slender waist, and whose every limb was lovely,—
he was amain overcome by desire. And all his frame
possessed by Manmatha, and deprived of self, the Wind em-
braced that blameless one by means of hislong arms. There-
at, influenced by fear, that one of excellent vows said,—
‘Who is it that desireth to lay violent hands upon my
chastity 7’ Hearing Anjana’s words, the Wind answered,—
‘I do not wrong thee, O thou of shapely hips. Let not
fear enter thy heart. As, O famous damsel, by embracing
;thee, I have mentally entered into thy womb, thou shalt
bear a son, intelligent and endeued with prowess. And,
gifted with great strength, and possessing exceeding energy,
and having vast vigor, he shall equal me in bound.
ing and leaping.’ Thus addressed, O mighty monkey, thy
mother, O long-armed one, O foremost of monkeys, gave
birth to thee in acave. And in that mighty forest, thou, a
child, desirous of eating, seeing the Sun risen, and taking
him to be a fruit, sprang up and leaped into the sky. And, O
mighty monkey, going three thousand yoyazas, thou, struck by
his energy, didst not feel poverty of spirit. And, seeing thee
rushing through the heavens, O mighty monkey, Indra,
growing wroth, hurled his thunder-bolt at thee. Thereat,


866 RAMAYANA,


breaking thy left jaw, thou (didst fall) on the mountaintop.
From this circumstance, thy name hath been known as
Hanumdn* Witnessing thee beaten back,that bearer of per-
fumes himself, the Wind, that breaketh everything before him,
in wrath did not blow through the three worlds. Thereat,all the
gods—lords of the universe—influenced by fear in conse-
quence of the triune world waxing agitated, began to pacify
the wrathful Wind. And on the Wind being mollified, Brahma
conferred on him a boon, saying,—‘O child, O thou of true
prowess, (thy son) shalt be incapable of being slain in battle
by means of weapons.’ And seeing himt sustain no
(serious) injury consequent on the impact of the: thunder-bolt;
He of a thousand eyes, pleased in his soul, also conferred
on (thee) an excellent boon, O lord, saying,—‘Thy death shall
take place according to thy will.’ Thou, endowed with dread-
ful vigor, art the son of Kesari by his wife ; and, resembling
the Wind in energy, thou hast sprung from his loins. Th’

art the son of the Wind, my child—equal to himint |

power of leaping. Now we are without our lives, And Low
thou, endowed with dexterity and vigor, and like another king
of the monkeys,t art before us, On the occasion of Vishnu’s
enveloping the earth with three steps, 1, O child, had circum-
ambulated the earth with her mountains, woods and forests,
one and twenty times. Then, commissioned by the gods, we
had gathered annuals, which (being cast on the deep), caused
ambrosia to come out after churning. At that time, great
was our strength. But now I have grown old, and my
prowess hath left me. At present we have thee, furnished
with every virtue. Therefore, possessed of vigor, do thou
bestir thyself, and bound over (the main). Thou art the most
qualified of all. This entire monkey host is eager to behold
thy prowess. O redoubtable monkey, do thou arise! Do


* Hanu—means jaw. Hanuman means—he with the (fractured) jaw.—T.
+ Hanumin.—T.
¢ Sugriva—T.


EISHRINDBARANDAM. 867


thou leap over the mighty ocean. Thy motion, Hanuman,
surpasscth that of all beings. Allthe monkeys are depressed.
Why, O Hanuman, dost thou overlook this? Put forth thy
vigor, O thou endowed with mighty vehemence, like Vishnu
crossing over the three worlds in three steps.” Exhorted by
the foremost of monkeys, that one famed for his speech, that
monkey,the offspring of the Wind-god,gladdening the monkey-
hosts, wore (a fit) shape for crossing the ocean.*


SECTION cxvir.


en


Sczine that foremost of monkeys enlarge his person for


crossing over an hundred yojanas, and suddenly filled with
energy,(the moukeys) at once renounced sorrow,and, filled with
delight, set up ululations and fell to eulogizing the mighty
Hanum4n. And,struck with amazement,they,(staying) all round,
joyfully gazed (at him) ; even as creatures beheld Narayana,
when stretching forth his three steps, he prepared him-
self (for the succeeding feat). And, eulogized by them, the
wondrous mighty Hanuman increased ; and, flourishing his tail
from joy, attained strength. And as, extolled by the principal
elderly monkeys,he became fraught with effulgence, his beauty
was great. Asa lion fills himself with vigor in an open
cave, so the son of the Wind-god filled himself with energy.
And the face of him, as that intelligent one was filling*himsel€
with force, was aflame like a frying-pan, or like unto
fumeless fire. Rising in the midst of the monkeys, Hanuman
with his down’ standing on end through joy, saluting the
aged monkeys, said,—"Wind, the friend of Fire, shattereth
mountain-summits ; and, [ever blowing in the eye of the

a


* Here is another epithet of Hanumin—Pavandtmajc—son unto the Wind.
god, Left out on the score of redundency,—T.


868 RAMALVANA.


sky, he is possessed of strength, and is of immeasurable
(might), Begot from his loins, I am the son of the
fast-coursing and high-souled Wind, coursing swiftly. I
am his equal in all these accomplishments*. I can,
without once stopping, circumambulate the extensive and
heaven-cleaving mountain, Meru, for a thousand times.
And, dashing the ocean with my arms, I can deluge
the world with its mountains, rivers and lakes. Lashed
by the force of my legs and thighs, that abode of Varuna,
the sea, out which have sprung the ferocious aquatic
animals, overleaps its continents. And for once that lord nf.
birds, Vinata's offspring, living on serpents, courseth through
the welkin, I can course through it a thousand times. And 1
can touch the flaming effulgent Sun ere,beginning his journey
from the Rising hill, he ascends the Setting hill. And, ye
foremost of monkeys, I can, fiercely rushing on, come again
without touching the earth. And I can bound beyor * irs
and planets, suck up the oceans, and rive the eartk d
a monkey, I can, leaping, crush mountains ; and, luaping, I
can drain the mighty ocean dry. And, when I shall leap in
the sky, flowers from various shrubs and trees shall follow
me to-day. And then my course, «flecked with flowers), shall
resemble even the sky (studded with stars). And, ye
monkeys, then all creatures shall see me,now ranging through
the profound firmament, now shooting up, and now descend-
ing (on the other shore), Resembling Mabameru, me ye
shall behold, ye monkeys, making my way, covering up the
sky, as if devouring up the heavens. I shall, Jeaping and
concentrating my energy, scatter the clouds, shake the hills,
and suck wp the ocean. The strength of Vinata’s son, or
the Wind-god’s, or mine, (surpasses that of every other
creature).None save the sovereign of birds, or the exceedingly
mighty Wind, can follow me in flight. In the twinkling of
an eye I shall spread through the unsupported sky, like


* ge. pertaining to leaping. —T.


RISHRINDHAKINDAM. 869


lightning darting from clouds. And at the time of leaping
over the ocean, my form shall resemble that of the energizing
Vishnu, when He had assumed the triune energy. I perceive
through my intelligence, (and my mental motion tallies), that
I shall behold Vaidehi. Therefore, ye monkeys, rejoice. In
vehemence like unto Garura, I shall, I conceive, go an
Ayuta yojanas. I can, suddenly summoning energy, bring
hither ambrosia from the very grasp of Vasava or Brahm&
himself.* I shall leap sheer over Lanka. Even this is my
impression.” Filled with delight, the monkeys there amazed
see that foremost of monkeys, endued with immeasurable
might,storming. And, hearing his speech capable of removing
the grief of kindred, that best of monkeys Jambavan,
transported with joy, said,—"“O hero! O son of Kesari! O
offspring of the Wind! the huge sorrow of thy kindred hath,
my child, been destroyed by thee. And these foremost of
monkeys assembled, who wish for thy welfare, shall, with
intent minds, perform acts tending to thy weal,—so that thou
mayst succeed in thy undertaking. And by the grace of the
saints, and with the permission of the aged monkeys, and by
the blessing of the superiors, do thou bound over the mighty
main. Till thou return, we shall stay on one leg.t The
lives of all these rangers of the forest shall go along with
thee.” Then that tiger-like monkey said unto those rangers
of the woods,—"None in this world would be able to sustain
my impetus in the act of bounding. Here are these summits,
firm and spacious, of this mountain, Mahendra, thronged with
crags. I shall rush forward from these summits of Mahendra,
interspersed with trees and adorned with masses of ore.
And as I leap over a hundred yojanas, these mighty summits
shall sustain my impetus.” Then he equalling the Wind, that
monkey, the son of the Wind-god, pounder of enemies,
ee a et ean


* Vésava, Indra, carries celestial ambrosia, and Brahmd, that which is the
aliment in Yoga—or spiritual rapture.—T.
+ i. ¢ practise austerities on thy behalf—T.


THE ;


RAMAYANA.


TRANsLatED INTO EnGtisH ProSz FROM THE ORIGINAL


SANSERIT OF VALMIKt.


——opetoo


SUNDARA KANDAM.


EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A,
Rector, Keshub Academy.


- PRINTED BY
Girish CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Press, 65/2, BrApon Street.


Me CALCUTTA.


1892.


. {au rights reserved.


RAMAYANA.


See


SUNDARAKANDAM.


SS UE Eneeeniaee cancer eed


SECTION I.


—


Taen that repressor of foes* resolved to follow the path
of the Chfranas, in quest of the place where Siti was carried
off by Ravana. And bent on achieving a hard task, in
which he had no help-mate and none to withstand,the monkey,
with his neck and head raised, resembled the lord of kine.¢
And frightening fowls, and crushing trees with his breast,
and slaughtering numbers of beasts, that exceedingly powers
ful, intelligent and staid one began to range at ease in lapis.
hued lawns resembling water, like a lion bursting in energy,
And on the level of that foremost of mountains, filled with
nonpareil Nagas, and embellished with natural and unmixed
metals, red and dark-blue, and black and pale, and pale-red,
and Intus-hued, and variegated ; and crowded with god-like
Yakshas and Kinnaras and Gandharvas and Pannagas,
excellently attired,—Hanum4n stationing himself, resembled
a Naga in a lake. Then joining his hands to the Sun,
Mahendra, Wind,t the Self-create, and all Beings, he set hia

* Hasumin—T

$ Bull.—T.

$ Pavana, The commentator takes this word in its literal meaning, He
that: gurifieth contemplative spivits by imparting knowledge, Ramanoya would

110 ey


874 RAMAPANA,


heart upon his journey. Then having,with his face to the East,


joined his palms to his Sire, that blessed one began to attain
proportions for journeying towards the South. And sure
as the sea increases on the occasion of a Parva, (Hanuman)
determined on his leap, experiencing exhilaration, began, in
the midst of the foremost monkeys, to increase for the behoof
of Rima. Attaining measureless magnitude, he desirous of
crossing over the ocean, pressed the mountain with his arms
and legs. And roughly handled by the monkey, the mountain
anon shook for a while; and all the blossoms showered down
from the tops of the trees. And covered all over with heaps
of fragrant flowers thrown off from the trees, the entire
mountain wore one floral look. And afflicted by that one of
first-rate prowess, that mountain shed water, like an elephant
in rut, And hard beset by that powerful one, the mountain
Mahendra put out the golden, silvern and collyriy: \sheen
(that appertained thereto). And the mount gan
to cast forth huge crags containing red arser’ ; and its
middle resembled smoke embosoming a sparkling flame.
And sore tormented by the monkey engaged in harassing
them, ali the creatures} dwelling in the caverns cried in
frightful tones. And that mighty chorus® of the creatures
consequent on the mountain’s agony filled the entire
earth, all the cardinal points, and the groves. And snakes
bringing out their spacious hoods marked with blue streaks,
vomitting fierce fire, began to bite at the rocks with their
fangs. And those gigantic crags, bit at by those enraged
(snakes) of virulent venom, flamed up with fire and were
shivered unto a thousand fragments. And those medicinal
herbs that grew there, albeit endowed with the virtue of
neutralizing poison, could not tame the fierceness of the


interpret the epithet as meaning Raima. This is reading into the author a
sense which the passage does not plainly yeild. —T,
* Another reading is: sa mahdsatwasanndda—The clans of those mighty


SUNDARAKANDAM. 875


vehom of those serpents. Then, conceiving that the mountain
was being riven by Brahma Rakshasas, the ascetics, becom-
ing agitated, as well as the Vidy&dharas together with their
females, began to flee away. And forsaking their golden
ats and cans on the drinking grounds, and costly vessels,
water-pots plated with gold, and diverse suckable viands

Ind meats of various kinds, and bucklers of bull hides, gold-
[hafted swords,—beings with wreathes. on their necks, inebriate,
bearing red garlands and unguents, having red eyes resembl-
ing lotuses, flew into the firmament. And fair ones decked
in chains and bangles and Keyuras and bracelets,* struck
{with amaze, with a smile rose in the sky along with their
"paramours. And witnessing this mighty phenomenon,
‘Vidy&dharas and Maharshis, mounted into the sky, gazing at
the mountain. And they heard the words of spirit-pervaded
ascetics, and Charanas, and Siddhas, stationed in the azure
sky: “This mountain-like Hanumn, son of the Wind, en-
deued with exceeding vehemence, is anxious to cross over
\ehe main-—abode of Varuna. And undertaking an arduous
task in the interests of Rima and monkeys, this one wishes
to goto the other shore of the sea hard to reach.”
yHearing this speech of the ascetics, the Vidyadharas saw
the mountain that foremost of monkeys of immeasur-
ble might. And that one resembling fire shook and bristled
is down ; and he set up a tremendous roar resembling a
righty (rumbling) cloud. And springing up, he lashed his
Mail furnished all over with hair and folds, like the king of
birds handling a serpent. And the tail of that one endued
with exceeding impetus, bent and brandished, seemed like
a gigantic serpent carried off by Garura. And the monkey
planted his arms resembling mighty clubs, fast (on the mount-
ain); and his waist became slender; and his legs were


* Parihdra, according to Kataka, implies excellence. Tirtha says it means
bracelets, 1 follow him.—T.


8s RAMA PANA.


contracted. And contracting his arms* and neck, thal
graceful and powerful one summoned energy, and strength,
physical and mental. And looking at his way from a distance,
Hanuman, raising his eyes up, and fixing his gaze at the
sky, suspended his breath in his breast. And planting his
feet firmly, that one endowed with mighty strength, Hanuman,
foremost of monkeys, contracting his ears up, sprang forward;
and that best of monkeys spoke unto the monkeys, saying,—
“As a shaft shot by Raghava, courses like the wind, so will
¥ course to Lank& ruled by Ravana. And if F fail to find
Janaka’s daughter in Lanka, I shall with the self-same speed
repair to the regions of the celestials. And if 1 do not find
Sit& in Lank&, after taking so much trouble, 1 shall bring
the Rakshasa king bound. Either attaining complete success, ”
T shall come hither (back); or uprootieg Lank& with Ravana
in it, I shall carry it hither.” Having observe? this, the
monkey Hanuman, foremost of monkeys, end N. with
speed, without pausing for thought, suddenlv -abg Up,
And that powerful monkey deemed himself like unto Suparna,
And as he flew up, the trees situated in that mountain, in
consequence of his violent rush, shrinking their boughs, rolled
over on all sides. And drawing up blossoming trees filled
with maddened lapwings, by the vehemence of his flight,
he coursed on in the clear sky. And those trees borne up
by the vehemence of his flight, followed the monkey for
a while, like friends following a friend that hath set out for
afar country. And pulled up by the impetus of his (rushing)
thighs, Sd/as and other mighty trees followed Hanum&a,
as an army follows its monarch. And surrounded by innumer-
able trees having their tops crested with flowers, Hanuman
wearing a mountain-like appearance, was wonderful to
behold. And those trees that were more ponderous, plunged
into the salt sea, as plunged the mountains into Varuna’s
ra a retrain ik me one cca n= a


* Above his shoulders.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 877


abode, afflicted with the fear of Mahendra. And strewn
with various sprouts and buds and blossoms, the monkey
resembling a mass of clouds, looked lovely like a hill filled
p,yrith glow-worms. And uprooted by the force of his rush,
ose trees, their flowers fallen off, plunged into the sea,

ce friends returning to their homes (after having accompa-
Sied their friend some way). Aud blown by the wind caused
"by the monkey, the various variegated flowers of the trees
in consequence of their lightness, showered down on
the sea, And covered with heaps of fragrant flowers of
diverse hues, the monkey resembled a mass of clouds
embellished by lines of lightning, And the waters (of
the ocean) strewn with blossoms carried off by his motion,
{} appeared like the sky garnished with charming stars (cresting
the same). And his arms stretched in the sky, seemed like
five-hooded snakes issuing from a mountain. And he ap-
peared as if he was drinking up the mighty deep with its
multitudes of waves, or as if that redoubtable monkey was
desirous of sucking up the sky itself. And as he coursed
the orbit of air, his eyes flashing like lightning, resembled
two craterst aglow on a mountain. And the eyes of that
foremost of tawny-hued ones resembled the sun and the moon
stationed in a vast yellow aureola. And beside his coppery
{ nose, his face looked coppery, as looks the solar disc on the
approach of eve. And the uplifted tail of the Wind-god’s
Offspring engaged in bounding, appeared beautiful in the
sky like the raised standard of Sakra. And the exceedingly
wise son of the Wind, Hanymn, having white teeth, with


* The legend is that Indra or Mahendra—i. e. Indra the Great—once took
it Into his head to clip the pinnions of all the mountains. Hence the
fright —T.

t Parvatasthévivdnalam—like two fires on a mountain. It evidently means
two active craters ina mountain. At least this rendering, without missing
the sense, impatts a material sublimity to the passage rarely paralleled in
literature. The commentator, however, takes the word to mean forest-con-
flagration, —T,


878 RAMAYANA,


his tail coiled up, looked handsome like the sun with his
disc. And on account of his waist being deeply coppery,
that mighty monkey appeared like a mountain running a
mighty torrent mixed with minerals and red chalk. And
the wind that had got into the armpits of that leonine monkey
who was crossing over the main, roareth like clouds. And
as a meteor consisting of many smaller ones, darting from
above falleth down (to the earth), rushed on that foremost
of monkeys. And then that stalwart monkey resembling
the careering sun, resembled a2 mad elephant fettered by
the middle, whose bulk has increased immensely. And
as he coursed above, on account of the reflection cast by
his body (on the bosom of the deep), the monkey* looked
like a bark swayed by the breeze. And wherever that mighty
monkey went about the sea, the state of things app~gred to
undergo a violent convulsion owing to impetus is Ned by
his body. And that mighty monkey possessed of | wed 1g
speed, rushed on, raising multitudes of surges on the st

by his breast resembling rock. And the wind begot of the
monkey as well as that of the clouds, issuing out, made the
dread-sounding ocean roll violently. And pushing up
multitudes of high-heaving billows from the salt waters, that
tiger-like monkey rushed on, separating earth and heaven.
And that one endeued with vehement speed passed over
surges in the mighty main resembling Mandara or Meru; as
if counting themt. And the waters lashed up to the clouds”
by the force (of his speed), looked like autumnal clouds
overspreading the sky. And then.whales and alligators and
fishes and tortoises appeared plainly visible, like the heisons
of individuals, when the cloth hath been taken off thfem, And
sea-serpents, seeing that tiger-like monkey Proceeding in
the sky, took him for Suparna himself. And theshadow of the
leonine monkey, measuring ten yofanas in width and thirty


* Under water—T.
t by his progrese<T_


SUNDARASEANDAM. 879


in length, seemed the more handsome in consequence of his
speed. And that shadow resembling masses of white clouds,
falling on the salt waters and following the wind-god’s son,
seemed exccedingly beautiful. And that exccedingly energetic
mighty monkey possessed of a gigantic body, appeared
splendid in the unsupported zerial way, like a winged mount-
ain. And the deep beside the course that was being
vehemently pursued by that elephantine monkey,was suddenly
turned into a water-course.* And coursing through the regions

‘N of fowls like the monarch of the feathered race, Hanuman,

h pushing away masses of clouds, resembled the wind himself,
And collossal clouds scattered by the monkey, pale and crim-
son and blue and mangistha-hued, looked exceedingly lovely.
n. * tow entering into the clouds, and now emerging from‘
taem, he looked like the moon, sometimes hid and sometimes
visible. And beholding that monkey engaged in bounding
with celerity, gods, Gandharbas and Danavas began to strew
blossoms (on him). And as he was leaping,the Sun did not burn
him ; and the Wind ministered unto him, for the success of
RAma’s work, And the saints hymned his praises, as he was
leaping on in the sky. And applauding the ranger of forests,
they raised the voice of song. And zagas and Yakshas, and
various (races of) Rakshasas, eulugized (him), on beholding
that tiger-like monkey, Hanum4n, in the act of bounding.
And Hanuman, that lord of monkeys, being engaged in the
act of bounding, the Ocean, wishing glory unto the race of
the Ikshwakus, thought within himself, “Truly shall I be
blamed of all persons if I do not assist this lord of monkeys—=
Hanum’n. Reared I have been by Sagara, the foremost of the
trace of the Ikshwakus—and this monkey is their counsellor.
It therefore doth not behove me to tire him out, It becometh
me to do that by which the monkey may take rest in me and,
relieved, may happily traverse the remaining way.” Having
* The sense is bard to hit. The commentator says,that agitated by Hanum4n’s
speed, the clouds began to pour down showers on the ocean—T,


880 RAMAPANA.


arrived at this wholesome resolution, the Ocean spake unto
that best of mountains, Mai Aka, hued in gold and situate;in
the waters, saying, “O lord, thou hast been placed here by the |
king of celestials as an outer gate against the Asuras inhabit~
ing the region under the earth. Thou too,. from then, hast
been waiting at this gate, unapproachable by the Asuras, —
rising up again and again and whose prowess is well-known ;
(unto the Lord of celestials), O mountain, thou art capable ;
of expanding thyself upwards, downwards and on thy sides. :
Ido command thee therefore, O best of mountains, to rise up. i
That best of monkeys, the energetic Hanum4n, the «...ormer (:,
of mighty deeds, engaged in Rima’s service, woft out with
fatigue, waiteth above thee. Beholding the exhaustion of."
" that leader of monkeys, it behoveth thee to rise up.’ ” Hearing


the speech of the Ocean, the golden m ae


covered with tall trees and creepers, rose u ntly

his watery bed. Like unto the Sun of brigh. |

of the watery expanse, he uplifted himself trom the weit, |
Being thus commanded by the Ocean, the great mom ‘a, :
covered on all sides with water, immediately brought fad/
his peaks. The sky was as if cleft by these golden summits :
like unto the rising of the Sun, inhabited by Kinnaras and
large Serpents. The golden summits of that mountain being :
thus lifted up, the dark-blue sky assumed the golden hue, 8
And by those highly resplendent golden peaks that best of:
mountains assumed the brilliance of a thousand suns. Beholding’'
before him that up-heaved mountain in the midst of the salt ,
Ocean, Hanumin regarded it, as abarrier for aye. Like unto
Wind dispersing clouds, that mighty monkey with great velo-
city crushed down those up-lifted peaks with his breast. Being ;
thus crushed down by that monkey, the best of mountains, ’
being apprized of his prowess, began to shout with joy. ,
Thereupon, with a glad heart gssuming the semblance of a;
man and stationing himself upon his own summit,  that-? $
mountain-chief addressed Hanuman, saying, “O best of


SUNDARA KANDA, eB


monkeys, forsooth hast thou been engaged in this arduous
task. Coming down on my peak do thou take rest. This
ecean was reared by one bern in the family of Raghus. And
“beholding thee engaged on R&ma’s behoof he is worshipping
thee. The best and everlasting virtue consists in returning
benefits unto one who hath benefitted us. Bent on returning
benefits unto Raghu’s race, he deserveth respect from thee,
And.to welcome thee properly I’ have been despatched by
him with the message—'Traversing over a hundred yoyanas
this monkey hath been worn out with fatigue ; let him voyage
to the remaining way after resting for a while on thy summit.
Do thou therefore, @ best of monkeys, remain here and take
rest. And feasting on these many fragrant and sweet fruits
and roats, O foremost of monkeys, do thou relieve thyself
of the toil and proceed. Q leader of monkeys, my relation
with thee is replete with many virtues and known all over
the three worlds. O Son of Maruta, O best of monkeys, I
know thee to be the foremost of all monkeys. Even an ordi+
nary guest should be adored by him who abideth by virtue,
what of thee great as thou art ? O thou lion among monkeys,
thou art the son of Maruta, the foremost of celestiala and
art his equal in speed. Thou that art conversant with virtue,
being worshipped, Maruta himself receiveth offerings. Thou
art therefore worthy of my adoration. Hearken, there is
another reason for it. O worshipful one, in olden times,
the mounteins, gifted with wings, began to range all quarters
with velocity like unto Garuda. They moving thus, the celes-
tials, the asceties, and all creatures became almost faint with
fear of their falling down. Highly enraged therefore, the
thousand-eyed Deity, the performer of hundred sacrifices,
sundered with his thunderbolt, the wings of hundreds aud
thousands of them. When with his thunderbolt, the Lord
of celestials, wroth, approached me, I was all on a sudden
thrown down by the high-souled Wind. O best of monkeys
I was thus cast down in this salt ocean and preserved unhurt


rir


882 RAMAYANA,


by thy ancestors having my wings hid. I shall therefore
adore thee and thou art object of my worship O Maruta!
And this my ..‘;tion with thee, O foremost of monkeys, ia
pregnant with many virtues. The time for returning benefits
having arrived, O high-souled one, it behoveth thee to afford
me and the ocean, satisfaction with a blessed heart. O best
of monkeys, relieve thyself of the fatigue and accept my
affectionate offerings, who am worthy of thy respect.*
Happy am [ to see thee.” Being thus accosted by Main&ka,the
best of mountains, Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys said,
saying :—‘Pleased am I and thou hast shown me enough of
hospitality. Do thou give up thy wrath.t Business wants
me to go soon and the time is well-nigh spent, Besides 1
have promised that I shall not halt at any intermediate
place.” Thereupon touching the hill with his hand that
highly cnergetic monkey wended, smiling, his arial way.
Thereat the ocean and the mountain respectfully looked to-
wards him and adored and welcomed him with blessings
worthy of the occasion. Leaving the mountain and the
ocean and rising high up, be proceeded in the clear welkia
traversing the zrial way.t Rising high up and casting his
look down on the hill, that foremost of monkeys proceeded
by the unsupported zrial track. Beholding this singularly
arduous work of Hanuman, the celestials,the Siddhas and the
ascetics all praised him. All the celestials and others living
on its summit, were highly pleased with thé mountain arrayed
in gold and having beautiful sides. And the thousand-eyed
Vasava was also pleased. And greatly pleased that highly
intelligent Sachi’s lord, himself, addressed that best of moun-
tains having picturesque sides, saying :—"Greatly delighted
am I, O lord of mountains, O thou having golden peaks. ‘No


* For his relationship with Wind whose son was Hanum4n.—T.

+ Wrath in consequence of his inability to accept his offerings.—T.

$ Pitupanthanam—the text means “his father's path"-~Wind being Hanu-
mins father the passage means—"“serial way."—T. a


SUNDARAKANDAM. 883


fear I do declare unto thee.  Proceedest thou therefore, at
thy ease, O gentle one | Greatly hast thou helped Hanum&n,
crossing fearlessly and unceasingly, over hundred yoyasias
so that he migk’ not fall in danger. This monkey, is going
in the interests of Rama, Dagaratha’s son—and thou hast
welcomed hin to’ the best of thy might. Therefore [ am
greatly pleased with thee.” Beholding that lord of celestials
the performer ot an hundred sacrifices, highly gratified, that
best of mountains attained to an excess of joy. And having
received boons (from Indra) the Mountain occupied again
its pristine place. And Hanuman in a short time crossed
over the main. Thereupon the celestials along with Gan=
dharvas, Siddhas and the ascetics, spake unto Suras& the
mother of serpents, resembling the Sun, saying :—"The
highly effulgent son of Wind named Hanum&n is crossing
over the main. Thou art required to throw obstacles in his
way fora while. Assuming therefore the semblance of a
terrible, grim-visaged Rakshasa, resembling a huge mountain
and having terrible teeth and a face with coppery eyes,do thou
touch the welkin. We are anxious to learn if he defeateth
thee by some means or cometh by grief.” Thus addressed the
worshipful Suras&, having been honored by the celestials,
deformed and horrible and capable of exciting the fear of all’
beings, and obstructing Hanum&n as he was coursing on,
said,—-"‘O foremost of monkeys, thou hast been ordained as
my fare by the gods themselves. I will eat thee up,—do thou
enter my mouth. Even this is the boon that was conferred on
me. by the Deity.” Having delivered herself thus speedily,
she opening her mouth wide, stood before the son of the
wind-god.’ Thus accosted by Surasé, (Hanuman) witha
glad countenance, said—'"Rama, son unto Dagaratha, had
entered the Dandaka forest in company with his brother,
Lakshmana, and his wife, Vaidehi. He having created
hostility with the Rakshasas, kis illustrious wife, Sita, while
he was engrossed in some work, was carried away by Ravana.


S84 RAMAYANA,


-At Rama's command, I go to her as his envoy. It beheveth
thee, living in (R&ma’s) dominions, to lend him thy help.
Or having seer: Mithila’s daughter, as well as Rama of
untiring deeds, I .ill enter thy mouth. This I promise thee
truly.” Thus addressed by Hanuman, Suras&, capable of
wearing forms at will, said,—‘‘None shall pass me without
being devoyred by me,—even this is the boon that I have
received.” Then seeing him go away, the mother of the
N&gas, Suras®, derious of essaying the strength of Hanuman,
spoke. “O best of monkeys, thou shalt have to go, to-day,
after entering my mouth. Even this is the boon that was
conferred on me by the Deity.” Having said this swiftly,
she extending her capacious mouth wide, stood in front of
the wind-god's son. Thus addressed by Suras&, that fore-
most of monkeys, waxing wroth, satd,—“Extend thy mouth so,
that thou mayst contain me.” Having said this unto Suras%,
having her mouth measuring ten yoyanas, Hanuman enlarged
himself as many yoyenas Thereat-Suras& enlarged her mouth
twenty yoyanas, And beholding her* extended mouth with a
long tongue, wondrous dreadful, like unto hill itself, and re-
sembling clouds, measuring twenty yoyanas, the intelligent
son of the wind-god, Hanum&n, enlarged, made himself
measure thirty yoyanas, Threat, Surasi, extended her
mouth forty yoyanas, and thereupon the heroic Hanuman
attained the altitude of filty yoyanas. And Surasd enlarged
her mouth sixty yoyanas; and the heroic Hanum&n anon
heightened himself seventy yoyanas. And Surasé widened
her mouth eighty yoyanas; and Hanuman like unto Fire
raised himself ninety yoyanas. And Swrasd enlarged her
mouth an hundred yoyanas. Thereat diminishing his persow
Fike unto a cloud, the wind-god’s son at that moment
measured one thumb only. Then entering her mouth and
coming out of it, that exceedingly powerful and gracefut


* Tat dristwa—Secing this, occurs twice in this passage, I render it
eace only. —T.. #


SUNDARARANDAM. S85


ote, stationing himself in the sky spoke thus. “O des-
cendant of: Daksha, I have entered into thy mouth, I
how down unto thee. I will repair to where Vaidehi is. Thy
boon hath proved true. Seeing.him out of her mouth like
the Moon out of the mouth of Rahu, the venerable Surasd
spoke unto the monkey in her native form, saying. —“For
compassing thy end, go, O foremost of monkeys, O mild
one, at thine ease. And bringing unto Vaidehi tidings
touching the high-souled Raghava do thou meet her.”
Witnessing that third act* of Hanum&n’s hard to perform,
all beings extolled the monkey exclaming, “Excellent!
Excellent!” Then he, resembling the wind in rush, arrived
at the irrepressible ocean—abode of Varuna—went on, enve-
loping the welkin, on the arial way, visited by showers,
ranged by fowls and Gandharbas, graced by the iris ; embelli-
shed by shining vehicles rolling on, drawn by lions, or
elephants, or tigers, or bird-serpents; presided over by
eminently pious and righteous persons who have won
the regions of heaven; and therefore appearing as if
adorned by the (five) Fires; of the touch of Agani or Vayra;
(ever) served by Fire bearing sacrificial oblations; garnished
by planets and stars and astral luminaries, and the Sun
d the Moon; thronged with Maharshis, and Gandharbas
tnd Nagas, and Yakhas; and pure, and speckless ;—the.
yupport of the universc—inhabited by Vi¢gwavasu; lorded
er by the elephants of the king of the celestials; the
orbit of the Sun and Moon, endowed with auspiciousness
constituting the canopy of this live world; blameless; and
made by Brahm4; crowded with countless heroes, and
Vidyadharas. And the wind-god’s son Hanum&n, scattering
clouds like the very Wind himself, coursed on in the zeriat
way like Garuda. And mighty clouds, hued like K@/dgurut
* The third feat, remarks RamAnuya, is Hanuman’s issuing out


mouth. The preceding two are not mentioned —T,
* A kind ef alco or agaliochum.— Wilson —T,


_ 886 RAMAPANA.


red, and yellow and sable, on being dispersed by the monkey,
burst into brilliance. And again and again entering into
the clouds and «merging out of them, he resembled the Moon’
during the raion Sor entering (into clouds) and now issuing
out of them, And everywhere Hanum4n, son unto the wind-
god coursing through the unsupported sky, looked like
the monarch of mountains furnished with wings. And it
came to pass that beholding him in the act of bounding, a
Rakshasi named Sinhik&, of great age, and capable of wea-
ring forms at will, thought within berself,—Today after a
long lapse of time I shall have my fare. This mighty creature
hath after a long time come within my power,’ Having
thought thus in her mind, she seized (Hanuman’s) shadow.*
On his shadow being secured, the monkey reflected,—‘As
a mighty bark is retarded in its course in the sea by
adverse wind, have I, my prowess paralysed, been suddenly
obstructed in my career.” Then looking above and below
and sideways, the monkey saw a mighty creature arisen
from the salt waters. And seeing that one of a distorted
countenace, the wind-god’s sen thought,—"“This one . is,
without doubt, the creature of wonderful form, possessed of
exceeding prowess,—given to securing its prey by means
of its shadow,—which had been described by the monkey-king.
And concluding her to be Sinhika from her act,t the intelli-
gent monkey attaining a gigantic body, increased himself,
like a mass of clouds during the rains. And seeing the
enlarged body of the mighty monkey, she extended -her
mouth measuring the sky aud the nether regions. And roar-
ing like unto a mass of clouds,she rushed against the monkey.
Thereat, that intelligent and mighty monkey marked her
. deformed and huge mouth, her body and its asticulated mem-
bers. And the redoubtable monkey hard as the thunderbolt,


:* Brahma had conferred on her a boon that she should secure her prey by
pulling at it by means of its shadow.—T.
t i ¢. of securing his shadow.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. ' 882


vontracting -himself in a moment, threw himself into hér
th. And the Siddhas and Charanas saw him sink in her
Suth, as the full Moon is taken by Rabu during a Parva.
then tearing her limits by means of his sharp claws, the
monkey, endowed with the celerity of thought, vehemently
sprang forward. Then slaying her by his acuteness of
sight, endurance and skill, that heroic, self-controtled monkey
again began to swell himself amain. Her heart having been
crushed out by Hanuman, she, rendered lifeless, fell into
the water. The self-create had created him for compassing
her destruction, And seeing Sinhik& speedily slain by the
monkey, and fallen, creatures ranging the sky addressed
that foremost of monkeys, saying,—‘‘Terrible is the deed
that thou hast performed to day. Mighty was the creature
that hath been slaughtered by thee. Compass thou thine
wishéd-for end without Iet, O foremost of monkeys. He, O
chief of monkeys, that, like thee, is endowed with endurance,
sharp sightedness, sense, and ability, doth not feel depressed
in action.” Honored by these and wished well as to his
purpose, that monkey, worthy of being honored, set out,
enveloping the sky, like him that subsisteth on serpents.*
And it came to pass that as he had almost arrived at the
other shore (of the ocean), he looking about on all sides at
the end of an hundred yoyanas saw a range of woods. And
as he went on, that best of monkeys saw an island decked
with diverse trees, and groves pertaining Malaya. And he
surveyed the sea, and lands bordering thereon, and trees
growing on the sea shore, and the countenances of the
spouses of the Sea. And surveying his own person resem-
a mighty mass of clouds, and as if closing up the sky,

tt self-possessed one ascertained his course of action.”
as the R&kshasas shall behold my enlarged body and


ne” Nghemence of my motion, they shall be seized with
De. cerni 2 :
urioispel concerning me.” Thus thought that magnanimous


‘n gel * Garuda.


y


” 988 RAMAFANA,


mountain,that self-possessed one, purged of ignorance, resu,
ed his natural shape. And diminishing that form into
pate, Wishes, Hanum&n remained in his native fora
like that depriver of Vali’s prowess, Hari, after he had place
his three steps. And thus wearing various graceful form:
that one, acting after reflection, having come to the othe.
shore of the ocean incapable of being reached by others,—
on looking over his (immensely magnified person), reduced
his body (to its former size). And that high-souled one
resembling a cloudy pavilion, alighted on the (foremost)
summit of the splendid mountain, Samva ; crested with
picturesque peaks ; and abounding in 4efakas, udddlakas and
cocoanuts, And reaching the shore of the sea, and beholding
Lank4 on the top of that foremost of mountains, the monkey,
renouncing his native form, fell on that mountain, agitating
birds and beasts. And having by main force bounded over
the ocean heaving with surges, and rife with Danavas and
Panagas, he alighting on the shore of the mighty main, be+
held Lanka like unto Amaravati.


one. Thereat diminishing that person of his sen


SUNOARAKANDAM. 889


SECTION ID.


Havine crossed over the ocean incapable ot being
repressed, that one endowed with great strength, staying at
the plateau of Chitrakuta, and having refreshed himself, cast
fig eyes on Lanka. And covered with showers of blossoms
poured down by the trees, that monkey possessed of prowess
then appeared there like Pushpamaya.* And having cleared
an hundred yoyanas, that monkey gifted with first-rate
prowess, did not heave sighs or feel any fatigue. "I am
competent to bound over many hundreds of yojanas. What
then is this end of the ocean measuring an hundred yojanas
only ?” And that foremost of those endowed with energy
and the prime of monkeys,—gifted with speed, went to
Lank&,{ having crossed over the mighty main. And seeing
blue lawns, and perfumed woods, replete with honey and filled
with mountains, be held his way by the central thoroughfare.
And that foremost of monkeys, the energetic Hanuman, went
by hills filled with trees, and ranges of blossoming woods,
And stationing himself in that mountain, the offspring of the
Wind-god beheld woods and groves and Lankd established
at the brow of the mountain. And that elephant of a monkey
surveyed Sara/as, and Karntkdras, aud dates in full flower,
Ptyélas, Muchulindas, Kutajas and Ketakas, Piyangus
warm with aroma, and Nipas, and Saptachchhadas ; Asanas,
Koviddras, and flowering Karaviras, and trees bearing
blossoms, filled with swans and Késandavas, and covered
ith lotuses and lilies; and charming sporting hills{ and
rious watery expanses; and extensive tracts covered


monkey so named.—T.
ending, remarks ithe comentator, from the mountain-: Lr —T.


890 RAMAYANA. :


with diverse trees bearing flowers and fruits at all seasons,
and gardens exceedingly beautiful to behuld. And drawig,,
near unto Lank& embellished with lilies and environed tl),
a moat filled with lotuses, that one graced with auspicious-
ness, that graceful monkey, Hanum4n, beheld Lanka vigilantly
guarded by Ravana, in consequence of Sit& having been
carried away,—with Rakshasas bearing fierce bows ranging
all around,—that mighty and captivating capital surrounded
by a golden wall, filled with edifices resembling cliffs and
Jooking like autumnal clouds, and elevated yellowish high-
ways ; abounding in hundreds of banners mounted on the
walls, and beautified with pennons and streamers ; with noble
golden gateways painted with plants ; and resembling the
metropolis of the very sovereign of the celestials. And that
gtaceful monkey saw Lank& situated on the top of the
mountain, filled with splendid yetlow-white palaces, like unto
a city stationed in the sky: ruled by the lord of Rakshasas
and reared by Vigwakarm& himself. And the monkey, Hanu-
m&n, beheld Lanka, as if moving in the sky : with her walls
furnished with daises for her hips, the immense waters and
woods for her cloth, Setaghnis and darts for her hair-ends :
and pennons on her walls for ear-rings,—built as if by the
agency of the Mind; and constructed by Vigwakarma himself.
And arriving at the Northern gate resembling the mansion
of Kailiga, and cleaving, as it were, the welkin, and as if
holding the firmament with lofty and glorious edifices, and
observing the sea; his dreadful enemy, Ravana ; the city
teeming with poisonous snakes,—as well as the method of
defence (displayed in it)—the monkey reflected,—“Even if
the monkeys came here, they should fail to achieve succesg
for Lank& is incapable of being taken in battle by the celes
tials themselves. Even if the mighty-armed R&ghava sho, -
reach this terrible-looking and impregnable Lanh& rear.
Ra&vana,what could he do ? Opportunity find I none ce es
conciliation with the Rakshasas, or for (winning them er) by


SUNDA RABINDAM. Sqr


gilts, or for sowing dissensions among them, or for conquer,
ing.them in fight. Of all the monkeys, four only endowed
with (exceptional) celerity,—viz., V4li’s son, Nila, the
intelligent king, and myself, have the power to come over
here. When! have ascertained whether Vaidehi is alive
or not, I shall, after interviewing Janaka’s daughter, think
, about this.” Then that elephantine monkey, stationed on
the summit of that mountain, for a while bethought himself
as-to the success of Rima.* “I cannot in this form succeed
in entering the city of the Rakshasas, guarded by wily and
powerful Rakshasas. { should, while engaged in searching
for Janaki, deceive all the strong and highly energetic
Rakshasas gifted with prowess. For attaining this mighty
object, it behoveth me to enter Lank& at night in a shapé
invisible yet well suited to the end in view.” And beholding
the city in that state, difficult of being subdued by the
celestials and Asuras (combined), Hanum4n, sighing moment-
arily, thought within himself,—-“How can I, without being
discovered by the impious ford of Rékshasas, Ravana,
succeed in seeing Janaka’s daughter, Maithili? How can
the work of Rama cognizant of self (be so managed
that it} may not be brought to naught? How can I see
Janaka’s daughter singly in secret? Actions on the very
eve of success, on being obstructed by adverse season
and place, and through the agency of unreflecting envoys,
‘come to nought, even as darkness is dispelled on sun-
rise. And in respect of what should he undertaken
and what not, even the certain decision (of a master assisted
/by fis counsellors), because of a heedfess messenger,
doth not appear in all its beauty: messengers (foolish) yet
‘prod of their knowledge, bring every business to nought.
How can { so manage that my business may not suffer?
How can I avoid recklessness? How can my bounding over
the deep bear fruit? On my being seen by the RAkshasas,
a


* About rescuing his wife—T,


8g2 REMAVANA,


the work of Rama cognizant of self, desirous of the destruc-
tion of Ravana, shall be marred. Even if I wear a R&kshasa
form, I cannot anywhere remain undiscovered. by the
Rikshasas. What shall I say of any other form? Even the
-wind, I conceive. doth not stray here, unperceived. Nothing
whatever is here that is unknown to the R&kshasas of
redoubtable deeds. Should I stay here embodied in my
native form, I shall come by destruction; and the interest
also of my master shall suffer. Therefore, diminishing myself,
Tshall at night, for compassing the welfare of Raghava,
enter Lanka in my own form. Entering at night Ravana’s
capital difficult of access, I shall, obtaining entry into’ every
dwelling seek Janaka’s daughter.” Having made up his
mind thus, the heroic Hanum&n, extremely eager to see
Vaidehi, wished for the setting of the sun. On the sun
having set, at night the Wind-god’s son, contracting
his person, reducing himself to the dimensions of a cat,
became wonderful to behold. And at dusk, the powerful
Hanumin, springing up, entered the charming city of Lank&
with its well divided highways; furnished with rows of
‘edifices having golden pillars, and net-works,—resembling
the metropolis of the Gandharbas. And he saw that splendid
city containing seven-storied and eight-storied edifices,
studded with crystal and adorned with gold. And the
dwellings of the R&kshasas were embellished with these
(ornaments). And graceful golden gateways belonging to
the Rakshasas everywhere lent splendour unto Lank&
adorned alt over. Beholding Lank&, wonderful and of
inconceivable loveliness, the mighty monkey, desirous of
beholding Vaidehi, became depressed and delighted at the
same time. And he (entered Lank&) engarlanded with yellow
‘edifices joined together, with the ornamented arches of her
gateways furnished with nets of precious gold; famed (all
ever the world); ruled by the arm of Ravana, and vigilantly
guarded by night-rangers of dreadful strength. --And as


SUNDARAKANDAM. “893°


if ministering unto him,* the Moon furnished with many
thousands of rays arose with the stars in the midst of the sky,
spreading lunar light over all creatures. And that heroic
monkey beheld the Moon possessing the sheen of a conch,
and hued like milk or the Jotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in
the welkin), like a swan swimming in a tank.


SECTION U1


Asssumine the quality of goodness and energy on
mount Lamva furnished with elevated summits, and re-
sembling long masses of clouds, Hanuman, son unto the
‘Wind-god capable of concluding in harmony with season,
pessessed of exceeding strength—an elephant among
monkecys—entered Lank& by night, affluent with charm-
ing woods and waters—the city governed by Ravana;
‘beautified with edifices resembling autumnal clouds ; sound-
ing like unto Vitapavatit herself—with infuriated elephants
(stationed) at her graceful gateways ; containing white gates
with ornamented arches ; resembling the handsome Bhogavati
inhabited and protected by serpents. And suddenly coming
?to that (city) resembling Amarfvati, scattered with clouds
charged with lightning, having hosts of luminaries, and
-tumultuous with the roars of blustering blasts,—girt round
by a mighty golden wall,—ringing with the tinklings of tiny
‘bells ; and embellished with pennons,—he growing exceedingly
exhilarated, made towards the wall. And beholding the city
all round, furnished with golden doors; having quadrangular
courts composed of lapises; ornamented with plastered
jeweled pavements studded with all gems, crystals, and
pearls; with mad elephants :of burnished gold and speckless

* Hanuméo.—T,

+ Alakd, the city of Kuvera, King of Yakshas.—T.


894 KAMAYANA,


white silver; with stairs of lapises,—(doors) devoid of dust
with their centres composed of crystal and with stately halls;
elegant,—-and adjoining mansions seeming as if reaching up
tothe heavens; resounding with Kraunchas and peacocks; fre-
quented by swans; and everywhere resonant with the sounds
of trumpets and ornaments. And then beholding the city
Lanka, resembling Vaswokasira,* and appearing to mount to
the welkin, the monkey Hanuman was filled with rapture.
And seeing the delightful, divine and prosperous city of
Lank& belonging to the lord of Rakshasas, that one endowed
with prowess thought within himself,—"This city protected
by the forces of Ravana with their hands holding upraised
arms, is incapable of being forcibly subdued by any other,
This place can be easily entered by Kumuda, and Angada, as
well as by that mighty monkey, Sushena ; and also by Mainda
and Dwivida. Ard there is way also for the offspring of
the Sun, and that monkey, Kugaparva, as well as of that
foremost of monkeys, Rikshya, and myself.” And having
witnessed the prowess of R&ghava, as well as the vigor of
Lakshmana, the monkey was filled with joy. And that
redoubtable monkey beheld the metropolis of the monarch of
the Rakshasas; having for her cloth the sea; for her pendants,
cow-stalis and stables; for her breasts, turrets mounted on
the walls for discharging missils,—decked out like a damsel ;
with her darkness dispelled by bright lights and the mighty
planets. And as he was entering, that tiger-like mighty
monkey son unto the Wind-god was met by the city in. her
native shape. And seeing that best of monkeys, Lanka, ruled
. by Ravana, arising of herself with her countenance rendered
deformed, stood before the heroic son of the Wind; and,
emitting a tremendous roar, addressed the offspring of the
Wind-god, saying,—“O thou that hast the woods for thy home,
who art thou? And on what errand hast thou come hither?
Tell me while yet thou hast thy vital powers left in thee.


* Alakd,


SUNDARARANDAM, - 89g


O motikey, for certain thou art unable to obtain entry “into
this LankS, protected by the forces of Ravana, and carefully
guarded on all sides.” Thereat, the heroic Hanum&n spoke
unto her staying in front of him,—"I shail tell thee all about
that anent which thou questionest me. Who art thou that
having deformed eyes stayest at the gate of this city? Aud
what for, O. frightful one, dost thou rail at me in wrath ?”
Hearing Hanum&n’s speech, Lanka, capable of wearing
forms at will, waxing wrotli addressed the Wind-god’s
offspring, saying“, who am incapable of being repressed,
abiding by the mandate of the high-souled sovereign of the
Rakshasas, protect this city. Thou art unable to enter this
cily, passing me by. Thou shalt to-day, losing thy life
and slain by me, steep (the sleep of death). O monkey,
1 am: the City of Lank& myself. 1 every way guard (all
that is here.”) Hearing Lank@’s words, Hanuman, son
unto the Wind-god,—foremost of monkeys—exerting him-
self (to secure victory), stood like another hill. And seeing
her appear in the form of a deformed female, that foremost
and best of monkeys endeued with intelligence, possessed
of prowess, said,—‘‘1 will behold the city of Lanka, crowned
with turrets, walls and ornamented arches. It is for this
that 1 have come here. Great is my curiosity. 1 come for.
sooth to see the woods and groves and gardens of Lanka here,
——as well as her principal edifices.” Hearing these words of
his, Lanka capable of wearing forms at will, again addressed
him io a speech fraught with disonant letters: “O thou of
perverse understanding, O worst of monkeys, without (in the
first instance) vanquishing me, thou canst not to-day bebold
this city ruled by the monarch of the Kaksbasas.” Thereat
that tiger of a monkey said unto that female ranger of the
night,—“After seeing this city, O gentle one, I shall go away
even as I have come.” Thereupon, setting up a mighty aad
terrible roar,Lanka filled with vehemence, struck at Hanuman,
with her palm. And that tiger-like monkey, the cnergetic


896 RAMAYANA,


offspring of the wind-god, on being lustily struck by Lanka,
emitted a tremendous roar. And (Hanum&n) fastened the
fingers of his left hand into a box, and transported with rage,
dealt it unto her. And considering that she was a female,
he did not give way to excessive wrath. And struck at (by
Hanum4n\, that ranger of the night, of a deformed face, her
body overcome, suddenly dropped to the earth. And the
energetic and heroic Hanum&n, seeing her measure her
length,—in consideration of her being « female, was filled
with compassion. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, Lank&
addressed the monkey, Hanum4n, in humble words, with
their letters faltering,—"O mighty-armed one, be propitious
unto me | Do thou save me, O best of monkeys, O placid one.
Those that are gifted with strength and are endeued with
exceeding vigor, ever bear regard unto the dignity of the
scriptures. By thy prowess, O monkey, hast thou, O hero,
O thou gifted with wondrous strength, vanquished me myself,
who am the City of Lanka. Listen to this narration, which_I,
O foremost of monkeys, deliver unto thee ; as to how the
self-create Himself conferred a boon on me.’ When a certain
monkey shall by his prowess, bring thee under his sway, then
shalt thou understand that a fear is come unto the Rakshasas’.
and that time, O placid one, hath come unto me, in conse-
quence of my meeting with thee. The truth ordained by the
self-create knoweth no turning. The destruction of the
unrighteous king Ravana together with all the R&kshasas,
hath come about in consequence of Sita (having been carried
away). Therefore, O best of monkeys, do thou enter the
city ruled by Ravana; and accomplish such tasks as thou
wishest to. Entering this splendid city lying under an im-
precation, governed by the chief of the Rakshasas, do thou
at thy will happily repairing everywhere,search for the chaste
daughter of Janaka.”


SUNDARAKANDAM. 897


SECTION Iv.


Havixe by his vigor vanquished the excellent City of
Lank&i capable of wearing forms at will, that exceedingly
energetic foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, endeued with
prodigious prow %s, leaped sheer over a wall, where door-
way there was néh.; and that-elephantine monkey gifted
with great strength entered Lanka by night. And entering
the city of Lank&, that one (ever) compassing the welfare
of the monkey-king, set his left foot on the heads of his
foes.* And entering in by night, the offspring of the
Wind-god furnished with strength, proceeded along the
bigh-way gtrswn with blossoms. And the monkey held his
way in thy charming city of Lank’, resounding with grateful
sounds x -ed with laughter, 4.4 ringing with trumpet
blasts. And with multitudes of mansions marked with the
thunderbolt and the hook, and adored with diamond win-
dows, the charming metropolis looked splendid, like the
welkin with clouds. And then Lank&, with handsome and
variegated mansions of Rakshasas, resembling white clouds
and arranged like‘, ‘tus-leaves ; and adorned on all sides with
st: _ctures superscribed ‘Vardhamina,’ shone forth in all its
glory. And ‘hat graceful one serving in the interests of the
king of monkeys, ranging for Rama’s behoof, beheld (Lanka)
adorned with variegated wreaths ; and was highly delighted.
. And moving from house to house, that foremost of monkeys
observed on all sides various dwellings of diverse forms and


* The literal meaning is that, leaping over the wall, Hanuman first set his
left foot on the hostile soil; and this act of his, as tending to the discomfiture
of the foe, is looked upon by the author in the light of HanumAn setting his left
foot on the heads of the Rakshasas. The setting of the left foot on an enemy's
Gominions, is considered by the scriptures as very inauspicious.—T,


3


898 RAMAPANA.


color, and heard charming songs chanted in‘the three octaves®
by damsels maddened with amour, resembling celestial
Apsaras, And he also heard the jinglings of zones and the
clash of bangles ; and sounds of footsteps on stairs of edifices
belonging to high-souled ones ; and sounds proceeding from
clapping hands; and the roaring of lions here and there, And
(Hanuman) heard there in the mansions of the Rakshas, Afare-
tras recited by persons engaged therein, amd those occupied in
Vaidika studies. And (Hanum&n) saw goblins and Rakshasas
storming and eulogizing Ravana; and mighty swarms of
Rakshas stationed, covering the highway. And in the
eentral courtyard, he found innumerable spies of the Rakshasa
(R&vana), some initiated, some bearing matted locks, some
with their heads shaven, and some clad in cow-skins, some
in cloths and some going stark naked; and (he found there
persons) carrying handfuls of dardha for their weapons, and
(having) the sacrificial fire-place for their arms ; and those bear-
ing in their hands clubs and concealed weapons,t or holding
rods as their arms, or having a single eye or a single com-
plexion,t or having a single breast dangling down; and those
hooking dreadful with uneven attire ;§ and dwarfs frightful to
behold; and bowmen; and swordsmen ; and (warriors) carry-
ing sataghnis and clubs for their arms; those bearing
excellent parighas in their hands, or blazing in curious
mail; persons not exceedingly fat, or exceedingly lean;
not unduly tall, or unduly short; mot extremely fair, or
extremely dark; not unduly crooked, or unduly dwarfish;
and those deformed, or many-formed, or endowed with


* The three octaves referred to are Mandra or the base tone, Madhyma
or the middie tone, and 7éra or the high tone. These constitute the entize
diapason of Hindu Masic.—T.

+ Kuta. The commentator says the word stands for a particolar kind of
weapons, Wilson has concealed weapon for its English equivalent.—T.

£ The same complexion gives sense. But [ reader the passage literally. —T.

§ Bhugnavastran.—Perhaps the text is corrupt. Bhugnavaktran—persons of
deformed faces—would render sense,—T,


SUNOARAKANDAM. 899


beauty, ot possessing splendour; standard bearers ; and
flag bearers. And (Hanuman) saw also varions weapons ;
apd those having for their arms darts and vrdkshas, ot
bearing pattizas and asanis, or hawing Kshepanis* and
aooses in their hands, saw that mighty monkey, or wearing
wreaths, or having their persons daubed with pastes, or
adorned with noble ornaments, orclad in various kinds of
taiment; and many a one ranging wherever he listed;
and those holding sharpened javelins,; and mighty ones
fearing Vajras; and hundreds and thousands of warriors
garrisoned in the central courtyard and engaged in vigilantly
guarding the interior,—having been directed by the lord
of the Rakshas—saw the monkey. And having seen that
edifice situated in front of the immer appartment, that
mighty monkey saw the famous mansion of the Rakshasa
chief, pinnacled on the mountain-top, with huge golden
arches over the gateway; surrounded by -a moat enriched
with pale lotuses; and completely guarded by a wall;
resembling heaven itself; magnificent; resonant with grate-
fal sounds; resounding with the neighing of horses and
wondrous steeds; and adorned with cars and vehicles,chariots
aad dainty horse: elephantst; and four-tusked elephants
tesembling masses of white clouds ;—and possessing graceful
gateways. And the monkey entered the palace protected
‘by the Rikshasa chief,—guarded by maddened beasts and
virds, and thousands of goblins endowed with exceeding
| great prowess, And he (Hanumin) entered Ravana's inner
,apactment girt round with a wall consisting of blazing gold
ind Fdmvunada ;} having its top decorated with costly gems
and pearls; and worshipped with excellent black Agurx
and sandal.

* A short arrow thrown from the hand, or shot through a tube. Wi/son.—T,


+ Elephants of the size of horses,—-T.
+ ¥4mounada is a kind of gold having sixteen diverse colers- T


goo RAMAYANA,


SECTION V.


as if ministering unto him (Hanum§n), arose the
many thousand-rayed Moon in the midst of the stars, enfold-
ing alt creatures with his luminous canopy. And that highly
heroic monkey beheld the Moon hued like the sheen of conch,
ér milk, or lotus-stalk, arisen and affoat (in the heavens),—
hike a swan swimming in a pool. And that inteltige ‘t one
from the earth beheld the Moon arrive at the mid-heavens ;
momentarily beaming out in luuar light; appearing (sptendid)
as if in conjunction with the Sun himself,—and like a bull
Joitering in his stall. And he saw the mild-rayed (Moon),
chasing away the remorse of all; swelling the sea; and
displaying all creatures,—attain the middle of the sky. And
that Lakshmi who on earth remains on Mandara, at eve in
the sea, and on the lotus on water, looked exceedingly lovely,
stationed beside the charming Moon. Like a swan in a silver
cage, like alion in a cave in Mandara, like a hero on a haughty
elephant, appeared the Moon in the middle of the sky. And
with (the mark.of) the horn.* the Moon resembled a sharpe
horned bull, or a mighty white-hued hill with towering
summits, or an elephant with his horns plated with gold.
And, with his dirt composed of particles of cool water
removed ; and the darkness dispelled in consequence of the
vicinity of the mighty planet ;+ and with his spots appearing
clear because of his shining appearance, appeared (the hare-
marked) { worshipful Moon in full splendour. And like alion on
coming out of his cavern,or a lordly elephant on entering into
the thick of a mighty encounter, ora monarch on obtaining
a kingdom,—appeared the Moon in fall splendour, And now


* Theson, It is a planet in Hindu cosmogony—T.
+ The spots are fabled as the marks of hares on the lap of the Moon,—T.


SUNDARARANDAN. - gor


appeared the revered Mid-night, chasing away darkness with
the Moon displayed,—when flesh-eating (RAkshasas) lend
full liberty to their vicious appetite for flesh; and when
disputes between lovers cease,*—and which bringeth down
heaven itself.t The sounds of strings sweet unto the ear
spread around; females sleep beside their husbands ; and
night-rangers, given to astounding and terrible acts, are, in the
‘ same way, out, indulging in theirsports. And the intelligent
monkey saw mansions crowded with (Rakshasas), some in-
ebriate with wine and others with wealth ; ‘and abounding in
cars and horses and golden seats ; and fraught with the grace
got of heroism. And (Rakshasas) were parleying,—moving
about their plump arms,—railing at each other ; and throwing
intemperate speeches at each other. And (Hanuman saw)
R&kshasas striking at their chests (by way of challenge),
sinking on the persons of their beloved, wearing diverse
habiliments, or stretching their tough bows, And (he) saw
debonair damsels daubing their frames with pastes; and
others, again,sleeping,—and fair-faced wenches smiling,—and
others sighing hard under the infl_ence of anger. And with
gigantic elephants roaring, (the place), honored by pious
persons,—with its heroes heaving sighs{—looked exceeding-
ly beautiful like a lake in which serpents are sighing forth.
And in that apartment (Hanum4n) saw persons of commanding
uncerstandings,§ endowed with a soft tongue,—instinct with
the spirit of reverence—the foremost men of all this world,--
and bearing euphonious appelations,and clad in diverse attires.
And beholding those well-formed people, whose conduct was
of a piece with their many virtues, (Hanum&n) rejoiced exceed-


* 4, e, In consequence of sleep.—T,

+ A beautiful characterization of sleep, reminding one powerfully of
“Macbeth hath murdered sleep,” &c.—T.

} In expectation of an access of warriors.—T.

$% According to the commentator, Vuddhipradhdndn means persons possess
ing many virtues. 1 differ from him,—T.


gos #AMAPANA.


ingly. And he saw some having beautiful forms; and others
deformed,—and both possessed of splendour. And (Hasium&n)
saw there their wives worthy of noble ornaments and endow-
ed with eminent beauty ; of spotless character ; possessing
great potency; like unto stars in point of excellency of con-
duct,—displaying side-glances and other tokens of dalliance,
—engaged in dear drinking. And at dead of night Hanuman
saw some females blazing in beauty affected simultaneously with
bashfulness and bliss, on being embraced by their para-
mours, like birds embracing their mates. And the sensible
Hanuman saw there other females seated in stately halls,—
lying in happiness on the laps of their lovers,—beloved of
their lords—intent on virtue,—married women,—under the
influence of Madana. And Hanum§n saw some without
sheets, like unto golden streaks,—paragons among women—
of the hue of molten gold,—and some of a moon-like com-
plexion, endeved with loveliness,—bereft of their beloved.
And that exceedingly heroic monkey saw females in their
homes experiencing the height of joy in the company of their
beloved dear unto their souls; charming with blossoms;
filled with gladness; and enchaining the hearts of their lords
with their loveliness. And Hanuman saw crowds of faces
like unto the Moon displayed,—with elegant eyes furnished
with lovely lashes, and side-long looks; and multitudes of
ornaments resembling beautiful lines of lightning. But
Hanumin saw not Sit8, of the highest lineage,—ever
abiding by the way of righteousness; born in a royal
line,—like unto a delightful and well-begot plant,—
of a slender frame,—sprung from the mind (of Brahma him-
self); established on the eternal road (of chastity); having
her gaze fixed on Rama; always engrossed in the coutem-
plation of Rama,—the mind itself of her lord,—who had
entered through and through into the heart of her graceful
Yord,—ever superior to all other women; oppressed with
the grief of separation; and having her throat afflicted with


SUNDA RAKANDAM. 903


the vapour of grief; who formerly had her throat graced
with that best of ornaments-—the isha; of excellent eye-
Jashes ; having a mellifluous voice ; like untoa peahen ranging
in the woods; (now) like unto an indistinct lunar lining,
orastreak of gold covered with dust, or the color of a
sore-scar, or a gold-leaf broken off by the wind. And not
finding, (after so long a search) the Sit@ of the lord of men,—
the spouse of Rama; best of those skilled in speech the
monkey, deeming himself as having suddenly lost his skill in
search, was overwhelmed with sadness.


SECTION vs.


ENDING about at will on the roofs of seven-storied
edifices, that monkey capable of assuming any form that he
chose, began to range Lank& with speed. And (at length)
that auspicious one arrived at the mansion of the Rakshasa
chief, surrounded by a shining wail hued like the Sun;
protected by terrible Rakshasas, like a mighty forest by lions.
And as that foremost of monkeys saw the mansion, with
fretted arches plated with silver and embellished with gold,—
eautifully abounding in splendid courts and gateways;
‘outaining elephant-drivers, and heroes knowing no fatigue;
ver coursed by irrisistible steeds drawing cars, and curious
ehicles, covered over with skins of lions and tigers, resound-
ing with belis hung thereon, and embosoming effigies of

sivory, gold aud silver,—the locality of mighty cars, and the
home of mighty car-warriors; filled all around with many
thousands of divers beauteous and dainty birds and beasts; well
protected by meek Raksha warders at the outskirts; throng-
ed about with magnificent dames of the first order;
containing gems of joyous damsels—the abode of the
foremost Rakshasas—sounding like the sea with the sounds


994 RAMAYANA,


of superb ornaments; affluent with regal insignia and‘
excellent sandals ; crowded with mighty ones, like a vast
forest with lions ; reasonant with trumpets and drums; and
ringing with the blares of conchs ; where the ever adored:
offspring of the Parvas was always worshipped by the.
R&kshasas ; solemn like the sea; and resounding like the
ocean itself,—the mighty mansion of the high-souled(R&vana) ;
clad in costly jewels ; scattered with precious gems—as that:
mighty monkey beheld (Ravana’s residence), he set about
searching for Sita.* And that mighty monke™ concluded, “This
is the ornament of Lank& bodied forth beautifully to the view,
covered with elephants, steeds and chariots.” And there
in the vicinity of Ravana’s mansion,t Hanuman began to
tange the dwellings of the Rakshasas from one to another,
as well as all the gardens (located there). And without
experiencing any agitation, he observing (everything), ranged
the palaces. Then that one endowed with wondrous motion,
with a bound entered Prahasta’s palace; and then with
another,that (monkey) possessed of energy entered the abode
of Mah&pargwa. Then that mighty monkey entered into
the abode of Kumbhakarna, resembling a mass of clouds ;
and thereafter that of Vibhishana; and then that of Maho-
dara, and then that of Virupaksha; and then the abode of
Vidyujjibha, and then that of Vidyunmala ;—and then that
mighty monkey with a bound entered into the abode of
Vahudanshtra. And then that leader of monkey-bands
gifted with great speed leapt into the abode of Suka, and
next into that of the intelligent Sarana, and next into that
of Indrajit. And that foremost of monkeys went to the
mansion of Jambumala, and of Sumila,—and (then) to


* The syntactical co-herence is, as is natural in so colossal a sentence,
grievously loose here. I have, however, tried my best to supply the Jacuna
in the passage —T :

t Ramanuja says that Hanumdn began to range the dwellings about the
wall environing Révana's mansion.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. ges


the abode of Rashmiketu, and Suryyasachu. And (next)
that powerful monkey leapt into the mansion of Vajrakaya ;
and (next) the Wind-god’s offspring entered the house
of Dhumraksha, and (next) that of Samp&ti, and the
grim Vidyudrupa, and Phana, and Vighana, and Suka-
n&bha, and Chakra, and Satha, and Kapatha, and Hraswa-
karna, and Danshtra, and the Rakshasa Lomasa, and
Yudhyonmatta, and Matta, and the horseman, Dhwaja-
griva, and of Vidyujjibha and Vijibha, and of Hastimukha,
and of Karla, and Vigala, and of Sonitaksha. The illustrious
offspring of the Wind, Hanuman, one after another, leapt
into all these noble edifices. And that redoubtable monkey
observed the affluence of all these (Rakshasas, possessed
of prosperity. And having bounded over the mansions of
all situated around, that one blessed with auspiciousness,
at leugth came to the very mansion of the monarch of the
R&kshasas. And that tiger-like monkey—the best of his
species—-ranging around, saw Rakshasis of frightful eyes,
‘alternately mounting sentry over the couch of Ravana—
bearing darts and maces in their hands, and equipped with
javelins and clubs. And (there) in the residence of that
lord of the Rakshasas, he beheld various bands of R&kshasis,
as well as Rakshasas of gigantic frames, upraising various
kinds of weapons ; and steeds of exceeding fleetness, red,
and white, and black; and first-rate elephants, possessed of
eminent grace, capable of crushing hostile elephants, and
well trained in arts relative to their species—like Airavata
himself in conflict. And there in that mansion he saw (all
these elephants), destroyers of hostile hosts—like unto pour-
ing clouds, or hills, sending up fountains, rumbling like
unto clouds, and invincible in battle by foes. And that
monkey, son unto the Wind-god, saw in the mansion of the
lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, hosts by thousands ; and cars
of various forms of glittering gold, furnished all over with
golden net-works, resembling the risen sun; and graceful


1r4


906 RAMAYANA.


grots ; and picture galleries ; and sporting saloons, mount-
ains composed of wood,* captivating structures dedicated to
dalliance, and dwellings for day-dalliance,t—saw he in the
mansion of the Rakshasa monarch. And he beheld that charm-
ing mansion resembling Mandara, filled with places for pea-
cocks}; thronged with pennons and flagstaffs,—a very mine
of countless gems,—-a field of treasures spread around,—where
persons of intrepid calmness were engaged in acts tending to
the safety of the treasures,—resembling the mansion herself
of Kuvera. And on account of the } stre shed by the
gems, as well as the energy of Ravana himself, that mansion
appeared splendid like the ray-furnished Sun in all his glory,
And the chief of monkey-bands saw bed-steads and seats
of gold and white vessels. And Hanum&n entered the
mighty mansion, containing clay formed by Madha§ and
Asava;|| filled with gemmed cans; charming; free from
impediments ; resembling the mansion herself of Kama,—like
the abode of Kuvera,—resonant with the sounds of bangles and
the tinklings of zones, as well as with the beat of mridanga-
hides and other eloquent musical instruments ; with palaces
close on each other ; thronged with hundreds of females (like
unto) jewels ; and containing capacious enclosures.

* Designed for sport.—T.

+ The conception of day-dalliance.met with in Vidya Sundara of Bharata
Chandra Roy, the Bengali poet, is found to have first originated with Val.
miki—T.

$ Sportive peacocks,

$ Spirituous liquor distilled from the blossoms of the Bassia latifolia,


According to some, a spirit distilled from grapes.—T.
, |) Spivit distilled from sugar or molasses,—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 907


SECTION VIL


Ann that one endowed with strength saw that row of
structures fitted up with golden windows, studded with lapis
lazulis, and containing birds ; like unto a mass of clouds in
a season of great rains, crowned with lightning, and fraught
with fowls. And he saw various structures close to one
another. to which excellent conchs, arms and bows lent lustre;
as well as huge and splendid towers belonging to edifices
resembling mountains. And the monkey beheld mansions,
treasuring various kinds of wealth, which were held in regard
by both gods and Asuras,—devoid of every defect; and
which had been won (by R&vana) through his own might.*
And (Hanuman) saw the mansions of the lord of Lank&,
located in strict conformity with esthetic laws,—appearing as
ifthey had been constructed by Maya himself,—which had
on the earth beneath every excell-uce. And then he
saw the mansion of the lord of Rakshas himself, surpassing
the best structures ; like unto a mass of towering clouds ;
captivating ; boasting of a beautedus golden appearance ;
[worthy of his own power,—and of incomparable loveli-
ness; appearing as if the celestial regions had drop-
ped down on the earth; blazing in beauty ; teeming with
countless gems; like unto the brow of a mountain strewn
with the blossoms and the dust thereof of various trees ; and
illumined by the foremost females,—appearing like a mass
ofyclouds containing lightning, or the witching welkin
furr@shed with grace, afloat with. excellent swans. And
(Ha in) saw the car variegated with countless gems ; like
unto fe top of a mountain variegated with innumerable


908 RAMAYANA.


planets,—or like clouds of diverse hues fused into a homo-
geneous whole. The place in the car designed as the seat of
the many, was filled with rows of hills ;* its hills were filled
with trees ; its trees were filled with flowers ; and (finally) its
flowers were filled with leaves and filaments. And (in it),
where white mansions were reared, there were tanks filled
with fair flowers; and lotuses furnished with filaments; and
Picturesque woods ; and liquid lapses. And the mighty
monkey beheld there the great chariot going after the name
of Pushpa, appearing beautifnl, wheeling round in the splen-
dour of the gems—which had surpassed even the cars pertain-
ing to the abodes of the celestials. And (in that car) were
hirds made of lapis lazulis; and (other) birds composed of
silver and coral; and variegated serpents made of various
precious metals; and fair-bodied steeds resembling those of
superior breeds; and there were constructed birds having
graceful mouths; and fair, tapering, playful and contracted
plumage, bearing blossoms made of coral and gold,—like unto
the very plumage of Kama himself. And there were elephants
possessed of graceful trunks, bearing fillaments ; and with
their trunks bearing lotus leaves,—engaged (in showering
water on Lakshmi); as well as the goddess, made with fair
arms, seated on a pool with a lotus in her hand. Thus enter.
ing that graceful mansion, like unto a mountaln containing
charming caverns, (Hanum&n) was seized with wonderment.
And once again (entering that charming mansion), like unto
a taking and fragrant tree during spring furnished with holes,
Hanumin was seized with wonderment. Then ranging
by bounds that honored city ruled by the arms of the ‘
faced one, he, not finding the highly regarded and extrer
distressed daughter of Janaka, who had won over her

“by. contemplating the virtues of her lord,—(was affecte:
sorrow). And, not seeing Janaka’s daughter, then the.
ofthat high-souled one, honored for his character ”


* Composed of gold and gems.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 909


entire world, of schooled self, ever ranging by the way chim-
ing in with morality, and having the scriptures for his eye-
sight,—-as he ranged about ,—was oppressed with grief.


SECTION Vill.


—:0:0:-——


wolves, #ayinG in that mansion, that intelligent monkey, the
rangegfing of the Wind-god, beheld that splendid serial car,
out g&iteous with excellent jewels, and furnished with windows
thef burnished gold. And the car, embellished with transcend-
tlentally beautiful figures,—belauded by Vicwakarm& himself
‘as constituting the acme (of his art),—which, mounting the
welkin, looked like a mark of the Sun’s orbit,—appeared
resplendent. And there was nothing in that car which was
not made skilfully ;—-nothing that did not look like a precious
jewel (sprung spontaneously on its person),—and the style
displayed in its various parts surpassed anything that could
Nbe found in the cars of the celestials themselves,—-and every-
thing in that car was executed in the highest style of excel-
ence,—(that car) obtained (by R&vana) in virtue of prowess
sprung from asceticism and contemplation (of the Deity);
capable of repairing wherever (the owner) wished to wend;
displaying various kinds of constructive skill; composed of
Pématerials procured from diverse sources,—such as were worthy
Tot a celestial car; fleet-coursing in consonance with the


the wind in celerity; the source of happiness unto
ious, high-souled, and pious ones—possessors of
fineless’t} and high rapture; coursing through the


* The ieee :
Réméavja. nt in a variety of ways,—the congeries of all wonderful
end wife—Ine impious. Another reading 1s duravaram—incapable of being

tie y the enemy.—T.


910 RAMAFANA,


.things,~adorned with ranges of chambers ; captivating to the
mind ; stainless as the autumnal Moon; furnished with splendid
summits, like the crest of a mountain; which was borne by
rangers of the night, given to mighty meals, ranging the
sky, with faces graced with ear-rings; and by thousands of
ghosts possessed of terrible speed, having expansive, winklese
and rolling eyes. That heroic first of monkeys sawfy ,
excellent car, beauteous with vernal blossoms,—faire; <
the month of spring and furnished with Mowers.


SECTION 1X.


—o:10——_—


Ano located within that excellent mansion, Hanum&n,
son unto the Wind-god, saw a superior and grand structure,
stainless and spacious; half a yoyena in width and one in
length,—belonging to the lord of the Rakshasas, and abound-
ing with many a palace. And searching for Videha’s daughter,
the large eyed Sit&, that slayer of enemies, Hanuman, ranged
ail through (this edifice). And Hanuman heheld the goodly
edifice where the Rakshasas used to dwell in common.
And (at length) that one came upon the mansion itself of
the lord of Rakshasas, having three-tusked and four-tusked
elephants, and protected by persons with upraised arms,
and covering a capacious area. And (Hanuman beheld) the
residence of Ravana, thronged with his Rakshasi wives,
as well as with princesses forcibly brought thither (by him
like unto the sea teeming with alligators and makaras, abc

eli b:
ing in timingilas and fishes and snakes, and agital, tha
the force of the wind. The same enchanting splendoy


is in Vaigravana- or the ray-riding Moon, remaine,! © ere

constant and abiding in R&vana’s abode. And t ne: Dros

perity of king Kuvera, or Yama, or Varuna, was her see
e


in the house of the Raksha,—or even surpassed .by


SUNDARAKANDAM. git


perity (of Ravana). In the midst of that mansion the
Wind-god’s offspring found another,* excellently constructed,
having innumerable mad elephants ;—that noble car embell-
ished with all gems, entitled Pushkpaka, which had been
constructed in heaven by Vigwakarma for Brahm& himself,—
which Kuvera obtained from the Great-father through high
austerities,—and which, vanquishing Kuvera by his prowess,
the Rakshasa chief got possession of. And the mighty monkey
ascended the splendid car Puskpaka, containing figures of
wolves,—made of Kérttaswara and Hiranya; griced with
ranges of goodly pillars ; as if blazing in splendour; through-
out garnished with narrow secret rooms and saloons, piercing
the heavens, and resembling Meru or Mandara, and like unto
the flaming Sun; skilfully reared by Vigwakarma; with
golden staircases and graceful and grand raised seats, rows of
golden and crystal windows, and daises composed of sapphires,
emeralds and other superb gems; embellished with noble
vidrumas, costly stones, and round pearls, as also with
plastered terraces; pasted with red. andal, like unto gold,
and furnished with a sacred aroma; and resembling the sun
new risen. And stationed thereon,t Hanuman smelt the rich
odour of viands and drinks that was spreading on all sides ;—~
and like one dear friend smelling another, he also smelt
the mighty Air, impregnated with aroma, which seemed like
embodied Odour. And (the Air) said unto Hanuman,—“Come
here, where that Ravana is.” Then ‘(descending form Push-
poka and repairing to that sleeping apartment of R&vana),
Hanuman saw the same, grand and graceful; belonging to
Ravana ; of transcendent beauty; comely like unto a lovely
lady ; diversified with jewelled staircases ; illumined with heaps
of gems; with its terraces constructed of crystal; having


* The car Puskpaka, according to Tirtha, whose view is accepted by
Ramdnuja. According to Kataka, Vesma “means a bedchamber of husband
and wife.—-T,

t & e. on Pushpaka.—T,


giz RAMAYANA.


statues of ivory, pearls, diamonds, coral, silver and gold ;
adorned with jewelled pillars ; and embellished al! round with
pillasters ; and upheld on all sides by straight, elevated and
gorgeously ornamented pillars of equal dimensions, resem-
bling prodigious wings,—(the mansion) appearing to tower
tothe sky; containing spacious and parti-colored woolen
cloths bearing the marks of the Earth*; extensive as the
Earth is, with kingdoms and dwellings ; resounding with the
roars of infuriated elephants ; redo'ent of divine fragrance ;
furnished with gay canopies; inhabited by the sovereign of
the Rakshas ; cloudy with aguru and dhupa; spotless ;
of a swan-like whiteness; engarlanded with flowers and
leaves like unto the dappled and brilliant cow (of Vasishtha) ;
bringing delight unto the heart; and enhancing the grace
(of all creatures); removing sorrow ; noble; and the generatrix
of Grace herself. And as soon as Hanum&n entered the
mansion protected by Ravana, it like a mother regaled his
senses with their proper objects. ‘This must be swarga, or
the region of the immortals, or the city of Amarfvati, or the
supreme Siddhi—”t thought the Wind-god’s offspring. And
he saw the golden lamps (shorn of their brightness),t like
unto gamblers worsted at dice by others exceedingly skilful,
and, in consequence, plunged in thought. And (Hanuman)
conceived that (Ravana’s sleeping apartment) was in a
conflagration, on account of the display of the lamps,
Rf&vana’s energy, and the splendour of the ornaments. And
when the night had been half spent, (Hanum4n) saw thousands
of superb dames, adorned in various attires, and bearing
apparels of diverse hues, and wreaths,—who having given
up sport, and come under the influence of wine and sleep,—


* §, e. four-cornered, The Earth, in Hindu cosmogony, is a flat surface
having four corners.—T,

+ Swarga is the region where persons reap the fruit of Jyctishtoma, ete.
Siddhi is Hlusion spread by Gendharbas.—T.

$ By the superior splendour of Ravana. —T.


SUNDARAKANDAB. ors


were fast asleep on woolen sheets. And in consequence of
the silence that reigned (in that apartment) embellished
with (ornaments), it resembled a large lotus-grove, where
the swans and the black bees are silent. And the Wind-god’s
offspring beheld the countenances of those beauteous women,
with closed eyes,—having their lashes shut through languor ;
and odorous with lotus-perfume. And their faces appeared
like lotuses blowing on the expiry of night and closing
their petals by night. ‘These lotus-faces like unto very lotuses
themselves, ever the six-footed ones* seek once and again.”
Thus thought with discrimination the graceful, mighty
monkey; and on account of their perfections, he confessed
those countenances to be equal to water-sprungt (lotuses).
And that apartment, in consequence of being graced by
those women,appeared splendid, like the autumnal,complacent
sky decorated with the stars. And surrounded by them,
the Rakshasa chief resembled the fair Moon encircled by
the stars. “Those stars that drop from the firmament on
their virtue deteriorating, have assev.oled here in a body,”
aus thought the monkey at that time. And the shine, form,
‘and splendour of those females resembled, forsooth those
of magnificently displayed, noble and lustrous stars. And
on account of their having been bereft of consciousness
through sleep, induced by fatigue brought on by drink (and
dance), their hair was dishevelled, and their full wreaths
‘and goodly ornaments lay scattered about. And: some
of those paragons had got their beauty-spots, smudged ; and
some, their bangles loosening off ; some, their chains running
to one side. And others had their pearl necklaces burst,—
and their cloths getting away (from their persons), and the
chains of their zones straying irregularly ;~—resembling way-
worn mares. And others again were without their ear-rings,
and had their garlands torn and crushed ; and resembled


* Shatpada—six-footed—a name of the black bee.—T.
+ Salilodbhavas,—water-sprung—a name of the lotus. —-T.


115


gig RAMAYANA,


blossoming creepers, trodden down in a vast forest by mighty
elephants. And the pearl chains of some shining females re-
sembling moon beains, having got topsy-turvy, was lying like
sleeping swans between the breasts of the damsels. And the
lapis chains of some resembled water-crows ;* and the fine
golden chains turned upside down of others appeared like ruddy
geese. And those ladies resembled rivers having hips
for banks; containing swans and K@randavas, and beautified
with ruddy geese. And those sleeping females appeared
like streams; having AiwAints fu. their ripples; and large
gold lotusest; marks} of amorous encounter on their persons
for ferocious aquatic animals; and perfections,§ for their
banks, And on the tender frames,-as well as on the tops
of the breasts, of some graceful scratches consequent on
pressure, appeared like ornaments. And the scarf-ends of
some stirred by the air that was blowing about their faces,
flapped on them again and again. And at the nether part
of the faces of Ravana’s wives, they (the scarl-ends)appeared
beauteous like uplifted streamers of exceeding elegance,
composed of many-hued golden yarn, And the ear-rings
of some dames possessed of a pleasant sheen, stirred by
the air that was breathing about their faces, were undulating
gently. And the sweet breath of their faces, naturally
fragrant, and redolent of sugar and dsava, was then regaling
Ravana, And out of fear sprung from sleep and intoxication,
some of Ravana’s wives were again and again smelling the
faces of those, co-wives with them, taking the faces to
belong to Ravana. And from their hearts being firmly
fixed on Ravana, those excellent women, having their sense


* Kadamoa—a drake; or, according to some, a teal; a gander; or the
species gallinula porphyria.—T.

+ te, the faces of the females are meant. Another meaning is, gold for large
totuses-—T.

$ Vildsa may also mean arch displays by way of coquetry.—T.’

§ Yasa, according to some, here means grace,—T,


SUNDARARANDAMN. 9rs


‘of separateness removed, (albeit thus dealt with), did what
was dear unto them.* And other females, making
their gay scarf-ends (for their sheets), and making their
acms, their pillows, were lying down there. And some were
lying on others’ bosoms ; and others again, on the arms of
the latter. And some lay on the laps of others; and
others, again, on the breasts of thelatter. And they reposed
on each other’s thighs, flanks, waists, and backs; and
coming under the influence of wine and amour, they lay
on each other’s persons, And those females having elegant
waists, receiving pleasure from the contact with others’
persons, were sleeping there, with their hands fastened by
each other. And that garland of females strung by the threads
of their hands, appeared beauteous, like a real wreath strung
on a thread, with maddened black bees (seated thereon).
And that multitude of females in a medley appeared like an
assemblage of blooming plants in the month of Chaitra,1 with
its wreaths formed in consequence of their coming in contact
with one another, and of its cluster. touching each other,
on account of the breeze blowing ;—with the plants encir-
cling the graceful (necks of the trees),—and rife with
Bhramaras chasing each other.—And although the ornaments
of those women wearing ornaments, attires and wreaths,
were put on proper places ; yet (on account of the profusion
of the ornaments themselves, as well as because of the cir-
cumstance of the dames’ sleeping),fit was difficult to ascertain
which ornament belonged to one damsel and which to another.
And it seemed as if, Ravana having attained rest (through


© The sense is very imperspicuous only by reason of the unskilful use of
the pronouns. . The damsels hissed did not resent the act ; but hissed the kissers
in turn.—T.

+ March-April.

$ In consequence also, remarks the commentator, of the aniformity running
throtigh the ornaments, as well as of the close contact of the persous of the
ladies. —T.


a6 RAMAYANA.


sleep), the flaming golden lamps furnished with various rays,
were gazing at the girls with winkless eyes. Daughters of
R&jarshis, of Vipras, of Daityas, of Gandharbas. and of
Rakshasas, having come under the influence of desire, had
become his wives. - And all those women had been procured
by Ravana because he sought fight (with their relations)
and some haughty dames, rapt with desire, had of themselves
come to this place. And there was no woman there, who
had been won by force by (Ravana), possessed as he was of
prowess ; but they had all been subdued by his qualities.
And save the surpassingly worthy daughter of Janaka, no
female (had been brought), who had set her heart on another,
or who had known any other before. And there was none
who, being his wife, was not-of high extrattion ; none’ who
was defective in grace ; none who was not of sterling merit ;
none who was not decked out in ornaments and attire ; and
none who was infirm; and none who was not an object of
desire of her lover. And the lord of monkeys endowed with
uprightuess of sense, thought,—“If the righteously wedded
wife of Raghava were as one of the wives of the king of the
Rakshasas, it would well for him.’ Again reflected he,—
“Sita is crowned with chastity and other virtues; and the
powerful lord of Lank&, assuming an illusory form, hath
with much ado perpetrated this ignominious act.”


SECTION X.


Anp there Hanum&n employed in looking around, saw
a grand dais made of crystal; and embellished with jewels ; :
comparable to one belonging to the celestial regions; furnish-
ed with superb and costly sofas, having their parts painted
and” composed of ivory, gold, and lapis lazulis ; with highly
precious canopies. At one place thereof he saw a white.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 917


umbrella, adorned with beautiful wreaths, resembling. the
lord of the stars himself, And Hanum4n saw a splendid
sofa garnished with gold, bearing garlands of agoka blos-
soms,—flaming like fire ; around which persons kept waving
with their hands chowris furnished with hair*; rife with
perfumes of various kinds ; odorous with rich dhupa, spread
with excellent sheets; covered with the skins of rams;
and decked on all sides with chaplets of gorgeous flowers.
And that excellent and mighty monkey beheld therein, the
heroic sovereign of the R&kshasas, Ravana, resembling a
mass of clouds ; with flaming and brilliant ear-rings ; having
reddened eyes ; of gigantic arms ; wearing a cloth composed
of golden threads; his person daubed with fragrant red
sandal ; looking like a crimson cloud at eve fraught with
lightning ; covered with noble ornaments; endowed with
eminent grace ; capable of wearing forms at will; resembling
Mandara affluent with trees and woods and shrubs ;—sleeping,
having given up sport at night ; adorned with elegant orna-~
ments; dear unto the daughters of the Rakshasas,-the
source of happiness unto R&kshasas ;—who had ceased from
drinking,—asleep on a shining bedstead,—and respiring like a
(hissing) serpent.t And reaching there, Hanuman, waxing
wondrous agitated, shrank back, as if in fear. And then arriv«
ing at the staircase, the mighty monkey, stationing himself on
a dais in the middle of the stairs, gazed at the inebriate,
Rakshasa, resembling a tiger. And as the sovereign of the
R&kshasas was sleeping, his graceful bed resembled a grand
cascade, beside which stands an elephant breathing odour,
And Hanum&n saw the arms of the huge-bodied lord
of Rakshasas, fastened with bracelets,—stretched (there),-=—
like unto the banners of Indra; which had been wounded


* The commentator throws out a conjecture that arficial figures are here
meant; which mechanically performed the function herein assigned to theni.—T..

+ The commentator, however, taterprets: Jike an slephant. Serpent la,-T
fancy, a happy rendering of -xéga.—F.


918 RAMAYANA, i


by the tusk-ends of Airavata, whose plump parts had been
tiven by vajra ; and which had been torn by the discus of
‘Vishnu ; well developed ; having equal and elegant parts ;
with hard joints ; fraught with strength ; with thumbs having
nails bearing auspicious marks; having rings (on the fingers);
eovered ; formed like bludgeons; round ; resembling the trunks
of elephants ; cast on the white bed like unto five-hooded
serpents; smeared and ahs with cool, fragrant, and
excellent sandal resembling the blood of hares; pressed
by paragons; odorous with incense; resisting (in battle)
Yakshas, and Pannagas, Gandharbas, gods and Danavas ;
and the monkey saw his arms resting on the bed, like
unto two beautiful and mighty serpents sleeping in the
entrails of Mandara. And with both those well developed
arms of his, the lord of Rakshasas resembling a hill, looked
handsome like Mandara with its summits. And_ breath
bearing the aroma of the mangoe, andthe Panndga, the
sweet scent of the Vakula, the savour of viands fraught
with the six kinds of tastes, and the perfume of wines, came
out of the mighty mouth of the sovereign of the Rakshasas,
filling, as it were, that entire chamber. And (Hanuman) be-
held (Ravana), with his countenance, aglow with ear-rings

and decked with a golden diadem embellished with pearls
and jewels ; daubed with red sandal; and adorned with ;
ad elegant chain ; having a large, broad, and full-developed
breast ; with a white silken cloth on, falling off his person ;
furnished with blood-red eyes ; covered with costly yellow
sheets ; appearing like a mass of unrighteousness ; breathing
like a serpent, or an elephant asleep in the mighty Gang&
during the rains ;—four lamps set on the golden pilars’
illumining four sides ; even as lightnings display the entire
surface of a. mass of clouds. (And Hanumin) also saw in
the mansion of the Raksha chief, the wives of that huge-
bodied one dear unto his wives—lying at his fect. And
that protector of monkey-bands saw them, having counten-


SUNDARAKANDAM. 919.


ances resembling the Moon displayed; decked out with
elegant ear-rings; bearing unfading garlands* by way of
ornamentation ; lying on the arms and lap of the lord of the -
Rakshas. And the monkey saw women bearing noble
ornaments,—lying down. And he saw golden bracelets and
ear-rings at the nether ends of the women’s ears,—set with
diamonds and lapises. And with their fair countenances
resembling the Moon, graced with comely ear-rings, that
terrace looked beautiful, like the welkin embellished with
stars. The slender-waisted wives of the sovereign of the
R&kshasas, overcome with languor consequent on drink and
amorous encounter, were fast asleep at the very places where
they were seated. And another transcendentally beautiful
damsel possessed of lovely limbs, skilled in dance, was fast
asleep, betraying comely movements (during sleep). And an-
other was seen asicep, embracing a vind,—like a lotus with
spreading petals, resting by the side of a raft. And another
dark-eyed wench was asleep with her muddukat on her lap,
like a loving mother having a boy. Another damsel possessed
of graceful limbs and a shapely bust, was lying down,
hugging her kettle-drum,—like a woman embracing her
lover, obtained after a long time. And one lotus-eyed female
was asleep, embracing her vind; like an amorous damsel
hugging her fair paramour. And another girl of res-.
trained self, given to dancing, had come under the sway
of sleep, embracing her vipancht} like a female sleep-
ing with her lover. And another having inebriate eyes,
was fast asleep, embracing her mridamga with her
charming, plump, and tender limbs, resembling gold.
Another female of faultless features, endeued with a slender
frame, haviag been overcome by lassitude consequent on
drink, was asleep,with her sanava on the ends of her lower
* d.¢. celestial females—T.
a + Akind of musical instrument.—T.
$ Akind of Vind—T.


920 RAMAYANA.


garment, held fast with her hands. Another woman was
sleeping soundly, embracing her dindima,* with another
bound at her back; like a female taking both her lover
and her child. Another damsel having eyes resembling lotus-
petals, having come under the influence of liquor, was asleep,
firmly holding her aramvarat with her hands. Another
‘woman, intoxicated by wine, was discovered asleep, with her
water-vessel upset; and, inc Yequence, appeaging like a well-
washed variegated wreath in ‘spring. Another, coming under
the masterdom of slumber, was sleeping, holding with her
hands her twin breasts resembling golden jars. And another
lotus-eyed and moon-faced fair one, coming under the govern-
ance of slumber, (was asleep), embracing another furnished
with shapely hips. And eminently beautiful dames were
asleep, embracing musical instruments ; like wenches press-
ing lustful (lovers), with their breasts. And that monkey saw
that lady, endeued with beauty, lying down apart in an
excellent bed; adorned with ornaments containing pearls and
jewels; and as if decorating that charming mansion with
her grace. And the monkey saw there the yellow-hued
Mandodari, having the splendour of gold; the object of
(Ravana’s) desire; beautiful exceedingly,—the mistress of the
inner apartment,—lying down. And seeing (Mandodari)
adorned with ornaments, the offspring of the Wind-god
guessed,—“This one endowed with the wealth of youth and
beauty might be Sita.” And demonstrating great joy, that
leader of monkey-bands rejoiced exceedingly. And thereat,
(Hanum&n) struck at his arms with his hands, kissed his tail,
exhibited signs of glee, frolicked, sang, darted towards the
pillars, shot up to the top thereof, and jumped down to the
earth,—manifesting his monkey-mature.


* A kind of musical instrument.—T, . .
+ Akind of musical instrument.—T,


SUNDA RAKRANDA SM. gat


SECTION Xi.


ae


Tuer resigning that line of thought,* that mighty
monkey, regaining his equanimity, set out in another diree-
tion of thought touching Sila. “Separated from Rama, that
lady is incapablet of sleeping, or eating, or decorating
ther person), or ‘drinking, And she is incapable of asso-
ciating with any other person, although he were the
sovereign of the celestials himself. And even in all heaven
there is none who is equal to Rama. She is some other.”
Assuring himself of this, that foremost of monkeys, eager to
behold Sit&, again began to range in that place set apart
for drinking. Some were tired out with sporting ; some with
singing; some with dancing; and some were fast asleep
through intoxication. And some supported themselves on
murajas, mridangas, ot chelikas; and some women were
sleeping on excellent sheets. And that leader of monkey-
bands saw (that place of drinking) filled with thousands of
women, adorned with ornaments engaged (in their sleep)
in depicting each other's loveliness ; and explaining the sense
of songs; conversant with season and place; under-
standing the meanings of words chiming in with season and
place ¢; and skilful at play. And at other places also he
saw thousands of superb and youthful dames fast asleep,—
employed in talking of each other's beauty. And that leader
of monkey bands saw (women) versed in season and place,
and understanding the meanings of words consonant with
season and place. And in the midst of them all, the lord of
the R&kshasas looked splendid like an ox in a spacious stall


* fe. that Mandodari was Sita.—T.

+ The text has na saptum arheti; lit., it behoveth (Sit) not to sleep. The
sense, however, is as given above.—T.

¢ All this, remarks RamAnuja, appeared from their talk during sleep.—T,


116


or RAMAYANA.


in the midst of stately kine. And surrounded by them, the
Rakshasa chief appeared beautiful like a gigantic elephant in
a forest, surrounded by female elephants. And in the abode
of the huge-bodied Rakshasa chief, that tiger-like monkey
saw that place of drinking, furnished with every object of
desire. And in that place set apart for drinking, he saw heaps
of the flesh of buffaloes, deer, and boars, arranged separately.
And that tiger-like monkey saw in capacious golden vesscls
flesh of fowls and peacock. which remained (alter the repast).
And Hanuman saw the flesh of boars, and Vddhrinasas*
Sulyas, deer. and peacocks, seasoned with curds and Sauvar-
chala;t and Krikalas,fand goats of various kinds,—flesh of hare
half-fed,—Ekagalyas,§ and buffaloes,—all chopped and dressed;
and lickable and drinkable viands sharp and mild ; and edibles
sharp and mild; and Régakhéndavas|| containing sugar and
acid, capable of improving a vicious palate. And with large
and costly stray bangles and bracelets ; and scattered cans,—
and diverse kinds of fruit; and wreaths of flowers, the pave-
ment attained exceeding beauty. And with elegantly jointed
bedsteads, arranged (around), the scene of wassail appeared
aflame without fire. And with meat consisting of many
ingredients, fraught with diverse tastes, seasoned with many
substances, and dressed by skilful cooks,—arranged separate-
ly in the scene of revel; and with noble and pleasant wines,
natural and artificial,—ésavas (rom sugar;and Addhotka Sand
dsavas from flowers and fruits; and impregnated separately


“ A species of birds, having, according to Vishnudharma, dark throats,
red veins, and white wings. According to others, a kind of goats.—T.

+ A kind of salt.—T.

t A kind of partriges.—T.

§ A kind of fish—T.

4 According to some, a preparation of the juice of grapes and pomegran-
ates, mixed with sugar, efc. According to others, black cakes having six
kinds of relisher.—T. \

{ Natural wines—such as Kédanwari etc., which require no preparation.—T.

% From honey. According to some, from grapes—T.3


SUNDARAKANDAMN. 923


with different kinds of fragrant dust,—the pavement, furnish-
ed with inuumerable garlands, surrounded with golden water-
vessels and crystal bowls, and golden water-pots, looked
exceedingly beautiful. And the monkey saw that foremost of
“all places set apart for drinking, containing silvern and golden
jars. And that mighty monkey saw golden wine-vessels
studded with gems, all filled with wine; and some with
half full of liquor, some with their wine entirely exhausted,and
some full of liquor, And (at some spots) he saw various
kinds of viands, aud at others wines ranged in rows,
and at others the wine-vessels remaining half full. And
there were many bedsteads belonging to fair ones, remaining
vacant; and at some places excellent women were sleeping
touching each other. And at one place, a female, borne
down by the force of sleep, forcibly possessing herself of
another's cloth, and wrapping herself therewith,—went to the
bed of that one, and was indulging in sleep.—And with their
breath, thei variegated wreaths and the cloth on their persons
were stirring gently, as if with a mild-blowing breeze.
And. laden with the odours of cool sandal,aud of sweet-tasting
Sidhu ;* and of diverse wreaths and flowers, and with perfum-
es of various kinds,—and entrancedt with (the aroma)of sandals
suitable for use after ablution, and of dkupas, the air, im-
pregnated with excellent scent, was there breathing around the
car Pushpaka. And in the residence of the Raksha, there
were some wenches sable, yet cxceedingly witching; and
some were dark-hued; and the frames of some were of a
golden brilliance. And theic beauty, in consequence of their
coming under the governance of sleep, and their being bereft
of their senses by Madana, resembled that of lotuses in a
sleep. Thus that highly energetic monkey saw everything


* Spirit distilled from ravllasses—T.

+ Murchchhita—The commentator says, means spreading. 1, however,
here presume to go by my own light, feeble as that may be. Zntraxced will,
I dare say, reeommend itself to the poetical in cspecial.—T.


974 | RAMAYANA. See,


thoroughly in the inner apartment of Ravana,—but he sail
not Janaka’s daughter. And seeing those females, that,
mighty monkey, apprehending loss of righteousness, was'
seized with an exceeding great fear*. ‘“Beholding a female,’
who is the religiously wedded wife of another, while she is
asleept, verily causeth loss of righteousness. My sight
surely never seeketh others’ wives; but I have bebeld thi,
one that hath ravished another’s spouse.” And that in-
telligent one, intent on attaining a knowledge of things
capable of being arrived at on grounds of judgment, again
reflected effectively as to his course of action: “All these
unsuspecting wives of Ravana have been beheld by me; yet
there are no signs that my mind hath undergone any allera-
tion. In respect of the enlistment of the senses on behalf
of any course of action good or evil, it is verily mind which
is the cause ; and hercin my mind is righteously disposed.
And I could not search for Vaidehi elsewhere’, for in the
matter of search, people always search for women even among
women. And people search for creatures among the specie:
to which they happen to belong: none searcheth for a los

Jady among female deer. Therefore have I with a pur

heart explored the entire inner apartment of Ravana; bu

Janaka’s daughter I see not.” And Hanuman endowed wit

prowess saw the daughters of gods, and Gandharbas, an

Nagas; but he saw not Janaki. And not seeing her, the

hero, having beheld other magnificent dames, coming out ¢

that place, set about searching for Sita (afresh). And leavin

the place of wassail, the graceful offspring of the Wind-go:

‘taking extreme care, again began to search for SitA all abo

(another quarter).


* Remembering, says the commentator, the injunction of the scriptur
“None should see a nude female."—T.
+ And therefore presumably incapable of taking care af herself—T:


SUNDARAKANDAM 935


SECTION XIt.


Anv remaining in that mansion, (Hanum&n) desirous of
getting a sight of Sita graced with a fair presence, went
into bowers, and picture galleries, and night-houses ;* but
her he did not find. And not finding the beloved (spouse)
of Raghw’s son, that mighty monkey reflected,—"Surely Sit
= jot alive,—for although 1 have searched (through and
Vid. th), yet Mithila’s daughler I have failed to find. And
tirl solicitous for the preservation of her chastity, and
win the prime path of virtuous woman,—that chaste
hath, for certain, been slain by this chief of the
asas, (ever) finding delight in iniquity. And seeing
ives of the Rakshasa monarch,—of [rightful forms,—~
rous; of lurid hue ; having huge faces ; with large horrid
int the daughter of Janaka h-th given up the ghost
from fright. Failing to see Sita, and (thereby) annuling
my prowess, and having long spent the appointed space
in company with the monkeys, way have I none to present
myself before Sugriva, that monkey being puissant and
given to’meting out sharp chastisement. Having searched
the inner apartment through, and seen the wives of the
Rakshasa, I do not see the chaste Sita. Therefore vain is
.4he trouble that I take. What, alas! shall the monkeys
assembled tell me when I shall go (to them)? ‘O hero, (elt
us what thoi hast done, repairing there’ And not having
seen Janaka’s daughter, what shall I answer? The term
fixed (by Sugriva) having been past, certainly meet it is that
I should fast to death. And what shall the aged Jambhavan,
and what shall Angada, say? And what, again, shall the
assembled monkeys say to me when [ shall hive crossed over


(here,


* Intended for stay at night.


"926 RAMALANA.


and perseverence bringeth ~bout supreme happiness. Search
again I will, where I have not yet searched. Perseverence,
for certain, ever bringeth people to all profitable objects.
Whatever one doeth with vigor, beareth fruit. Therefore will
I put forth fresr‘dear efforts vigorously. 1 will search such
places held by Ravana as I have not yet seen. I have
again searched the picture-galleries and the sporting-struc-
tures, and edifices, and roads passing through gardens, as
well as the cars,” Having thought thus, Hanuman again set
about searching the subterranean abodes, religious ae
and many-storied mansions. And flying up, and cc

down, and staying, and going at places, and opening f jet it i
and shutting others, and entering and issuing ou ira
falling. down as if darting up, that mighty monkiy be;
range on all sides. There was not even space mea
four fingers in that inner apartment of R&vana, to whi
monkey did not repair. And he saw the abodes
nobility, the daises, the trees by the crossings, the holeSjna
the tanks, And Hanum&n saw there Rakshasas of various
forms, frightful and deformed ; but he saw not Janaka’s
daughter. And Hanuman saw there the wives qf Vidy4-
dharas ; but he saw not Raghava’s beloved. And Janumin
saw there transcendentally beautiful women—daushters of
N&gas—having countenances resembling the moon; but he
saw not Janaka’s daughter. And Hanum4n saw there
daughters of Nagas forcibly brought by the lord of the
Rakshasas ; but he saw not Janaka’s daughter. Having seen
other beauteous females, and not seeing het, the mighty-
armed son of the Wind-god was oppressed with sadness,
Seeing that the endeavours of the monarch of menkeys. as
well as the bounding over the main, hadcome to nought, the
offspring of the Wind-god was plunged in thought. Descend-
ing from the zrial car, Hanuman, son unto the Wind-god, his
senses deprived by sorrow, was again wrought up with


anxiety.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 927


SECTION xl.


_Auicutine from the car, Hanuman possessed of vigorous
activity,—leader of monkey-bands—nearing the wall, looked
like lightning within a mass of clouds.* And having gone
round the mansions of Ravana, and not seeing Janaki, the
monkey Hanum4n said,—Striving after Rama's welfare,
lhave again searched through Lanka; but I do not see
Videha’s daughter, Janaki, having all her limbs endeued with
loveliness. And I have explored pools, and watery expanses,
and tanks, and rivers, and streams, and marshes, and woods,
and citadels, and mountains, yea,—all this earth ; but Janaki
Ido not find. The vulture-king Sampati had told that Sita
was in the mansion of Ravana. But why do I not see her
(here) ? Or doth Maithili Sita, daughter unto Janaka,t sprung
inthe Videha line, forcibly carried off (by Ravana), and
completely in his power, abide “sy the mandate (of that
monarch) ?_ I conceive that while taking Sit& the Raksha
darted upward, he being :afluenced by fear of Rama’s shafts ;
{and accordingly losing control over his movements), she fell
off by the way. Or I fancy that while that noble lady was
being carried away along the way ranged by Siddhas, she

. lost her life on beholding the ocean. Or I think that on
account of the vehement speed assumed by Ravana, and also
oppressed with his arms, that large-eyed noble lady hath been
bereft of her life. For certain, while (Ravana) was soaring
higher and higher, Janaka’s daughter, rolling (on the car),
dropped down into the sea. Alas! trying to preserve her
chastity, the forlorn Sit&, practising self-mortification, hath
been devoured by this abject-minded Ravana. Or that dark-

* The commentator remarks : By this the author _insinuates thet the wall
was of entire sapphire—T.

+ Knowing Brahma, remarks Ram&nuja—T


928 RAMAYANA,


eyed innocent one, hath been eaten up by the wives of the
Ra&kshasa chief, actuated by wicked motives.* (Ever) contem-
plating Rama’s countenance, resembling the full Moon, with
eyes like lotus-leaves, she, exercised with sorrow, hath
breathed her last.. Bewailing much with exclamations of,
‘Oh Rama and Lakrainana!' ‘Ah Ayodhya !’ that lady
Vaidehi hath renounced her body. Or secretly kept in
R&vana’s mansion, that girl, like a female parrot in a cage,
is weeping bitterly. How can the slender-waisted wife of
R&ma, born in the race of Janaka, furnished with eyes resem-
bling lotus petals, come under the sway of Ravana? [shall
not be able to say of Rama’s beloved wife that she hath been
sullied,t or that I have seen her, or yet that she is dead:
To say this is censurable; not to say it is also such.
‘What is my course ? I find myself in a false position. Things
having drifted to this pass, what should I say, now that the
time hath come?’ Thus thinking, Hanuman again reflect.
ed,—“If without secing Sita, 1 repair to the abode of thé
lord of monkeys, what then shall I gain as the object of my
exertions? This my bounding over the main comes to
nought; as also my entry into Lank& and the sight of the
Rakshasas. And what shall Sugriva say ? Or the assembled
monkeys ; or those twin sons of Dacaratha; to me when
I shall have come to Kishkindha ? And if going there, I
Should say a harsh speech unto Kakutstha—'T have not seen
Sita'—he shall renounce his life. Hearing harsh, terrible,
unsufferable, fierce and foul words concerning Sit&, calculated
to set the senses on fire, he shall not exist. And seeing him
come under misery, with his mind expiring, the intelligent
Lakshmana, firmly attached (unto Rama), shall also cease to
exist. And hearing that his two brothers are dead, Bharata
also shall give up existence. And seeing Bharata dead,


® Jealousy, according to the commentator.—T.
+ This is evidently the sense, having regard to the preceding sfota, although
the commentator gives the apparent meaning of vinasthe perished. —T.


SUN DARAKANDAM. ‘389


Satrughna shall also renounce his life. And beholding their
sons dead, their mothers, Kaugaly&, Sumitr8 and Kuikayi,
shall, certainly, resign their lives. And seeing Rama in that
plight, the lord of the monkeys, Sugriva, grateful and having
his heart fast fixed in truth, shall give up his life. And Uma,
aggrieved, heart-wrung, distressed and bereft of happiness,
and assuming the garb of a female ascetic, because of grief
for her husband, shall resign ber existence. And oppressed
with grief arising from Vali, and weighed down by sorrow,
the queen Tari, also, resolving on death shall cease to exist.
And in consequence of the death of his father and mother
ae be calamity befalling Sugriva, the prince Angada also
shall’ next forego his existence. And the dwellers of the
woods overwhelmed with grief got of (the decease of) their
master, shafi strike at their heads with their clenched fists
and hands. And the monkeys affectionately cherished by
the famous lord of the monkeys with soothing words gifts
and regard, shall resign there lives. And no more in woods,
and rocks, or secret spots, shall’ the foremost monkeys,
assembled together, indulge in sports. And they, along with
their sons and wives, and counsellors, distressed on account
the disaster that hath overtaken their master,—shall fall
from the tops of mountains down to places even or uneven.
And the monkeys shall take poison, or hang themselves, or
enter into flaming fire, or fast, or fall on their own weapons.
{ fancy tat a loud wailing shall arise on my return (to that
place) ; and the race of Ikshwku as well as the rangers of
the woods shall meet with destruction, Therefore 1 will not
repair hence to the city of Kishkindha ; nor can I see Sugriva
without Mithila’s daughter. On my not going there and stay.
ing here,those righteous-souled Maharathas as well as the fast-
fleeting monkeys, shall preserve their lives through hope
(of hearing tidings concerning Sita.) And not having seen
Janaka’s daughter, I will lead the Vénaprastha mode of life,
partaking (of fruits) falling into my hands or mouth, restrain-


117


930 RIMIPANA.


ing my ‘senses, and staying at the foot of trees. Preparing
a funereal pile on a tract bordering on the sea, abounding
in fruits, and flowers, and water, I will enter into flaming
fire. And as I sit to fast, and for effecting the separation of
self from my body and centering my identity in the spirit
crows and beasts of prey shall feed on my body. And
I think the sages have enjoyed another way of exit. I
shall, failing to see Janaki, enter into water. My illustrious
and exalted garland of fame, begot of excellent acts, hath
perished for good in consequence of my not seeing Sit&.*
Or restraining myself, I shall become an ascetic living under-
neath trees; but return I will not, without obtaining a sight
of that dark-eyed damsel. If I return without seeing Siti, all
the monkeys with Angada shall cease to exist. Iucalculable
are the ills of my putting a period to my existence; (on the
other hand) if I live, I may come by good. Therefore my
life I will maintain. If 1 live, it may conduce to happiness.”
Having thus indulged in a variety of harassing thoughts ‘n
his mind,that foremost of monkeys could not cross over to the
other shore (of the sea of distress). Then summoning energy,
that elephantine monkey endeued with fortitude reflected,—
“Or I shall slay the Ten-necked Ravana possessed of great
strength. Sita hath been carried off; but by this I shall avenge
myself, Or throwing him repeatedly into the sea, I (shall take
him) and present him to Rama, even as one presents a beast
unto Pagupat.”+ Reflecting thus,the monkey, not finding Sits,
-—agitated with sorrow and anxiety, thought,—“So long as I
do not find the illustrious spouse of Rama, Sita, I will explore
the city of Lanka again and again. If in consonance with
Sampat’s speech, I bring Rama hither, Raghava, not. seeing


* Tirtha reads -chivaratriyam for chirardirye, Then the sense is, This
illustrious live-long fair-rooted and auspicious night crowned with a garland of
fame, hath borne no fruit, in consequence of my not seeing Sit4. The commen-
tator, 1 presume, refines a little too much.—T.

* ¢ An appellation of Siva—lit. ord of deasts—in allusion to animal sacrifices


to Siva.—T. §


SUNDARARINDAM. g3t?


his wife, shall bura all the monkeys.. (Therefore) even here
TI shall stay, restraining my fare and mortifying my senses.
All those principal monkeys ought not to lose their lives
because of any act to which 1 may commit myself. This is
the asoka wood, extensive and containing mighty trees,
This I shall explore, as it hath not yet been searched by
me. And saluting the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the
twin Agwins, (and Rama and Lakshmana), | enhancing-
the sorrow of the Rakhas, shall go into it. Having vanquished
the Rakshas, f will bestow on Rama the lady of the Ikshwaku
race like the fruit of asceticism conferred on an ascetic,”
Having thus reflected for a space, the mighty-armed
offspring of the Wind-god, his senses agitated with auxiety,
arose. ‘I bow unto Rama with Lakshmana, and unto the
revered daughter of Janaka, I bow unto Rudra, and Indra,
and Yama, and Wind-god, and I bow unto the Moon, unto
Fire and unto the Maruts.” Having bowed unto them all,
as also unto Sugriva, the offspring of the Wind-god, survey-
ing all the cardinal points, mentally entered the Asoéa wood.
Having mentally entered the Asoka wood, that monkey, son
unto the Wind-god, reflected as to what he should do next,
The sacred Asoka wood, sanctified with every purifying rite
and abounding in woods, needs must be full of R&kshas.
And warders, directed there to, forsooth, protect the trees;
and that worshipful Soul of the universe* does not breathe
here vigorously. I contract my person in the interests of
Rama, and in order that Ravana may notseeme. May
all the deities along with the saints confer success on me.
And may the revered self-create Brahma, and the deities,
and the ascetics, and Fire, and wind, and the much invoked
bearer of the Vajra,t and the noose-handed Varuna, and
the Moon and the Sun, the high-souled Agwinis, and all the
Maruts—(confer) success (on me)! And all beings, and the


SSE =F


* The wind—T.
¥ Indra.—T,


932. RAMEPANA.


lord of them all,* and others that, albeit not specified in the.
scriptures, are yet visible in. the way,-—will confer success
on me. When shall I behold the blameless face of that noble.
Jady,—with its protruding nose; having luminous smiles,
having eyes résembling lotus-petals; and bright as the
conrplacent lord of stars? Ah ! to-day how shall feeble forlorn
one that hath been borne down by the force of the mean,
abject and grim-visaged (Ravana), fierce yet wearing (at the.
time of the rape), a dress tending to inspire confidence,—
come in my sight ?”


SECTION XIV.


Howe reflected for a while, and mentally met with '
her, that highly energetic one leapt from the wall of
R&vana’s mansion on to that (of the Asoka wood). And
all his frame filled with delight, that mighty monkey, station-
ed on the wall, saw various trees having their tops furnished
with flowers through spring and the other seasons,—salas
and asokas, bhavyas, champakas, udalakas, and ndgas, and
those bearing fruits resembling the mouths of monkeys;
and those relative to mango woods,—with hundreds of plants.
And (Hanum&n) leapt into the garden like an arrow let go
from the bow string. Entering into the grove, variegated
all over ; resonant with the notes of birds ; filled on all sides
with golden and silvern trees; many-hued with birds and
beasts ; contaiving dainty tracts of trees like unto the risen
Sun,—the powerful Hanum4n saw the place surrounded with
various kinds of trees, having fruits and flowers ; frequented
by maddened coels and d4ramaras, with creatures expressing
happiness by their movements, birds and beasts overflowing


er
¢ Praydpatii—T.


SUNDA R4SRANDAM. 933


with spirits ; echoing with the cries of peacocks; furnished
with various species of fowls. And as he was searching for
that surpassingly beautiful and blameless daughter of the king,
that monkey awakened the monkeys that were sleeping
sweetly. And blown against by the wind caused by the wings
of the birds as they flew upwards, various and variegated
trees showered down blossoms. And in the midst of the
Asoka wood, Hanum4n, son unto the Wind-god, covered over
with flowers, looked lovely like a hill strewn with blossoms.
And all creatures, beholding that monkey embosomed among
trees and darting on all sides, took him for spring. And
strewn with several masses of blossoms loosened from the
trees, the Earth appeared beauteous like a damsel dight with
ornaments. And shaken in diverse ways by the motion of
the light fleeting monkey, the trees showered many-hued
flowers. And with their leaves and tops torn, and their flowers
and fruits shriveled up, the trees looked like worsted gamb-
lers bereft of their clothes. And, shaken by Hanumin
vehemently moving about, those excellent trees crowned with
fruits, speedily cast off fruits, flowers and foliage. And
moved by the Wind-god’s offspring, the trees with their trunks
left, and forsaken by the fowls were incapable of harbouring
any creatures. And like youthful fair ones with hair dis-
hevelled, their paste worn off, their upper lips with fair teeth
sucked of their moisture; and having their persons torn with
nails and teeth; appeared the Asoka wood with its trees
shattered ; and itself ground with the tail, hands and legs (of
Hanuman). And that monkey with his vehemence scattered
the clusters of shrubs, like the wind violently scattering
clouds in the rainy season. And ranging there, the monkey
saw beautiful pavements, jewelled, silvern aud golden. And
he saw there various pools filled with excellent water and
having steps crusted with jewels. Their sandy soil was
_ filled with pearls and corals, and the ground inside was made
of crystal, And their banks were decked with diverse gulden


934 RANAPANA,


trees. They were beautified with full blown [otuses, water."
lilies, Chakvavakas and Natyuhas* and filled with the notes
of swans and Sdrasas. They were encircied on all sides
with big tanks having trees on their banks and water, clear
and sweet like unto nectar. They were entwined with
hundreds of creepers, covered with Santénat flowers and filled
with diverse groves and Karaviras serving the purpose of
windows. And thereupon that foremost of monkeys beheld
there a mountain—the most picturesque in the world, resem-
bling clouds, having high summits, covered on all sides with
peaks and filled with hilly abodes and various trees. And that
monkey beheld there a river falling down from the mountain:
like unto a damsel falling down from the lap of her beloved.
And the branches of the trees touching the water (of the
stream) resembled a fair damsel prevented by her dear com-
panions ‘from forsaking the company of her beloved), And
that great monkey beheld further down the stream turni‘ig
back like unto the damsel, pleased, going back to her dear
one. And that foremost of monkeys, Hanum{&n, the son of
Maruti, beheld, at some distance, ponds filled with lotuses
and various birds. And he saw a big artificial pond full of
cool water having stairs crusted with excellent jewels and its
sandy banks filled with pearls. It was embellished (on alk
sides) with various animals, diverse trees and big mansions
made by Viswakarm4§ himself. It was adorned all around
with artificial forests and all the trees there bore flowers and
fruits, spreading their branches like unto umbrellas and
having yolden and silvern pavements under them. And that
great monkey beheld there one golden Singsapal| tree


* A gallinule.—T.

+ One of the trees of heaven.—T.

£ Literally the passages means “making @ gap in that forest thickly filled
with trees.” But Rémanuja interprets thus and we have adopted his interpre-
tation.—T.

§ The son of Brahma and artist of gods—T.

| A tree (Dalbergia Sisu).—T.


SUNDARARINDAM. 935


surrounded on all sides with golden pavements. And he
saw the glebe, the hill streams and many a golden. tree
resembling fire. By the lustre of all those trees that heroic
monkey appeared as if made of gold like unto the Sun
by the touch of the mount Sumeru. And having seen those
beautiful golden trees, shaken by the wind and making a
sound like that of a Arnzéint ;* having flowery tops and new
leaves he was greatly amazed. And climbing that Singsapa
tree enveloped with leaves that monkey, gifted with velocity,
reflected—‘‘Perchance I may see Vaidehi, exercised witl:
gtief, anxious to behold Rama and wandering hither and
thither at her pleasure. Certainly this is the picturesque
Asoka forest of that vicious-souled one, embellished with
sandal, Champakas and Vakulas. Here is a beautiful pond
abounding in lotuses, thronged with birds and forsooth shall
that royal spouse Janaki repair hither. She is the beloved
queen of Raghava and expert in walking inthe garden. And
separated from R&ma, certainly shall Janaki repair hither.
Or she having the eyes of a young a.nclope and adept in
roaming in the forest, exercised with thought touching Rama,
shall come here. Or she having beautiful eyes aud fond of
ranging in the forest, racked with sorrow in consequence of
Rama's separation, doth always frequent this forest.t Ere
this, the chaste and worshipful spouse of Rama—Janaka’s
daughter, used to love always the birds and animals of the
forest. (The morning hath set in) and surely the beautiful
and graceful daughter of Janaka fond of performing morningt
ablutions, shall come to this river of pure water to perform
them. Truly is this beautiful forest of Asoka the worthy


* A kind of tinkling ornament.—T.
+ + The commentator, RamAnuja interprets this sicka as explaining the cause
of Siat’s frequentiug the Asoka forest.—T.
{ Sandhya literally mcans the point of time which connects day and night,
Tt however, generally means the period alter sunset and before the night seta
in. But here with reference to the speech which Hanuman began by the ona
Of . aight, it means the morning.—T,


536 RAMAYANA,


abode of the beloved and chaste spouse of Rima, the lord
of men. JE that one of moon-like countenance breathes,
forsooth shall she come to this river of cool water.’ Having
arrived there and anxiously expecting the appearance of the
spouse of that lord of men, the high-souled Hanum&n hiding
himself (on the Singsapa tree) enveloped with flowers and
leaves, beheld all.


SECTION XV,


— 0:0


: Havine stationed himself on the tree, casting his
looks all-around in quest of Sita and looking down on the
carth he surveyed the entire forest of (Asoka). It was beauti-
fied with San/dnaka creepers and various trees, fragrant
with celestial odours and was embellished on all sides.,, It
resembled Nandana or the celestial garden, and was filled
with various animals and birds, palaces and mansions;
resounded with the notes of Kosz/as ; adorned with the ponds
abounding in silvern water-lillies and lJotuses; filled with
many seats and coverlets and various houses having spacious
courtyards; adorned with beautiful flowers of all seasons and
trees bearing fruits, And the beauty of the blossoming
Asokas resembled the effulgence of the Sun. And stationed
there Maruti beheld trees as if devoid of leaves on account
of the hundreds of birds, adorned with various flowers,
resorting there. And he saw there the earth touched by
Asoka trees, the removers of grief. having flowers growing
from the roots and lowered down with their weight. And
the entire quarter was as if ablaze with the beauty of the
flowery Karnikaras and Kingsukas. And there appeared in
beauty many flowery Punnagas, Saptaparnas, Champakas,
and Udalakes having deeply expanded roots. And there
was a thousand of Asoda trees, some. of whom. were like


SUNDA RARKINDAM. 937


gold, some were like the flame of fire and some were like
dark-blue collyrium. It was like the garden of Nandana or
like that of Kuvera or perhaps it surpassed the both in excel-
lence. And enveloped in charming, celestial grace beyond
conception and having flowers for stars that forest appeared
like a second sky. And covered with hundreds of pearl-like
flowers the forest looked like the fifth ocean. And that
garden was embellished with flowers of all seasons and honey-
smelling trees, and filled with diverse notes and various
animals and birds, And that fragrant garden was rendered
more charming with various other fragrances. And that
foremost of monkeys beheld in that garden of Asoka, a round
palace, situated at a distance, fragrant as the Gandhamddana
mountain and high as the lord of mountains, (The
palace) was white as the Kailaca hill and built on
thousand pillars. All its stairs were made of coral
and its pavements made of burning gold. Its beauty
was as if burning all along and stealing the vision of the
lookers-on. It was spotless and dn account of its height

couched the welkin. And thereupon he beheld there (Sit@)
‘Wearing a soiled cloth, poorly, greatly reduced by fast, sigh-
ing again and again and encircled by a band of Rakshasees.
She was (however) spotless like unto the rays of the moon
on the first lunar day. And her graceful beauty could with
great difficulty be perceived like unto the flame of fire
enveloped with smoke. And wearing a shattered and soiled
yellow cloth and divested of all ornaments she appeared like
a lotus stalk without lotuses.* Oppressed, racked with grief,
weakened and chaste as she was, she appeared like Rohini
possessed by Kefu. She was greatly reduced by fast,
stricken with grief and anxious thoughts, disturbed with
sorrow and was poorly and her eyes were always full of tears.


— OOO
* This passage has another meaning—Padmini has two meanings—
{a) lotus (2) Lakshmi or the goddess of wealth. The goddess of wealth is
generally described as sitting on @ lotus.—T.
118


938 eAMd ANA.


Separated from her kith and kin and not beholding Rama and
Lakshmana* but the Rakshasees, she appeared like a hind
surrounded by dogs. Her braid of long hair resembling a
black serpent falling on her back it appeared as if the Earth
was filled with dark-blue forests on the disappearance of the
tains. She was worthy of happiness only and never knew
of misery and therefore she was (now) greatly oppressed with
sorrow. And beholding that one of expansive eyes rendered
pale and feeble, Hanuman, by various conclusive arguments
reflected within himself ‘She must be Sita, for this damsel
looks just like her, whom I saw, when she was ravished by
Ravana, assuming shapes at will. Having the countenance
of the full-moon, beautiful eye brows, round breast, she is as
if dispelling the darkness from all quarters by virtue of
her grace. Her throat was yellow, and her lips were like
Bimbas.t She was of middle stature and her limbs were all
well built. She had eyes resembling lotus petals and was:
like the beloved wife of Manmatha—Rati and was adorable
unto the whole creation like the rays of the full-moon. That
one having a graceful person was seated on the earth like a
female ascetic having her senses restrained. And she wad
sighing again and again like the timid daughter-in-law of
the lord of serpents. Entangled by a mighty web of grief
her grace was greatly lessened and she appeared like the
flame of fire enveloped in smoke. She was like unto Smrité
of doubtful meanings, fallen wealth, lost respect, hope with-
out any desire for gain, Sidh:$ of many troubles, sullied
understanding and fame soiled with false rumours. That
innocent one was greatly distressed for not being able to


* Priydjanam——titerally means dear ones—but here it refers to Rama and
Lakshmana—T.

+ A cicurbituceous plant with red fruits.—T.

$ The epithet bas 2 special significance because through her the destruction
of the race of Rakshasas was brought about.—T.

§ Yoga or asceticism by virtue of which fina} emancipation from existence
is effected. —T,


SUNDARARENDAM. 939


attend upon Rama, and she having the eyes of a young hind,
being oppressed by the R&kshasees was casting her looks
hither and thither. And with a displeased countenance, hav-
ing dark-blue and curling eye lashes,and éyes full of tearg, she
was sigliing again and again. Worthy of wearing ornamesnt
but now without any, poorly, crusted with execrations, she
appeared like the rays of the stars enveloped by dark-blue
clouds. And beholding Sitd in that pitiable plight like unto
learning for want of practice, (Hanum&n) was puzzled with
doubts. And seeing her without ornaments he could with
great difficulty make her out like unto words having different
meanings without the knowledge of grammar. And behold-
ing that blameless daughter of the king, having expansive
eyes, Hanuman, by various reasonings, reflected—'Forsooth
she must be Sitd. I see at her person all these ornaments,
of which Rama mentioned unto me at the time of my depar-
ture. [behold on her ears excellent ear-rings and nicely
placed Svadangstras* and on her arms jewelled ornaments
rendered dark-blue by dirt for const-nt use. Verily these
are the ornaments Rama mentioned unto me. I do not
perceive them which had been cast off by her. But these are
the rest there is not the least doubt about it. The monkeys
had seen, her excellent yellow cloth made of golden fibres,
on the hill. They had seen also her excellent ornaments,
which cast off by her, fell on the earth with a sound. Her
cloth hath been shattered by constant use but ber grace hath
not been rendered worse than its color. This one having a
golden countenance must be the beloved queen of Rama, who,
albeit separated [rom him, hath not disappeared from his mind.
This is that damsel on whose account Rama being simultane-
ously burnt by affection, pity, grief and amour,—affection in
consequence of his beloved spouse being ravished, pity for
his inability to protect one dependent on him, grief for the
loss of his beloved wife and amour for his dear one. Verily


* A kind of ornament worn on the ears.—T.


g40 RAMAYANA,


it appeareth from the grace of her person, from her well
developed limbs and from Rama’s beauty that this worshipful
damse! having dark-blue eyes must be his spouse. She has
her mind fixed in him, and he in her and it is for this that
she and the virtuous-souled (Rama) have been,ptill main-
taining their being. Indeed my master Ramahaih performed
a mighty task for breathes he still in her separation, without
consuming himself in grief”’ And having beheld Sita in
this plight, that son of the Wind-god approached Rama in
mind and showered praises on his master.


SECTION x. =
an


Ano having eulogized Sit8, worthy of being praised and
Rama, endeared by accomplishments that foremost of mon-
keys again engaged in meditation. And having reflected
for some time, the powerful Hanumfn, having his eyes full
of tears bewailed on Sit&’s account (in the following strain)
—"No one can withstand the course of destiny since Sit,
being the spouse of the worshipful brother of Lakshmana,
ever obedient unto his elders, hath been overwhelmed
with grief. The worshipful damsel is cognizant of the
prowess of R&ma and the intelligent Lakshmana and for
this she is not entirely depressed like unto the river
Ganges at the approach of the rainy season. As regards
their character, age, conduct, family and other auspicious
marks they are equal and hence Raghava deserveth Vaidehi
and this one of dark-blue eyes is his.” And having seen her,
gold-hued and conducing to the happiness of the people
like unto the Goddess of wealth, Hanuman approached
Rama in his mind and said :—‘“For this (damsel) was killed
the mighty Vali and Kavanda—Ravana‘s equal in prowess.
For her (too) was destroyed in battle, the terribly powerful


SUNDARARAND 1M. gat


R&kshasa—Viradha,by Rama,putting forth his energy,like unto
Shambara killed by Mahendra. (It was for her) that fourteen
thousand Rakshasas off terrible deeds were destroyed at
Yanasthana with arrows resembling the flame of fire. And
Khara was killed in battle, and Trishar& was discomfitted and
the mighty Dushana by Rama, knowing his ownself. And it
was on her account that Sugriva, known all over the world,
car 4 by the wealth of the monkeys hard to acquire and
amassed by Vali. And it is for this (damsel) of expansive
eyes that I have crossed the effulgent lord of rivers and have
geen this city. And methinks it would have been all proper
had Rama turned-on her account the whole earth bounded
by oceans. Ifthe kingdom over the three worlds and the
daughter of Janaka be compared together, the former is not
equal to one hundredth part of Sita. This Sita, the daughter
of the high-souled Janaka, the pious King of Mithila, firmly
attached unto her husband, rose, covered with dust, out of
the earth, in a field delved by a furrow’ She is the well-
known eldest daughter-in-law of the king Dagaratha, of
an adorable character and unchecked prowess. And She is
the beloved spouse of the pious and grateful Rama, know-
ing his ownself, and has been brought under the control of the
Rédkshasees. Renouncing all luxuries, and considering not
the least about miseries, she actuated by her husband’s love
entered the solitary forest. And satisfied with fruits and roots
and ever engaged in her husband’s service, she lived in the
forest as much delighted as she was in her house. And
that one of a golden hue, never used to afflictions and who
was wont to converse always with a delighted countenance,
hati'"now been suffering incomparable miseries. Like unto
a thirsty wight longing for an abode where he might get
adrink, Raghava panteth after seeing her, gifted with an
exalted character and oppressed by Ravana. As a monarch
who had lost his kingdom, is greatly delighted when he
regaineth it, forsooth shall Raghava, in like manner,


942 RAMAPANA.,


be pleased when he shall come by her. She too hath ‘been
maintaining her being in the hope of seeing Rama again,
separated as she is from her friends and deprived of all
comforts and luxuries. These Rédshasees, and these trees
enveloped with fruits and flowers—forsooth she doth not
behold, but is engaged with all her heart in medidations
only touching Rama. Husband enhanceth the beauty of
a female more than the dress (and therefore Siti) beautiful
as she is, doth not appear graceful, in her hushand’s absence.
Forsooth my master Rama hath performed a difficult act for
he hath been still keeping up his life in her separation
without consuming himself in grief. My heart is greatly
pained knowing that she, having dark-blue eyes, resembling
lotus petals, worthy of happiness, hath been possessed by
grief, She, patient as the Earth, having eyes resembling
lotuses, who was ere this protected by Raghava and
Lakshmana, is now being guarded by Rakshasees having
terrible eyes, under the trees. Being harassed with continued
miseries, the daughter of Janaka hath lost all her beauty
like unto a water-lily crushed with frost, and hath come by
a miserable plight like unto a doe seperated from her mate.
The branches of the Aso#a trees, lowered down with flowers
are as if enhancing her grief as also the Moon of many
thousand rays, at the expiry of the winter.” Having reffec-
ted thus and arrived at the conclusion that she was Sit&,
that powerful leader of monkeys gifted with velocity stationed
himself on that tree.


SUNDA RAKANDAM., 943


SECTION XVII.


Tuereveon the Moon, white as water-lily and of clear
appearance procceded far down the welkin like unto a
goose traversing the blue waters, With a view to befriend
him, the Moon of clear rays, sprinkled the Wind-God’s son,
with cool beams. And thereupon he beheld Sitd, having a
moon-like countenance, plunged in grief like unto a laden
boat sunk in water. While beholding Vaidehi,Hanum&n,the son
of Maruta,observed at some distance,a number of grim-visaged
Rakshasees. Some had one ear, some one eye, some had big
ears some was without ears; some had formidable ears and
some had a nose projecting upwards. And some had the
upper part of their bodies unusually long and bulky, some had
along and slender neck, some had dishevelled hair, and
some one’s person was so thickly cover~7 with hairs, that she
appeared to have been cloaked in a blanket. Some had long
ears some had a long forehead, some had a long belly, some
had long breasts ; some had long lips ; some had their lips and
chins stuck together, some had a long countenance and some
had long knees. Some one was of short stature, some was
tall, some crooked, some grim-visaged, some diwarfish, some
one was of terribly dark colour ; some had a disfigured coun-
tenance ; some had coppery eyes and a fearful face. Some
were terrible-looking, some copper-colored, some black, some
angry and some fond of quarrelling with each other; and
some had iron darts, hammers and mallets in their hands.
Some had a face like that of a boar, some had a face like
that of a deer, some like that of a tiger, some like that of a
buffallo, some like that of a goat, and some like that of a
jackal ; some had legs like those of a camel, some had those
of an elephant, some those of a horse and some had
their heads placed on their breasts. Some one had only one


944 RIMAIPANA.,


hand some had only one leg. Some had ears Jike those of a
horse, some like those of a cow, some like those of an- ass,
some like those of an elephant and others had ears like those
of ation. .Some had very big noses, some had crooked
and others were without any ; some had noses like those of
an elephant and others had their noses on their foreheads.
Some had their legs like those of elephants some had very
huge legs ; some had like those of a cow, some had on their
legs locks of hair like unto pillars, some had a terribly huge
head, some had big breasts and others had spacious bellies,
Some had faces and eyes beyond ordinary proportions, Some
had along face and tongue. And some had the face ofa
goat, some that of an elephant some that of a cow, some
that of a boar some that of a horse and some that of an ass.
Some of the SYakshasees were grim-visaged and some hot-
natured, quarrelsome and had darts and maces in their hands.
And some terrible Rakshasees of disfigured countenances,
had smoky-coloured hairs. And they were all continually
drinking wine—always fond of liquor and meat, and all
their bodies were sprinkled with blood for their living
on gore and flesh. And that- foremost of monkeys
found all these grim-visaged Kakshasees seated around
that mighty tree enveloped with branches. And the grace-
ful Hanumn observed at the foot of that tree that worship-
ful and blameless daughter of the king Janaka. She
was bereft of all effulgence, racked with grief and all
her hairs were soiled with dirt. She appeared like a star fallen
down on the earth on the wane of virtue. And famed though
she was all over the world for her chastity, it was difficult
for her now to see her husband. She had no excellent orna-
ments—her attachment unto her husband was the only
ornament. She was imprisoned by the lord of Rakshasas
and separated from all her friends, she appeared like a she-
elephant separated from her band and bound and attacked
by a lion, and like the rays of the Moon enveloped with


SUNDARAKAND it. 345


clouds al the expiry of the rainy season. Her beauty was
greatly faded (in consequence of her husband's seffara-
tion) like unto a stringed instrument for want of a player.
And ever engaged ia her husband’s welfare she was
thoroughly anworthy of being brought uader the control
of the Ra&kskasas. Bcing sank in the abyss of grief and
encircled by those Rakshasees she appeared in the forest
of Asoka like unte Rohini possessed by Raku. And Hana-
min beheld her there like a creeper divested of flowers.
And having her person soiled with dirt and shorn of all
ortaments she appeared in her hidden grace like unto a
lotas covered with clay. And the monkey Hanuman, beheld
that damsel, having the eyes of a young antelope, clothed
with a soiled and shattered cloth. And though the coun-
tenance of that worshipful one was shorn of all grace, het
heart did not loose its loftiness in consequence of her
husband’s prowess. And Sit&, of dark-blue eyes, was protected
by virtue of her own character. An¢@ ‘eholding Sité, having
the eyes of a young antelope, and terrified and casting her
looks hither and thither like a lind and barning down the
trees enveloped with leaves by her breath ; like unto a mass of
grief and an upheaval of sorrow ; having well-proportioned
limbs, and appearing graceful without ornaments, M@ruti
attained to an excess of delight. And beholding her having
inebriete eyes, Hanuman shed tears of delight and bowed
anto Raghava. And having offered his obeisance unto Rama
and Lakshmana the powerful Hanum&n, greatly delighted
in seeing Sit&, remained there hidden.


11g


946 RAMAYANA,


SECTION xvits.


AAnp beholding the forest filled with flowery trees and
desiring to have a full view of her, he, well-nigh, spent the
night. And at that late hour of the night, he heard the
chantings of the Vedas by the Rakshasas, conversant with
the six supplementary parts of the Vedas,* engaged in the
performance of sacrificial rites and knowing Brahm&. . And
thereupon the mighty Ten-headed Rakshasa,having huge arms,
awoke with the sounds of those auspicious instruments,
pleasant unto ears. And awaking, that great and powerful
lord of Rakshasas, having his cloth and garlands loosened,
hegan to think of Vaidehi. And that Rakshasa, puffed up
with pride, was passionately attached unto her and so he
could not restrain his amour in him. And so adorned witlr
all ornaments, he, casting his looks on the roads containing
jewelled and golden gates and appearing in grace,entered the
forest of Asoka, filled with various trees containing fruits and’
flowers of all seasons and with ponds ; beautified with various
flowers ; variegated with inebriete and wondrous birds ; filled
with various beautiful wolves ; thronged with various deer
and covered with fruits fallen on the earth. And one hun-
dred damsels followed in the train of the son of Pulastyat
like unto the damsels of the celestials and Gandharvas
following Mahendra. And among those fair ones, some
carried chowries and some fans, And some carrying water
in golden jars headed the train while others carrying the
golden throne covered with a coverlet followed it. Anda
favourite damsel carried in her right hand a jewelled drink-
ing howl filled with wine. And another carrying the white


* Grammar, Prosody, astronomy, pronounciation, the meaning of the
unusual terms and the ritual of the Hindu religion —T.
¢ Refers to Ravana, Pulastya being his father—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 917


umbrella having golden ribs resembling the full moon and
goose, followed in the train. And in this wise the excellent
wives, of Rivana, having their eyes rendered sleepy with
sleep and wine, followed their heroic husband like unto light-
nings following the cloud. Their necklaces and keyuras were
displaced, paste faded, hair dishevelled and they had drops
of sweat on their faces. With sleep and intoxication, were
reeling those fair ones of beautiful countenances, having
their hairs with garlands disbanded and their persons wet
with perspiration. And in this way those beloved wives, (of
Ravana) having inebriete eyes, followed, out of amour and
reverence, their husband. And their mighty husband, brought
under the control of amcur and having his miud firmly at-
tached unto Sit’, proceeded slowly. And that monkey, son
of M&ruta, heard the sound of danchees and nupuras of those
excellent damsels. And the monkey Hanuman also beheld
Ravana, of extraordinary’ deeds and of inconceivable
prowess and strength, at the gate. Mis whole body was
seen on ail sides by the light of the lamps lighted with
perfumed oil and carried by the Rakshasces before. He was
inflamed with amour, pride and haughtiness and his expan-
sive eyes were coppery and idle. And he appeared like
Cupid himself-just appearing in view, leaving behind his
bow and arrows. And holding his excellent robe, covered
with flowers, washed, set with jewels and white as the
foam of the churned nectar, he placed it in its proper place.
And Hanuman,hiding himself on the tree, in the midst of many
leaves and flowers, tried to recognise him as he approach-
ed. And beholding him, that foremost of moukeys saw that
highly famous king Ravana, surrounded by his excellently
beautiful and youthful wives, enter that forest of enjoyment:
filled with birds and animals, There was a warder by name
Sankukarna in that forest—highly powerful, wearing various
ornaments and addicted to drinking. And by him was
seen that lord of Rakshasas—the son of I’rsravasa.. And


948 . RAMEYANA.


that highly energetic monkey beheld that effulgent (Ravana):
surrounded by excellent damsels Jike unto moon encircled
by stars. And beholding him the monkey reflected—"Thia
must be Ravata—for he is the person whom I saw sleeping
in an excellent apartment in that city.” Thinking this, that
highly effulgent son of M&ruta—Hanum4n leaped (high epor
another branch). And effulgent as he was, that highly
inteligent monkey hid bimself on a branch covered with
leaves, being unable to stand before the effulgence of that
R&kshasa. And Ravana proceeded in that way, being anxious
to behold the blue-eyed Sit, having spacious breast, excel-
Jent hips and a lock of black hair.


SECTION XIX,


Ano thereupon beholding R&vana—the lord of Rakshsas-
as, gifted with youth and beauty and adorned with am
excellent dress, that excellent and blameless daughter of a
king, Vaidehi, trentbled fike unto 2 plantain tree shaken by
the wind. And having covered her belly with her legs
aud her breast with her hands, that one, having charming
colour and expansive eyes, cried aloud. And arriving there
the Ten-necked one beheld Vaidehi, guarded by the
Rakshasees, poorly, racked with grief like unto a boat sunk in
an ocean, Subject to hard penances, she, seated on the
bare earth, appeared Tike a branch of a tree fallen on the
ground, Her limbs, where he used to wear ornaments, were
covered with dirt and atbeit worthy of ornaments, appeared
without any like unto a lotus covered with clay and therefore
shining very indistinctly. And she was proceeding as it were
uato that lion of a king—Raima, knowing his own-self, im her
mind’s charriot drawn by the horses of resolution. And not
-behelding the end of her grief, that damsel, attached’ uate


SUNDARAKANDAM. 949


Rama, was keeping alone and reduced to a skeleton and
overwhelinned with anxious thoughts and grief. And she
was troubled ‘like unto the daughter-in-law of the ford of
serpents, of impeded course hy means of incantations, and
stricken with grief like unto Rohini, possessed by Ketu. And
although born:.in a pious family, well behaved and good-
natured and married according to their rites, she appeared
to have been sprung from a low race and wedded according
_to their base ceremonials. She seemed like mighty fame
disappearing, like respect disregarded, like intellect waning
and hope disappointed ; like a sacred altar trampled, like
royal mandate disobeyed, like the quarters bnrnt hy a fire-
brand; like offerings unto God soiled; like the disc of the
full-moon stricken with darkness, a lotus distressed, an army
without a leader; like the ravs of the moon enveloped with
gloom, like a river of shallow water, Jike a sacrificial altar
possessed by an outcast, like the flame of fire extinguished ;
like water fowls terrified and lot«-es disturbed and petals
crushed by the trunks of elephants. And her grace greatly
famished by the absence of her husband she appeared like a
river whose liquid contents were dried up. And not clean-
ing her limbs she appeared like a dark night, And that one
of gracefut limbs, tender and worthy of living in a jewelled
abode, being stricken with grief, seemed like a dried Jotus-
stalk just extracted from its bed. And she like the daughter-
in-law of the lord of elephants,caught,separated from her band
and tied to a pillar,was overwhelmed with grief and was sighing
again and again. A long lock of dark-blue hair, taken not the
least care of, was on her back; and with this she appeared like
unto the earth covered with dark-blue forests at the expiration
of the rainy season. With fasts and grief, anxiety and fear,she
was greatly weakened and reduced and gave up eating and
took recourse to asceticism only. Stricken with grief, she
seemed to have been offering prayers unto that foren.ost
of Raghus for the destruction of the Ten-necked one, like


950 - RAMAYANA.


those unto the deities with folded hands. Aad beholding that
blameless Maithilee, having expansive eyes with beautiful
eye lashes, greally attached unto Rama, and weeping,.
Ravana tempted her for his own destruction, :


SECTION XX.


Tuerevron Ravana, with sweet words and gestures, ex-
pressed his own desire unto Sit&, poorly, deprived of joy,
encircled by R&kshasees and leading the life of an ascetic.
“O thou having thighs like the trunks of elephants, while
thou hast, beholding me, hidden thy breast and belly, perhaps
thou art afraid of exposing thy person unto me. I do long
for thee, O thou having expansive eyes; do thou esteem
me, O my dear one, O thou gifted with all accomplishments
and pleasant unto all persons. O Sita, here is no human
being or any Rakshasa assuming shapes at will, do tho
therefore renounce all fear from me. O timid damsel,
for certain it is the virtue of the Rakshasas that they always
visit others’ wives or come by them by force. In spite of
this, O Maithilee, I do not touch thee for thou art not under
the influence of amour—but forme, Iam completely under
its sway. Do not fear me, O worshipful damsel, confide in me
O my beloved one, and become atiached unto me. Do
not give way to grief. A single lock of hair, to lie down’
on earth and useless fast—these do not become thee. Attain-,
ing me, O Maithilee, do thou enjoy excellent garlands,
sandal, ornaments, costly wines, beds, seats, songs, danc-
ing and music. Thou art a jewel of a female; do thow
not therefore remain in this guise. Puton thy ornaments
therefore. How shalt thou remain unadorned obtaining
me, O thou of a beautiful figure? This thy beautiful
youth is passing away, which like the curreat of a river


SUNDARAKANDAM gst


when once gone, doth not turn back. O thou of a fair look,
having created thee, the artist of Gods, the maker of
celestial beauties, hath ceased from his work, for a match
of thy beauty I find in none. Who is there, O Vaidehi,
who can withstand the influence of amour, getting thee,
gifted with beauty and youth? (What of others) even
Brahma, the grand-father of the celestials, is moved. O
thou having a moon-like countenance, and well-developed
hips, whatever limbs of thine, I behold, I find my gaze fixed
therein, O Maithilee, do thou become my spouse, and
renounce this delusion. Do thou become the foremost queen
of all my excellent wives. O timid one, all the jewels that
I have collected from the three worlds, and all my kingdom
I shall coufer on thee. O sportive damsel, for thy satisfaction,
I shall conquer the whole earth, engarlanded by many cities
and bestow it upon Janak&. Find I none on this earth
who can withstand my prowess. Do thou behold my
matchless prowess in battle. The celestials and Asuras
are incapable of withstanding me, defeated as they were
by me in battle and their pennons struck down. Do thou
therefore desire me to-day, dress thyself in excellent robes
and adorn thyself in beautifully brilliant ornaments. I shall
behold thy dazzling beauty when adorned with ornaments.
For pity unto me, do thou embellish thyself with ornaments,
O thou of a graceful countenance. O timid damsel, do thou,
at thy pleasure, enjoy all sorts of comforts and luxuries,
and do thou, as thou desirest, confer wealth and land on
others. Do thou confiding in me, ask for thy wished-for
objects and do thou command me like unto an unmannerly
damsel. Thou shalt, by asking favours from me, satisfy the
desires of thy friends. O gentle lady, O thou of great
renown, du thou observe my prosperity. What shalt
thou do with Rama, wearing bark, OU thou of pleasant
presence, Rama hath ceased from his endeavours for gaining
victory. He hath lost all his beauty, lives in the forest, is


952 RAMAFANA.


engaged in observances and always lies down on earth. I fear
whether he is living still. O Vaidehi, Rama shall not be
able to see thee like unto the rays of the moon covered
with blue clouds preceded by Valakds.* Raghava shall never
get thee back from my hands, like unto Hivanyakasipu
unable to regain his wife Keerti from Indra. O thou of
beautiful teeth, O thou having beautiful eyes, O sportive
damsel, O timid one, thou dost steal my mind like unto Garuda
catching serpents. Beholding thee, wearing a shattered
silken cloth, slender and without any ornaments, I do not find
any attachment in my own wives. Q daughter of Janaka,
do thou exercise, thy supremacy, over all my wives, living
in my seraglio and gifted with all accomplishments. O thou
having black hair, all, my wives are foremost in beauty
over the three worlds. And they shall all attend thee like
unto Apsaras waiting upon the Goddess of wealth. O thou
having beautiful eye brows and well-developed hips, do
thou, along with me, enjoy at thy pleasure all the wealth
and riches of Kuvera.t O worshipful damsel, in asceticism,
strength or prowess, wealth or fame, R&ma is wot my equal.
Do thou therefore at thy pleasure drink, enjoy and eat,
I shall confer on thee wealth and the whole carth. Do thou
satisfy all thy desires in me, O fair damsel, and let thy friends
be satisfied in thee. And adorned with a beautiful golden
necklace, O timid lady, do thou at thy pleasure, range
with me, in the forests, situated on the bank of the ocean,
aad filled with flowery trees and black bees.”


* A kind of crane.—T.


t The God of wealth or Pluto in Greek myth—T. *


SUNDARAKANDAM. 953


BECTION xxl.


———


Heaaine those words of that terrible Rakshasa, Sits,
stricken with grief and of feeble voice, slowly replied—
Racked with grief, engaged in asceticism and weeping,
Sita began to tremble. And that excellent damsel, devoted
unto her husband, began to think of him, Placing a twig
before, that oue, of beautiful smile, said—"“Do thou take back
thy mind from me and place it in thy own wives. Like unto
a. sinner unworthy of praying for final emancipation, it doth
not behove thee to expect to come by me. Devoted unto one
husband I shall never perpetrate such an iniquitious act.
I am born in a high and have been married in a pious
family.” Having accosted Ravana thus, the well-known
Vaidehi, turning her back, again spake unto him, saying—
“f should not live with thee since I am another's wife
and chaste. Have thy eyes always on religion and do thou
follow in the track of piety. Like unto thine own wives,
others’ are worthy of being protected by thee, O ranger of
the night. Making an example of thee, do thou enjoy with
thy own wives. Forsooth those vicious-minded, those of
agitated senses, who are not satisfied with their own wives,
are brought to misery by others’ wives. (Methinks) there
are no pious men here and even if there be any thou dost not
follow him siuce thou hast such an adverse understanding,
against human practice and usage. Or the considerate people
have spoken the truth, but thou, for the destruction of the
race of the Rakshasas, considering that false, hast not
followed it. Wealth, kingdom and cities~all are brought to
naught when they are placed at the hands of a vicious and
illiterate king. Obtaining thee, (therefore) as her king and ,
for thy folly only, this city of Lanka, abounding in jewels,
shall soon be ruined. O Ravana, every one delighteth in

120


954 RAMAYANA.


the destruction of that inconsiderate being, who bringeth
about his own destruction and is engaged i in the perpetration
of evil deeds. And inthis way, thyself, the perpetrator of
vicious acts, meeting with thy end, those persons who had
been tyranized by thee, shall, delightedly, say—“Oh! blessed
are we since this terrible (Rakshasa) hath met with his end.
With wealth or riches thou shalt not be able to tempt me.
As the rays of the sun belong to him, so I am Raghava's
only. Having laid my head on the beautiful arms of that
lord of men, how shal! I place it again on another's? Like
unto the knowledge of one God monopolized by the Brahma-
nas only,! am the spouse of that lord of earth only, cognisant
of higher truths and marrying me according to the pious
ceremonials. May good betide thee, O Ravana. Do thou
take me unto R&ma, stricken with grief as I am, like unto
a she-elephant anxiously waiting in the forest brought to the
lord of elephants. It behoveth thee to make friends with
Rama, that best of men, if dost thou desire to maintain thy
empire and dost not wish to bring about thy own destruction.
Jt is known to the world, that Rama knoweth well the
sanctions of religion and is kind unto them who seek his
shelter. Do thou seek his friendship, if dost thon wish to
maintain thy life. Do thou propitiate him therefore who is
kind to his dependents and it becometh thee to take me
respectfully unto him, Thou shalt meet with thy. well-being
if dost thou in this wise confer me on that best of Raghus.
And mighty is the disaster that shall befall thee, if dost thou
follaw any other procedure. Thunderbolt, even, when hurled,
may leave thee, Death himself may overlook thee—but there
is no safety for thee, if Raghava, the lord of men is enraged.
Thou shalt hear the terrible sound of the twang of Rama’s
bow, like unto the sound of the thunderbolt hurled by Indra.
Soon shall arrows,bearing the names of Rama and Lakshmana
and having fiery heads like those of snakes, -alight here.
And covered with Aanka léaves they shall undoubtedly cover


SUNDAR&KANDAM. oss


the whole city and devastate it by destroying all the Raksh-
sas. Like unto Garuda pulling up the snakes, the Garuda-
like Rama shall pull up thy snake-like Rakshasas. And
like unt. Vishnu recovering the effulgent Sree (the Goddess
of wealth) from the Asuras, by crossing over the three worlds
with three foot-steps, my husband, the conqueror of foes, shal!
recover me from thee. Janasthana hath been devastated,the host
of R&akshasas hath been killed, and thou hast been disabled.
Truly thou hast perpetrated an impious deed. O R&akshasa,
those two lions among men going out to enquire about the
illusive deer, I was ravished by thee, entering the empty
hermitage, O vile wight. And like unto a dog incapable
of standing before a tiger, it would have been impossible
for thee, to wait there in the presence of Rama and Laksh-
mana. If dost thou engage in conflict with them, thy
wealth and friends shail be of no avail unto thee (and
thou shalt be dis-comfitted) like unto one-handed Asura
Vitra by the two handed Indra.* .-on shall my lusband,
with the assistance of Lakshmana, draw out thy life with
arrows, like unto the sun drying up, by his rays, shallow
water, Whether dost thou repair to the abode of Kuvera,
or whether dost thou, terrified, take refuge unto the assembly
of Varuna, thou shalt, for certain, be destroyed by the son
of Dagaratha, like unto a mighty tree broken down by
thunderbolt.

* The allusion is—the mighty Asura Vitra fought with Indra for a long
time even after he had his one hand chopped off.--T,


956 RAMEPANA,


SECTION XXET.


Fearne those harsh accents, that lord of Rakshasas,
replied unto Sit&, of comely presence, with the following
unpleasant words’—“It is generally found on earth that
the more a woman is courted by a man, the more she is
brought under his influence. (But for thee} the more kindly
I have been behaving towards thee, the more ‘roughly I have
been treated. Truly doth my love for thee keep in control
the wrath like unto a good charioteer restraining the
swerving stead. O mighty is amour unto. men, for on
whom this amour falleth, albeit she is an object of wrath,
becomes an object of kindness and affection. O thou of
fair countenance, it is for this reason, that] do not destroy
thee, although thou, who art engaged in false asceticism, art
worthy of being killed and dishonored. O Maithilee, for each
and every one of all those harsh words which thou hast
used by me, dost thou deserve death.” Having spoken
thus unto Vaidehi, Ravana, the lord of Rakhasas, having
his wrath subdued, again bespake Sita: “I shall wait
for those two months, of which | have made a contract,
after which thou shalt have to share my bed, O thou ofa
comely presence. And even then if thou dost refuse to regard
me as thy husband, my cooks shall mince thy limbs with
steel and serve thee for my morning meal.” Beholding
the lord of Rakshasas remonstrate with the daughter of
Janaka in this wise, the daughters of the celestials and
Gandharbas became exceedingly sorry. Some with lips, some
with eyes, and some with ‘gestures of their faces, they all con-
soled Sit&, thus distressed by that Rakshasa. And thus con-
soled by them, and being proud of her good conduct and her
husband’s heroism, Sit& thus addressed Ravana, the lord
of Rakshasas, “Forsooth there fs no person in this city


SUNDARAKANDAM. 957


who desireth thy welfare and therefore preventeth thee from
such an impious deed. Who is there in the three worlds,
who even desireth me in mind, who am the spouse of the
virtuous-souled (Rima) like unto Indra’s Sachee. O thou
the vilest of the R&kshasas, for using those vicious words
towards the spouse of Rima, of immeasured prowess, repair-
ing whither shalt thou escape vengeance? Like untd
an infuriated elephant encountering a hare in the forest, thou
shalt O Vile! a hare as thou art, meet with that elephant-
like Rama. Thou art not ashamed of railing that lord of
Ikshwakus, so long as dost thou not come within his ken,
O base! why do not thy grim, terrible, coppery eyes, looking
so viciously at me, fall down on earth. O vicious wretch,
Tam the spouse of that virtuous-souled (Rama) and daughter-
in-law of Dagaratha—using these vile words towards
me, why dost not thy tongue fall off? O Ten-necked
one, I can instantly reduce thee to ashes but for R&ma’s
mandate and my ascetic observances., Thou couldst not have
ravished me in the presence of the highly intelligent Rama.
And undoubtedly for thy destruction this hath been brought
about by God. Thou art heroic and Kuvera’s brother and
great in prowess, why didst thou then take me by stealth
after despatching Rama away from the hermitage?” Hear-
ing those words of Sit&, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas,
whirling his grim eyes, looked towards the daughter of Janaka.
He was like unto a mass of blue clouds and his arms and
necks were long and spacious. He was gifted with elephan-
tine gaits and his tongues and eyes were sharp and flaming.
The top of his crown was shaking and he had charming
garlands around his neck and his person sprinkled with paste.
He had crimson-coloured garlands and clothes on and his
charming arms were adorned with ornaments. Encircled
with a sword-belt around his waist he appeared like unto
'Mandara, entwined by a snake at the time of the churning
of the ocean. With his two plump arms, that lord of


958 - RAMAYANA. :


Rakshasas appeared like unto the hill Mandara with its twe
huge summits. And adorned with a pair of Kundalas* resembl-
ing the newly risen Sun he looked like a hill covered with
two Asoka trees enveloped with crimson flowers and leaves,
He was like unto Xalpat tree and spring incarnate.
And albeit adorned, he looked terrible like unto a Caztyat on
the cremation-ground. And having his eyes red hot with ire,
sighing again and again like unto a snake and casting his
looks upon Sitd, Ravana addressed. her again, saying,—'O
thou following asceticism, this thy vow is without any
meaning and beyond the pale of morality. Even shall }
destroy thee to-day like unto the Sun dispelling darkness
with his rays.” Having thus addressed Maithilee, the ini-
mical king Ravana cast his looks towards the grim-visaged
Rakshasees. And amongthose Rakshasees, some had huge
ears, some had ears like those of kine,some had ears as long as
arms, some had long ears and others were without any. And
some had legs like those of an elephant ; some had like those of
acow and some had legs covered with hairs. And some had
one eye, some had one leg, some had capacious legs and some
were without any. And some had huge heads and necks and
some had breast and belly beyond proportions and some had
faces and eyes above human size. Some had huge tongues
and nails. And some were without noses. And some had
leonine faces, some had faces like those of kine and some
had those of boars. And casling his look towards such
Rikshasees, he said—"Ye R&kshasees, do ye all endeavour
to bring Sita, the daughter of Janaka, under my control.
By good or bad conduct, by conciliation or gift, by threat or
blandishment, do ye so endeavour as Vaidehi’s soul might be
bent unto me.” And having ordered thus again and again,


* A kind of ornament worn on ears.—T.

+ A fabulous tree granting everything desired —T.

$ Amonument or sculpture raised in honor of a deceased person on the
site of a funeral pyre.--T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 989


that lord of R&kshasas, stricken with amour and ire, address.
ed Sit&, roaring fiercely. And thereupon approaching speedily
and embracing the Ten-necked one, one LRakshasee named
Dhinyamalini bespake him :—“Do thou sport with me.,
O great king. What shalt thou do with her ?—O lord of
R&kshasas—a human being,poorly and of a pale countenance.
O great king, forsooth, the celestials have not destined for
her enjoyment all those objects which thou hast procured
by thy prowess. And again he who desireth for an unwilling
dame burneth his own person—and he who desireth for a
willing damsel, attaineth excess of delight.” Having said
this, the Rakshasee took away Ravana by force. And that
Rakshasa too, resembling a mass of clouds, laughing, turned
back. And that Ten-necked one, strode away as if shaking the
whole earth and passed within (his queen's) abode resembling
the effulgent Sun, And encircling Ravana those daughters
of celestials Gandharbas and Nagas, entered into an excel-
lent abode. And having remonstrated with and left behind,
the firm and pious Sit& with a trembling person, Ravana,
possessed by amour entered into his own palace.


SECTION xXtl,


Havine spoken thus unto Maithilee and commanded the
host of the R&kshasees, Ravana, a terror unto his enemies,
went away. And alter that lord of Rikshasas had gone
away and entered his inner apartment, the hideous RAksha-
sees drew near Siti. And approaching Sit that terrible
host, almost faint with ire, addressed Vaidehi with the
following harsh words—“Thou dost not regard it highly,
Sit&, that thou shalt become the chosen wile of that high-
souled, and great R&vana, the Ten-necked son of Pulastya.”


960 RAMAYANA,


Thereupon another Rakshasee named Ekjats, with eyes
rendered coppery with ire, addressing Sita having a smalt
navel, said,—Pulastya is the fourth of the six Praj&patis,”
a mind-born son of Brahm& aud celebrated in the world.
And the glorious ascetic, by name Bishrava was the mind-
born son unto Pulastya, effulgent like unto Prajapatis, O
large-eyed damsel! Of Visrava came R4vana terrible unto
his enemies. Aud it behoveth thee to becpme the consort of
that lord of Rakshasas. Scorn not the words I say unto thee,
O thou of comely presence.” Thereupon another Raksha-
see named Uarijaté, having the eyes of a cat, and whirling
them with ire, said—‘It becometh thee to be the wife
of that lord of R&kshasas who smote the thirty three
celestials and their lord in battle. Dost thou not desire to
be his wife, who is heroic, kof indomitable prowess and
who doth not turn back in battle? And turning away in
scorn from his beloved wife, highly esteemed, the mighty
king Ravana, desireth for thee. And leaving his inner
apartment enriched with thousand of females and adorned
with various jewels, Ravana shall adore thee.” And thea
followed another Rakshasee by name Bikati—“The king,
who by his terrible prowess subdued the Gandharbast and
N&gas,t in battle, hath stood by thee. O foolish damsel,
why dost thou not wish to be the cousort of that high-souled
lord of Rakshasas—Ravana, gifted with wealth and riches,”
And then followed another Rakshasee named Durmukhee.—
“Why dost thou not approach him, O thou having expansive
eyes, by whose fear, the sun doth not shine, and the wind
doth not blow. O dame, why dost thou not wish to be the
consort of Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, at whose command
the tress shower blossoms and the hills and clouds pour
down water. Why dost thon not make up thy mind to be


* Prajapatis are the lords of the created beings first created by Brahma.—T.
+ Heavenly singers and musicians who belong to the heaven of Indra.—T.
$ Serpent-gods who dwell in the regions uuder the earth,


SUNDARAKANDAM. g6t


the wife of Ravana? GQ damsel, O worshipful dame, we
have spoken thus for thy welfare. Do- thou comply with
our request or thou shalt surely die.”


SECTION XXIV.


TPusreveon all those Rakshasees, having terrible faces
again and again pursued Sit& with reproaches rough and
rude,—-"Why dost thou not desire, O Sit&, to live in his
inner apartment, liked by all and abounding in costly bed-
steads, O woman, thou regardest highly to be the wife of
aman. Do thou turn back from Rama—thy desire shall
never be satisfied. Do thou spend happily thy days with
our lord—Ravana, the Rakshasa chief, who makes his own
the treasures of the three worlds. Thou art a woman, O
thou of comely presence, and therefore doth thy fancy cling
to Rama, O thou of a blameless cous.enance, who is a man,
deprived of his kingdom, overwhelmed with disasters and
hath his desires frustrated.’ Hearing the words of those
Rikshasees, the lotus-eyed Sii&, with her eyes full of tears:
said.—What ye have all said and which is against human
usage and vicious, doth not: find place in my mind. A
woman cannot be the wife of a R&kshasa. Eat me up if
you will, I will never follow your words. Poor or deprived
of kingdom, he who is my hunband, is my preceptor. I am
ever devoted unto him, like Subarchalé* unto the Sun. Like
unto the great Sachi standing by Sakra, Arundbuti by Vas-
hishta, Rohini by the Moon, Lopamudr’ by Agustya, Sukanya
by. Chyabana, Sabitree by Satyabana, Sreematee by Kapila,
Madayantee by Sandasa,Keshinee by Sagara and Damayanti
the daughter of the king Veema by her husband Nala, I shall
ever remain devoted to my husband Rama, the foremost of
the descendants of Ikshawku.” Hearing the words of Sit&, ail


* The wife of the sun.—T,
121


gta “RAMAYANA HO


those Rakshasees despatched by Ravana, almost beside them
selves with ire, again covered her with reproaches rough ‘and
rude. And Hanuman remained all along speechless and
hidden on the Shingshapa‘tree. And that monkey heard all
those demons remonstrate with Sita in this way. And those,
influenced with ire, approached the” trembling Sit& and
encircling her, licked again and again their long and burning
lips. And taking up instantly spears, they exceedingly wroth,
menaced her, saying—‘She is not worthy of having Ravana, the
lord of the Rakshasas, ag her lord.” Being thus remonstrated
with by those terrible Rakshasees, that excellent damsel,
shedding tears, neared the Singshapa tree. And the large-
eyed Sit&, encircled by the Rakshasces, remained there sunk
in grief. And all those hideous demons, showered reproaches,
from all sides, on her, greatly reduced, of a poorly counten-
ance, and wearing a soiled cloth. Thereupon a grim-visaged
demon, angry, having hideous teeth and a huge belly extending
downwards, by name Vinat&, spake, saying :—"O Sita, thou.
hast shown enough of attachment towards thy husband.
But, O gentle dame, excess of any thinz tends to evil, We
are satisfied. And may good betide thee! Thou hast acted
worthily like a woman. Do thou hear, O Maithilee, what
I say for thy welfare. D. thou accept, Ravana, the lord of
the Rakshasa host, as thy husband. He withstands power-
fully his enemies like unto Vasava, the lord of the celestials,
charitable, kind unto all, and swecet-speeched. And for-
sakiny Rama, a poor wight, do thou take Ravana (as thy
husband). Having thy person sprinkled with celestial paste
and adorned with excellent ornaments, do thou from to-day
O Vaidehi, O thou of comely presence, become the queen of
all the worlds, like unto Sachee of the lord of the celestials
and sudha* of the fire. What shalt thou do with Rama,


* An exclamation used in making an oblation to the Gods. A personificas
tion of the preceding as the wife of fire and Goddess presiding over burnt
offerings.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 63


@. Vaidehti, poor and of limited life? This is what [ say.
and if dost thou not follow it we shall all instantly banquet
gn thee.” And thereupon another Rakshasee named Vikata,
having her breast hanging long, exercised wilh ire, and
clinching her fist, addressed, roaring, Siti—‘‘O foolish daugh-
ter of the king of Mithila, we have put up with all thy
foolish words only out of compassion, and because thou art
a feeble being. {t will not lead to thy well-being if thow
dost not hear our words. Thou hast been brought here, the
other side of the ocean, difficult of being approached by
others. Thou hast come within the terrible abode of Ravana
O Maithilee, and hast been shut up in his room guarded by
us all. And even, Purandara’s* self cannot save you. Do
thou therefore hear, O Maithilee, my well-meaning words.
Why dost thou shed tears? Renounce thy useless grief.
Do thou become happy and delighted, renouncing thy conti-
nued melancholy. Do thou sport, O Sita, at thy pleasure,
with the lord of the Rakshasas. W's know, for certain, O
timid damsel, that the youth of the fémales, is very transient.
And so long as thy youth doth not fade, do thou pass thy days
happily, O thou having inebrite eyes, with the lord of
Raikshasas, in picturesque gardens, and mountain forests.
“Do thou take, O fair damsel, Ravana, the lord of the R&ksh-
sas, for thy husband, and thousands of females shall be placed
at thy service. If dost thou not follow, what I say, O
Maithilee, I shall taking out thy heart, banquet on it.’?
Thereupon another grim-visaged| Rakshasee, named,
Chandodora, shaking her terrible spear, said—‘Beholding
this Sit’ having the eyes of a young antelope and her breast
trembling with fear, my earnest desire, as I am enctente,
hath been to banquet on her large eyes, lever, spleen, hex
plump hands, heart, other limbs and head.” Thereupon
another Rakshasee named Praghas& said—"I shall grind
the throat of this cruel woman. What are you doing, sitting


* Another name of Indra—the lord of the celestials,—T_: .


964 RAMAYANA,


here? Ye shall then relate unto the king that the woman
is dead. And undoubtedly he shall say ‘Do ye eat her up.”
And thereupon another Rakshasee named Ajamukhee said
“I do not like quarrels. Let us all divide her into equal
portions. Bring soon our favourite drink and various
gaclands.” Then followed another Rakshasee by name
Surpanakha,—"I do fully concur with what Ajamukhi hath
said. Bring soon wine, the remover of all griefs. Banquetting
on human flesh I shall dance before the queen Nikumbbil&.”
Being thus threatened by those grim-visaged Rakshasees
Sita, resembling the daughter of a celestial, renouncing pati-
ence, began tu weep.


SECTION xxv.


——


Ano those hideous Rakshasees thus threatning her with
reproaches rude and rough, the daughter of the king Janaka
began to weep. And being thus addressed by those R&aksha-
sees, Vaidehi, of subdued soul, being greatly terrified, said,
having her voice choked with vapour,—‘A woman can never
be the wife of a Rakshasa, Eat me up if you will, I shalt
never follow your words.” And being surrounded by the
Rakshasees and threatened by Ravana, Sit4, resembling the
daughter of a celestial, stricken with grief, could not console
herself. And trembling, she shrank from their presence like
unto a strayed fawn surrounded by wolves. And resorting
to a flowery branch of an Asoka tree, she sunk in grief,
thought upon her lord. With tears she bathed her beautiful
breast and oppressed with woe, she could not reach the other
bank of the ocean of grief. Like a plantain tree shaken by the
breeze, she shook and fell down trembling (on the earth).
And being afraid of the Rakshasees, her cheeks forsook their
vative hue. And herself trembling, her pretty long lock of


SUNDA RARANDAM. 985


halr also shook and appeared like a serpent moving this way
and that. Overwhelmed with grief and beside herself with
ire, the daughter of the king of Mithil&, wept and exclaimed
sorrowfully,—'O mother KausalyA! OQ queen Sumitra ! true
is the saying of the wise that death doth never approach un-
timely the male or the female. Or else I would not have lived
for a moment, separated from RA&ma and oppressed by the
R&kshasees as I am. Limited is my virtue, and therefore I
am to die the death of a poor deserted thing like unto a
bark driven by the blast in the midst of the ocean. Debarred
from my husband's sight and tortured by the hideous demons,
Ishall sink, oppressed with woes, like unto the banks of a
river, washed by the water. Oh blest are they who have
been resting their eyes upon my grateful and sweet-speeched
lord of leonine gaits, having eyes resembling lotus petals!
And separated from Rama of subdued sou!, it is as difficult
for me to breathe as for him who hath drank up virulent
poison. What mighty iniquity had I perpetrated in my
previous existence that I have met with this terrible disaster!
1 wish to renounce my life under this toad of grief—but alas!
Tam surrounded by the Rakshasees and cannot meet Rama,
Oh!cursed is this subject human life, that they cannot
tenounce it even at their pleasure” !


SECTION XXVI.


Savine this, the daughter of the king Janaka, bathed her
countenance with tears and hanging down her head began
to lament, And she began to roll on the earth like unto
a colt as if she was mad, possessed by a devil and had lost
her sense. “{, the spouse of Rama, who was drawn away
at a distance by the R&kshasa (Maricha) assuming shapes
at will, was seized and borne away by Ravana. ‘A captive


966 RAMAYANA.


of the Rakshasas, subject to their terrible threats and taunts,
sunk in grief and anxiety,—I desire not to keep my life. Of
what avail are wealth, ornament and life unto me, who am
living in the midst of the Rakshasas and separated from
Rama, of the mighty car? Forsooth my tife is made of
stone, imperishable and immortal since it is not riven asunder
even by this mighty grief. Woe to me! who am unchaste
and vile and my life is vicious, since breathe I still in the
absence of my lord. What of fixing my fancy on that night-
tanger, my meaner foot even shall not touch him? That
(demon) «who is courting me in this terrible way, doth
not know himself, his own race and that I loathe him so
much, What more shall I speak unto you, | shall never
consent to Ravana’s prayer, I might be rent from limb to limb
or burnt in fire. Razhava is grateful, true, wise and kind.
I fear it is through my ill-luck that he doth not feel pity for
me. Will he not take me back who alone slew the thou.
sands of the R&shasas in Janasthina? I have been captured
by R&vana, a R&kshasa of feeble prowess, Forsooth my
lord is capable of slaying this Ravana in conflict. Wilk
not that Rama regain me, by whom was killed in the
forest of Dandaka, Viradha, the foremost of the Rakshasa
crew? Although situated in the midst of the ocean, Lanks’
is unapproachable by others, but Raghava’s arrows shall also
reach here. (I am at a loss to ascertain) why Raima of
firm prowess, doth not regain me, his beloved spouse who
Nave been borne away by the] Rakshasa. Methinks Rama
doth not know that I am here, or else, powerful as he is, he
would not have put up with this insult. That lord of vultures,
who could have informed Raghava, of my being borne away
by the R&akshasa, was killed by Ravana in the battle. O
great was the work done by him, who, old as he was, for my
sake, addressed himself to bring about Ravana’s destruction.
lf R&ghava could know that I was here, he, exceedingly
weoth, would have cleared the earth with his arrows, of the,


SUNDARAKANDAM. 969


R&kshasas. He would have then burnt down the city of Lanka,
diied up the deep and blotted out the name and fame of
Ravana, And from each ruined home would have risen the
Rakshasa widows’ groans and cries like unto those of mine.
And instituting enquiries, along with Lakshmana, he shall
soon reduce Lank& to this plight. And observed by them
the enemy shall not live for a moment. And in no time,
shall Lanka, assume the appearance of a cremativun ground,
having all her high ways enveloped with smoke issuing out of
the funeral pyres, and filled with vultures. And soon shall this
desire of mine befulfilled. All these words of mine do sound
improbable now but they all indicate your misfortune. Besides
from these bad omens, that are to be seen hero, it appeareth,
that Lank& shall soon be shorn of her grace, The Jord of the
Rakshasas, the vicious Ravana being killed, forsooth shail
Lanka, divested of wealth, appear ikea widow. This Lanké,
which is now full of pious ceremonies, shall, on the death of
the Rakshasas and their master, appear like a husbandless
woman. For certain, shall I soon hear the cries and groans
in every house, of the daughters of the Rakshasas worn with
grief. Ifthat heroic Rama, having dark-blue eyes, comes to
know that I am in the abode of the Rakshasas, the city of
Lank& shall be burnt down with his arrows and shall be
stricken with darkness and shurn of grace and all the fore-
most of the Rakshasas shall be destroyed. The time which
was appointed by the vile and cruel Ravana, hath arrived.
And that vicious wretch hath resolved to destroy me now,
There is no crime which cannot be perpetrated by those
vicious demons. Mighty is the disaster that shall arise on
account of this crime—the Rakshasas who live on flesh do
not know what virtue is. Forsooth shall the Rakshasa serve
me for his morning meal. What shall Ido without my lord
of comely presence ? Debarred from my husband’s presence,
stricken with grief and not beholding Rama, having dark-blue
eyes, I shall soon meet with death. Rima, the elder brother


968 RAMAYANA,


of Bharata, doth not know that I am still alive or else he
and Lakshmana would have ransacked the whole world for
me, Or renouncing his body ou this earth fur my grief, the
heroic elder brother of Lakshmana, hath repaired to the
celestial regiun, Blessed are the celestials, Gandhacbas,
Siddhas and mighty ascetics who are beholding my heroic
lotus-eyed Rama. Or that highly intellgent royal ascetiz
desirous of securing piety and freed from the troubles of
life, hath no need ot a wife like me. Or people have fancy.
for what they see and which disappeareth as soon as the
object is out of sight. ‘The ungrateful are capable of renoun-
cing theic love, but not Rama. Or there might be some
folly in me. Or on the wane of my good luck have
been separated from the excotlent Rama. Death is more
preferavle uuto me than life since I have been separated
from the high-souled heroic Rama, of unblemished character
and the slayer of toes. Or those two brothers, the foremost
of men, laying aside their weapons, and living on fruits and
roots, have been wandering in the forest. Or those two
heroic brothers Rama and Liakshmana, have been, by trea-
chery, put to death, by the vicious-suuled Ravana, the lord
of Rakshasas. At this time of distress, 1 do with all my heart
long tor death,—(but alas 1) even death is not approaching
ime in this my misery, Oh blessed are those high-souled,
gteat ascetics abiding by truth and having their senses in
control, who have no objects of love or displeasure. They
are not distressed with misery for their objects of love or
grief for them whom they do not love. They are freed from
them and I do bow unto those high-souled ones. Being
forsaken by the beloved Rama, knowing his owuself, and
brought under the control of Ravana, I shall renounce
my life.”


SUNDARAKANDA!. 969


SECTION XXVIl.


Bane thas addressed angrily by Sita, some of those
Rakshasees, beside themselves with ire,proceeded to relate this
unto the vicious-souled Ravana. And approaching Sita
those grim-visaged demons again addressed her with words
rude and rough. “O vile Sita, O thou bent on committing sin,
we Rikshasees shail to-day devour thy flesh tothe best of our
satisfaction.” Beholding those vile demons threaten Sit4, a
Rikshasa matron, wise and old, named, Trijat& cried—"O
vile demons, do ye eat your own petsons® but do not devour
Sit&, the daughter of Janaka and the esteemed daughter.
in-law of the king Dagaratha. 1 dreamt a terrible dream
last night which made my down stand on their end. And
in that dream [ foresaw the overthrow of the Rakshasa race
and the conquest of her husband.'’ And being thus address-
ed by Trijatd, those demons, exercised with wrath aj
terrified, accosted her with the following words,—"Do tlya
relate (unto us) what sort of dream didst thou dream fast
night.” And hearing those words proceeding from the
mouths of the Rakshasees, Trijatd began to describe the
dream she had at the latler end of the night,—“I saw Raina,
wearing garlands and clothed in white, ride in a celestial
charriot, along with Lakshmana, made of ivory, traversing
the etheria} regions and drawn by a hundred steeds. I saw
in my dream to-night, that Sita, clad in the purest white,
appearing on a snow-white hill beaten by the waves of the
ocean, had at last met Rama, like unto light joined to the
Sun. And I again saw Rama and Lakshmana appear in
effulgence, seated on a huge elephant, having four tusks ©
and resembling a bull, Thereupon those two (brothers),


* The proper expression, I think, should be—Eat me.” The commenta-
tor RimAnuja explains démanam as your own vodies.—T.


£22


‘970 RAMAFANA,


resplendant like unto the Sun by their own effalgence, and
wearing white garlands and clothes, appeared near Janaka's
daughter. And the lotus-eyed Janaki, on the top of the hill
situate on the weikin, first fell on the lap of her husband
and then stationed herself on the neck of the elephant
guided by her husband. Then I saw Sit& rubbing the Sun and -
the Moon with her two hands. And then that best of the
elephants, with those two princes and the large-eyed Sitf on
him, stood high ahove Lank& I again saw Rama, clad in
white, and adorned with garlands, ride along with Lakshmana
‘in a ccharriot drawn by eight white bullocks. {I again saw
that highly energetic, best of men—Rama, having truth for
his prowess, along with his brother Lakshmana and Sit& flee
to Northern realms, ascending a celestial flowery charriot
zesembling (in brightness) the Sun. And I saw Révana too,
shaved and shorn, besmeared with oil, wearing a crimson
cloth, drinking honey, wearing a garland of Karavira flowers,
fall down on earth from the flowery charriot. And dragged
Wa woman, shaved, wearing a red cloth and garlands
#4 sprinkled with crimson paste, Ravana was again seen
by me riding in a charriot drawn by asses. And quaffing oil,
laughing and dancing, that one of agitated senses, forgetting
himself sped on the charriot to the South.* And I again
saw R&vana, the lord of the Rakshasas, stricken with fear,
fall, headless, down on the earth, And then rising all ona
sudden, and uttering obscene and inconsistent words like unto
a maniac, Ravana, overwhelmed with fear, and amazement,
and intoxicated, fell into a mass of dirt, stinking and
resembling the very hell. And again proceeding to the
South he entered into a lake devoid of mud and water. And
adark woman, clad in a crimson cloth, and bedaubed with
mud, dragged the Ten-necked demon, entwining herself


* In the south is the region of Yama,the God of Death and hence his going
to the south is not an auspicious siga,—T,


SUNUARAKINDAM. 978


around his geck. Then followed the mighty Kumvakarna®
and all the sons of Ravana, shaved and shorn and besmearet
with oil. And they all proceeded southward—the Ten-necked’
demon on a boar, Indrajitt on a porpoise, and Kumvakarna-
on a camel. F saw only Biveesana, with a white umbrella
and accompanied by four courtiers, range in the welkin.
And there was audible in the large assembly sound of music:
and stringed instruments. And all the Rakshasas wearing
crimson clothes and garlands, were quaffing oil. F
saw the royal and picturesque city Lanka with her steeds,
cars and elephants, drowned in the ocean, having her gate-
ways and ornamented arches broken. And in Lanka, covered
with dust, Rakshasa women, laughing, and making terrible
sound, were engaged in quaffing oil. I saw all the leading.
R&akshasas—Kumvakarna and others, dark-hued and wearing
crimson clothes, emerged in an abyss of cow dung. Do ye
therefore fly at some distance, and will find that R&aghava
shall regain Sita. And exercised with ire he shall destroy
you all along with the Rakshasas. Ri,hava shall never
brook, his esteemed and beloved spouse, living in the {orest,.
being taunted and threatened by you. No more with rough
words therefore ;do you console the lady and humbly pray
her to forgive you. This I think proper. Surely shall she,
divested of misfortune, be, reconciled to her beloved
and excellent husband, regarding whom, in her misery, §
have dreamt such a dream. Ye Rakshasees! You have
threatened her, do ye implore her forgivencss—no more:
with harsh words. Forsooth, from R&ghava shall proceed:
the mighty disaster of the R&kshasas. If Maithilee,. the
daughter of the king Janaka, be pleased with you (for
your imploring her forgiveness) you might be saved from
the mighty disaster. 1 do not perceive any inauspicious


* R&vana’s brother.—T.
+ Ravana’s son—the name signifies the conqueror uf the lord of the celes-
tials,--T,


972 ° RAMBPANS. '


mark on the person of this large-eyed dame, It appears
from the pafeness of her countenance that she hath been
overcome by misfortune. And I saw (in my dream) this
worshipful dan.sel, unworthy of any misfortune, stationed
in the welkin. Verily I do perceive, before me, the satisfaction
of Vaidehi’s end, the destruction of the lord of the Rakshasas
and the conquest of Raghava. Behold! there, her left eye,
spacious, as a lotus-petal, is dancing to hear this pleasant
dream announcing the satisfaction of her own end, And her
heft arm is also dancing with joy, all on a sudden. And her
excellent beautiful left thigh, resembling the trunk of an
elephant, is also dancing as if indicating, that she shall at
no distant date, be reconciled to Raghava. And the birds,
again and again, entering their nests, and highly delighted
are pouring forth their notes announcing the advent of a
happy occasion.” Thereupon that modest dame, greatly
delighted in the prospective conquest of her husband, said—
“If this be true I shall save you all.”


SECTION XXVi11« .


Heazwa those unpleasant words of Ravana, the lord
of Rakshasas, Sit&, racked with sorrow on account of her
husband, became terrified, like unto a she-elephant, worsted
hy a lion on the skirt of a forest. Threatened by Ravana
and encircled by the Rakshasees, that timid damsel bewailed
like a girl cast off in a lonely forest. “Truly the sages say.
that death ‘in this world doth not come untimely. Or else


* The sections 28 and 29 are not found in all the texts, They are found in
Bengal edition. Gorressio translates it and remarks—"I think the chapter
XXVIM~The auspicious signs—is an addition, a later interpolation by the
Rhapsodists. It has no bond of connection either with what precedes or follows
it and may be struck out without injury.” We have however thought it proper
to give a full version.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 973


would [ have, vicious as 1 am, lived for a moment, being
thus sorely threatened. Forsooth, my mind, divested of
happiness and full of misery, is firm or else why is it not
broken in sunder like unto the summit of a hill clapped
by a thunderbolt: Nor am I to blame for this—I am worthy
of being killed by this demon of uncomely presence. As a
Brahmana cannot impart instructions in Vedas unto the people
of other castes so I shall not confer my mind on Ravana.
If that lord of the people doth not come within the appoint-
ed time, forsooth shall that vile lord, of the Rakshasas, mince
my limbs with his arrows like unto a surgeon cutting off
the limbs of an embryo.* Two months shall pass away in
no time and I shall have to suffer the pain of death, over-
whelmed with sorrow as I am, like unto a thief, confined in
stocks, at the command of the sovereign to receive death the
next morning. O Rama! O Lakshmana ! O Sumitra! O Rama’s
mother! O my mothers! I am worsted in this ocean of
grief, like unto a bark, driven hither ard thither by the
blast, in the midst of an ocean. Verily for me, those, two
‘ powerful, lion-like sons of the king. have been killed by
(this demon) effulgent like the lightning and assuming the
semblance of a deer. Unfortunate as I am, forsooth I was
tempted then by death wearing the shape of a deer and
thus foclishly lost Rama and Lakshmana, the sons of the
worshipful sire. O Rama, O thou of truthful vows, O thou
of long arms, O thou having the countenance of a full moon !
O my life! engaged as thou art in the welfare of the people,
_ Gost thou not perceive that I am about to be killed by the
’ Rakshasas. Alas! this my devotedness unto my husband, my
forgiveness, my lying down on the bare earth, my observance
of religious vows, my wife-like virtues, are lost like unto
service done for an ungrateful wight. In vain are my
pious rites, and in vain is my devotedness unto my


* This passage clearly indicates that there were proficient and skilled sur-
geons at the time when Ram4yana was written,—T.


974 RAMAYANA. ‘


husband—since I do not behold thee, am pale and feeble in
thy absence and have given up all hopes of seeing thee. And
duly satisfying thy sire’s command, and returning success-
fully from the forest, thou shalt fearlessly sport with many
a damsel having large eyes. (But for me) O Rama, | was
for my own destruction, devoted, soul and heart, unto thee.
Oh! fruitlesss is my asceticism and wifely virtue! Oh fie
onme! I shall renounce this my unfortunate life. I desire
to do away speedily with my being by means of poison.
orasharp weapon. But there is no one in this city of the
Rakshasas, who bringeth me this poison or weapon.” Bewail-
ing thus in various accents, and remembering Rama with
all her heart, Sita, having her countenance dried up, and
trembling, got at the biggest tree enveloped with flowers.
And thinking thus, Sita, stricken with grief, took up in her
hand, her braid of hair and thought—I shall soon hang
myself, with this braid and reach the abode of Death. And
that one of tender person reached the tree, and holding a
branch, began to think of Rama, Lakshmana, and the glory
of her race. And on her person were perceived many
auspicious marks, well-known in the world, removing grief,
fostering patience, and announcing the advent of future
welfare,


SECTION xxix.


—00—


Lie unto servants waiting upon a wealthy persor

_ various auspicious omens waited upon Sit4 of a blam-less and
comely person, racked with grief and divested of ‘sy. And
the large loft eye of that dame having graceful hvrs, having
dark pupils, white ends and thick eye-lashes, legan to dance
like a lotus shaken by a fish. And her feautiful, round,
plump left hand, which, ere this, sprinkled with costly eguru


SUNDA RARANDAMN. 975


and sandal, used to serve for a pillow unto Rama, began to
dance now again and again after a long time. And her well
built plump left thigh, resembling the trunk of an elephant,
dancing, announced that she would soon behold Rama.
And the gold-hued cloth, now covered with dust, of that
damsel of a comely person, having teeth like pomegranate
seeds, slipped a little off its place. And being enlivened by
those and various other auspicious omens, she attained joy
like unto a seed, spoiled by the wind and the sun, growing
afresh in the rainy season. And her countenance, having
lips red as Biméba fruits, beautiful eyes, eye-brows extending
to ears, curling eye-lashes and white teeth, again appeared
graceful like unto the Moon released from the full grasp of
Réhu™ Her grief and exhaustion were removed—sorrow was
pacified and her heart was filled with joy. And she with her
countenance appeared beautiful like a lunar night beautified
by the rays of the Moon.


SECTION xxx,
—:00


Ano the powerful Hanumana, heard from the beginning
to the end (the bewailings) of Sita, the story of Trijata’s
dream and the threats of the Rakshasees. And beholding the
worshipful damsel, living in the forest of Asoka, like unto a
celestial damsel in the garden of Nandana, the monkey-
entered in a maze of anxious thoughts. “At length my
watchful eyes have seen her, whom have been seeking in
vain, the thousands and millions of the monkeys in all direc-
tions and quarters. Truly have I seen her to-day, engaged


* Like the Moon when full eclipse is just over—In mythology R&hu is the
son of Sinika, a daitya, with the tail of a dragon whose head was severed from-
his body by Vishnu, but being immortal this head and tail retained their sepa-
rate existence and being transferred to the stellar sphere, became the authors
of eclipses—-T.


978 kAadvaNns,


as I have been as a spy to estimate the strength of the ememy
and am ranging secretly evegywhere. I have seen minutely the
city of the Rakshasas, and the strength of Ravana, the lord
of Rakshasasas. It now remains to console the spouse of
Rama of incomparable power, and kind unto all, who panteth
for her lord, { shall console this damsel, having the.
countenance of the full moon, who had never seen grief
before, and who shall not soon reach its end. And if I go
away without soothing this chaste lady, who is almost sense-
less with grief, I shall be blamed of neglect of duty. And if
I go away, the royal daughter, the,famed Janaki, finding no
means of safety, sh il, for certain, renounce her life. She is
worthy of being consoled like unto the great armed (R&ma)
having the countenance of the full-moon and anxious to
behold Sita. It is not proper to speak befure the Rakshasas—
What shall I do then? I am in very great difficulty. If
I do not console her at this latter end of the night, surely
shall she renounce her life. How shall I answer’ Rama,
without consoling Sil of comely stature, when he will
ask me “What message from my Sita?” And if I speedily
tepair hence without any information regarding Sit&, surely
shall Kakuthstha scorch me lifeless with the fire of his angry
eyes. And if I urge my lord the king (Biveeshana) to bring
his hosts here for Rama, in vain shall be bis toil*, And ~
seizing the occasion when she shall be free from her demo- .
naic guards, I shall console her in her dire distress. And
a puny monkey as I am, I shall speak in Sanskritt which men
delight to use. And if I speak Sanskrit like a Brahmana, Sita
shall be terrified considering me Ravana. Must I therefore
ase (he language of a common manf or else I shal! not be able


* For before that Sita shall renounce her life—T.

+ The language refined by the strict rules of grammar—T,

} This passage clearly indicates that Sanskrit if not spoken by men, and
women of the upper classes of the time when Ramdyana was written, was at
least understood by them, and was commonly spoken by men of priestly class
and other educated persons."—-T. :


SUNDARAKANDAM. 977


‘to console the dame of a blameless person. And beholding
my monkey shape and hearing my human language she might
be afraid again, terrified as she had heen before by the band of
the Rakshasas. And considering me Ravana wearing shapes
at will, that large-eyed and high-minded dame, shail cry pite-
ously forhelp. And Sit& making a sudden noise, those terrible
Rikshasees resembling Death himself and armed with various
weapons, shall at once arrivethere. And thereupon casting
their looks all around and finding me out, those highly power-
ful and grim-visaged demons shall try to kill or catch me.
And beholding me leap from branch to branch and trunk to
trunk of big trees they shall be greatly alarmed. And espying
my appearance while ranging in the forest, those Rakshasees
greatly terrified, shall fill the wood with their wild shouts.
And then they shall call(to their assistance) all those Raksha-
sees engaged in guarding the abode of the lord of the
Rakshasas. And they, greatly agitated, shall with vehemence
atrive here, armed with dirts, arrows, scimitars and various
other weapons, And being surrounded by them on all sides,
if I do kill that fost of demons, tired, I shall not be able to
bound over the main. And if that host of skilled demons,
succeed in making me a captive,f too shall be in their hands
and Sit& shall remain ignorant of my object. Or the Raksha-
gas, pernicious as they are, shall kill the daughter of Janaka,
and there shall the great work of Rama and Sugriva, be
spoiled. And Janaki liveth in this secret place, girt by the
ocean, guarded on all sides by the Rakshasas,difficult of being
got at and having all avenues to it shut up. If I am killed or
captured by Rakshasas in battle, | do not find any who can
help Rama in his enterprise. Myself killed, I do not find
any monkey who can leap a hundred leagues across the sea.
i am capable of destroying thousands of Rakshasas, but I
shall not thea be able to get at the other shore of the great
ecean. Victory or defeat is uncertain in a battle—I do not
(therefore) like to engage in such an uncertain {act}, What


123


978 kAMAPANS,


wise man merges certainty in uncertainty ? It is a great sin
in me (I own) to talk with Siti—But she will die if Ido not
talk with her. Works, almost accomplished, when entrusted
to an inconsiderate emissary, are generally spoiled, out of
season and out. of place, like unto darkness driven by the
appearance of the sun. All those works, which are generally
taken in hand after duly deliberating over their propriety and
impropriety, are generally spoiled by those emissaries who are
proud of their learning. What shall I do, by which my work
is not injured, am not blamed of foolishness and my cross-
ing over the main doth not become fruitless? What shall I do
so that SitA might listen to me without being terrified?” Think-
ing over this, the intelligent Hanum&n arrived at a conclusion.
“I shall not disturb her, speaking (all on a sudden) about
Rama of unwearied actions, dear unto her and to whom.
she is firmly attached. Uttering the name of Rama, the
foremost of the Ikshawkus, and of subdued soul and lauding
his piety and fame in sweet accents, I shall so manage that
Sita might hear and believe them.” Beholding the spouse
of that high-souled lord of the earth and engaging in this
train of thoughts, Hanum4n, stationed on a branch of the tree,
spoke the following sweet words.


SECTION XXX.


“Meorranne thus the highly intelligent monkey spoke
in accents, sweet and in such a tone as they might be,
heard by Vaidehi. “There reigned a noble and pious king
named Dagaratha, highly glorious amongst the Ikshawkus,
the lord of the warrior-cars, steeds and elephants.
Devoid of envy, high-minded, kind, having truth for. his
prowess, the foremost of the ikshawku race, wealthy and
the enhancer of wealth; gifted with royal marks; highly


SUNDARAKANDAM. : 979


beautiful; the foremost of the kings; famous all over
the world of many oceans; the conferrer of happiness and
himself happy. His eldest and most beloved son was the Moon-
bright Rama, wise and the foremost of those who know the
science of the bended bow. Ue was the protector of his own
character, of his own kinsmen, of the whole world of creation
and of virtue and subduer of foes. And banished by his old
and truthful sire’s commands, that hero, along with his wife
and brother (Lakshmana) repaired to the forest. And while
roaming a-hunting in the forest he slew many a heroic Rak-
shasa wearing shapes at will. And having heard of the destruc-
tion of the Rakshasas of Janasthana and of Kharaand Dushana,
the illusive Ravana, assuming shapes at will, beguiling Rima,
in the forest, stole away his consort—the Janaka’s daughter.
‘And roaming the country around in quest of the blameless
and worshipful Sita, Rama found a firm friend in Sugriva,
And bringing about the destruction of Vali, Rama, the con-
queror of others’ cities, conferred the monkey-kingdom upon
the high-souled Sugriva. And by Sugriva’ s decree, thousands
of monkeys, wearing shapes at will, have been searching that
worshipful dame in various directions. And by Sampati's
counsel and for that large-eyed dame, I have leapt a hundred
leagues across the deep. I have at last got her. And such
were the form, grace and the marks that Raghava mentioned
unto me.” Having said this, the foremost of the monkeys
ceased. And greatly wondered was Sita hearing those
words. Thereupon that timid dame, having good curling
hair, raising up her face covered with hairs, looked up to
the Singshapa tree. And hearing the words of the monkey
and casting her eyes to all directions and quarters, Sith
attained an excess of delight, being engaged in thoughts
concerning Rama. And looking around her aud upwards,
she beheld,like unto the rising sun,the Wind-god’s son, gifted
with inconceivable intellect—the minister of the king of
monkeys.


wy


980 RAMAPANA,


SECTION xxxtt.


Ano beholding that tawny-colored monkey like unto a
mass of lightnings and wearing a white cloth, hidden on the
tree, Sita's mind was greatly agitated. And she saw there
the humble, sweet-specched monkey, appearing graceful like
unto a collection of full-blown Asofa flowers and having eyes
resembling burning gold. And observing that foremost of
the monkeys, sitting humbly, that daughter of the king of
Mithila, again greatly amazed, thought.—' ‘This monkey is the
most terrible of his race and therefore hard to be got at
and looked at.” Thinking this she again sank in fear. And
stricken with grief she again bewailed in piteous accents
exclaiming,—-"O Rima! O Lakshmana!’ And she wept:
silently and lowly. And thon beholding that best of monkeys
approach her humbly, the fair daughter of the Mithila’s
king, thought,—“Is this a dream mine eyes have seon f”
And she again looked towards that Wind-god’s son, the
foremost of the monkeys, the best of those gifted with
intelligence, having a huge disfigured countenance, highly
accomplished and wearing a dress mentioned before. And
beholding him Sita was almost out of breath with fear. And
regaining soon her sense the large-eyed damsel again thought,
—"I have seen a very inauspicious dream to-day—to see a
monkey in a dream is reckoned inauspicious by the sages.
May good betide Rama, Lakshmana and my Sire the king of
Janaka. It is no dream, I have not slept, worn with grief
and trouble as Jam. Apart from my lord having the counte-
nance of the full-moon, I have no happiness, Thinking of
Rama always and uttering his name, each sight I see and each
sound I hear brings him to my eye or ear. And therefore
his form appearing in my mind is distressing me to-day, who
am entirely sunk in his thoughts. And thinking of him


SUNDARARAINDAM. 98


always I see him before me and hear his words.’ Methinks
this is but a phantom of the mind. And thinking this I stilt
behold the same. But an imaginary object can never have
a form. And 1 still find a distinct form addressing me.
Be glory to Vachaspati, Indra, the self existent Brahma, the
lord of fire and may they so grant that the creature who hath
spoken before me, be real and not imaginary.”


SECTION xxXxXtit.


"Tyerevpon coming down from the tree, Hanuman, the
highly effulgent son of Wind, having a coral-red countenance
and attired in a humble guise, approached Sitd and joining
reverentially his palms, addressed her with the following
sweet words,—“Who art thou, O thou having eyes like lotus
petals and wearing a soiled silken cloth, who art waiting there
holding a branch of the tree? Why are the tears of sorrow
flowing from thy eyes like unto drops of water falling from
lotus petals? Who art thou, O most fair of face, amongst
the celestials, Asuras, Nagas, Gandharbas, Rakshasas, and
Yakshas and Kinnaras? Do the Rudra's* claim thy birth
O thou fair damsel? Or the swift gods who ride the storm ?
Or the Vasus?t Thou appearest to me as of a celestial race.
Art thou Rohini, the best and most accomplished of the
stars, who, reft from the Moon, hath fallen down from the
abode of the celestials? Who art thou O blessed dame,
O thou having blameless eyes ? Art thou, O lotus-eyed damsel,
the blessed Arundhuti, who hath fled in wrath or jealous
pride from the side of her lord (Vashishtha)? Or O lovely


* The Rudras are manifestations of Siva.—T.

+ A kind of demi-gods of whom six are enumerated vie, Dhava, Druva.
‘Soma or the Moon, Vishnu, Anila or wind, Anala or fire, Prabhusa and Pra-
bhava —T.


982 RAMAYANA, Ps


damsel, who is the son, father, brother or husband gone
from this world for whom thou art weeping? Yet by thy
tears aud sighs, by the earth thou art treading and by calling
on a monarch’s name it appears that thou art not a celestial,*
But from the marks on thy person it appeareth that thou
art either the consort or the daughter of a king. Art
thou that Sit& I do ask thee, who had been stolen and borne
away by Ravana from Janasthinay May good betide thee!
From thy wretched plight, thy unrivalled beauty and thy
ascetic garb, thou art, 1 ween, for certain, the queen of Raima.”
Hearing those words of Hanum4n and greatly delighted at
Rama's name, Vaidehi spoke unto him—‘I am the daughter-
in-law of Dagaratha, knowing his own self, the foremost of
the kings of the world and the slayer of the enemy’s host,and -
the daughter of Janaka the high-souled king of Videha, My
name is Siti and I am the consort of the highly intelligent
Rama. [lived twelve years in Raghava’s abode, enjoying
every earthly comfort and satisfying every desire. And
at the beginning of the thirteenth year the king, advised by
his priest, arranged for the installation of the descendant
of Ikswakus (Rama) on the throne. And while the articles
for the installation were being collected, the queen Kaikey?
addressed her lord saying—'I shall not drink or eat for days
and this shall be the end of my existence if Rama be installed.
If thou dost not wish to falsify the vowt thou made unto
me, O best of kings, let Rama then repair to the forest.”
The monarch was truthful and remembering his vow and
hearing the unpleasant and vile words of Kaikeyi lost him-
self (in grief}. And thereupon the old king abiding by
truth, weeping, begged of his elslest son, the kingdom. The
graceful R&ma liked his sire's command more than the
installation, and resolving within him, promised.to obey his


* The celestials never shed tears nor touch the ground when they walk,—T.
t This refers to the vow which Dasaratha made unto Kaikeyi at. the time
of the war going on between the celestials and the Asuras.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 983


words, R&ma, having truth for his prowess, never, for his
life, takes back what he gives, never speaks an untruth and
always speaks truth. And leaving aside his costly attire, the
highty glorious (R&ma) renounced with all bis heart the king-
dom and gave me over to his mother. ‘But myself wearing the
garb of an ascetic, repaired speedily before him. Separated
from him, I do not like to live even in the celestial region.
And the great son of Sumitr4, the enhancer of friends’ joys, to
follow his elder brother, dressed himself in bark and Awsa.
And thus abiding by our sire’s behest, and taking firm vows
we entered a dreary forest never seen before. While that
one, of unmitigated effulgence was thus living in the forest
of Dandaka, |, his consort, was stolen by the vicious-souled
Rakshasa—Ravana. He hath kindly allowed ne two months’
respite after which I shall be slain.


SECTION XXXIV.


—0:0:——


“Heaaine those words of Sit& stricken with grief, Hanu-
min, the foremost of the monkeys, replied in soothing words,
“O worshipful lady, by Rama’s decree I come as a messenger
uuto thee. He is safe and sound, O Vaidehi, and has asked
of thy welfare. © worshipful dame, Rama, the son of
Dagaratha, the master of the Vedas, and the foremost of
those conversant with Vedas hath enquired of thy welfare,
And the highly effulgent Lakshmana, the beloved
follower of thy husband, worn with grief. bows his reverential
head unto thee.’ Hearing of the welfare of those two lions
among men, the worshipful dame, with all her frame worked
up with rapture, again spake unto Hanum4n, saying—"Verily
the wise saw of the people appears to me to be true that
once in a hundred years true joy appears to a living man”.
Sita, at that time, attained such a wonderful joy, as would
have been acquired by her in the company (of Rama aad


98% RAMA PANA, ’
Ree a
Lakshmana). And they confidingly conversed with ‘each
other. Hearing those words of Sitd,racked with sorrow, Hanu-
mn, the son. of the Wind-god drew a little nearer to ber.
The more Hanum&n approached her the more Sit4 suspected
him as R&ivana, “Alas! Alas! why have I spoken to
him? It is the R&vana, who hath appeared again in a new
disguise.” And leaving off the Asoka branch, that one having
a blameless person, overwhelmed with grief, sat down, on
the earth, In the meantime the mighty-armed monkey
bowed unto Janaka’s daughter, but she, worked up with fear,
did not cast again her looks towards him. And beholding
him bow unto her, Sitf, having a moon-like countenance,
sighing, spake unto that monkey in swect accents—''If thou
art that Ravana’s self, who, changing thy shape by magic art,
want to distress me again—this thy vile deed doth not be-
hove thee. Thou art surely that R&vana, whom I saw at
Janasthfna, in a mendicant’s guise, renouncing his own
shape, O uight-ranger, O thou wearing shapes at will!
it doth not behove thee to distress me who am poorly and
famished with fasts. But no, thou canst not be (the fiend)
whom I suspect, since ] have such joy from seeing thee. And
may good betide thee if thou art Rima’s messenger. I do
ask thee, O foremost of monkeys, something about Rama that
is pleasant unto me. O monkey, do thou relate the glories
of my dear Rama, Thou art (thus) shaking my mind O gentle
one, like unto water breaking down the banks of a river.
Alas | this dream has afforded me immense pleasure since,
I, who have been separated from my lord for so long a time,
have beheld this monkey sent by Raghava. I do not sink even
if 1 can behold in dream the heroic Raghava along with Laksh:
mana—but dream even is jealous of my well-being. Nor
do I regard this as dream. To behold a monkey in a dream
doth not lead to prosperity—whereas I have attained it® Or-


* Here prosperity means joy—Sita attained an immease tressare a fon on
beholding Rama's messenger—Hanumin—T, ods,


SUNDARAKANDAM y8s


is it mental derangement ? Or have I been possessed by
adevil? Orhave lrun mad? Or is it the sultry vapour
noating over sands and appearing at a distance like water ?
No, it is not madness—for derangement of mind is the sign
of madness—t have not lost sense and I do distinctly perceive
me and the monkey.” Thinking thus in many a way and
ascertaining the strength (of the monkey and the Rakshasa)
Sita took him for the lord of the Rakshasas,. wearing shapes
at will, And having arrived at this decision, Janaka’s daugh-
ter—Sit&, ceased from talking with that monkey. And
apprised of Sita’s thought, Hanuman, the Wind-god's
son, (replied) in words sweet unto her and enhancing
her delight—"Bright as the sun that lights the sky
and dear as the moon to every eye, he pleases all his subjects
with bounties like unto those of Vaisrabana.* He is gifted
with prowess like unto the greatly famed Vishnu, truth‘ul and
sweet-speeched like unto Vachaspati.t Graceful, grateful to
the eye and beautiful like unto Kandarva’s} self, he displays
his wrath in a proper quarter—the fucemost of men and of
a mighty car. The whole world of creation (liveth safe)- in
the shadow of the arms of that high-souled one. Thou shalt
svon see the consequences he shall reap by whom, assuming,
the shape of a dear, Raghava was taken away from the her-
mitage and thou wert stolen away from that lonely place.
And soon shall that powerful (hero) destroy Ravana in the
battle, with. fiery arrows, discharged angrily. I have been
sent by him as a messenger to thee. Worn with grief in thy
separation he hath enquired of thy welfare, as well the highly
effulgent Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, bowing
revereniially unto thee. The king of monkey hosts, by name
Sugriva—R4ma’s friend, hath also enquired of thy welfare,


* Another name of Kuvera, the god of gold.—T.

t The god of speech_—T.

t Cupid or the god of love in Hindu mythology described as the most
beautiful of the celestials—T. .


124


986 RAMAYANA. 7


O worshipful dame. Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana, have
thee always in their minds. Blessed are we, O Vaidehi, that
thou dost still live, subject as thou art to the R&kshasees.
Thou shalt soon behold Rama, and Lakshmana of a mighty
car,and Sugriva of unmitigated prowess in the midst of
the million of monkey hosts. I am Sugriva’s minister, by
name Hanum&n. Ihave entered this city of Lanka after
crossing over the great main. And by means of my prowess
and placing my feet on the head of the vicious-souled Ravana,
Ihave ‘come here to see thee. I am not he (Ravana) for
whom thou art taking me, O worshipful dame. Do thou
renounce thy suspicion and rely on my words.”


SECTION xxxv.


—:00-—.


Henrinc the tale of Rama from that best of monkeys,
Vaidehi, spoke in sweet accents, soft and low,—"“Where didst
thou meet Rama, how didst thou come to know Lakshmana ?
How did the monkeys and men meet on terms of
‘brotherhood ? Do thou again relate unto me, O monkey, the
regal signs that deck the persons of Rama and Lakshmana—
and I shall then relinquish all grief. Do thou relate unto
‘me the form and grace of Rama, his thighs and arms and
as well as those of Lakshmana.” Being thus addressed by
Vaidehi, Hanum4n, the Wind-god’s son, began to give an
exact description of Rama. ‘If dost thou, by my good luck,
O Vaidehi, O thou having eyes like lotus-petals, knowing me
(as his messenger) ask me to describe thy lord’s person as well
as that of Lakshmana, I shall relate them unto thee. Do thou
hear, O large-eyed dame, what regal signs I have marked on
the persons of Rama and Lakshmana. O daughter of
Janaka, R&ma has eyes like lotus-petals and a countenance
resembling the full-moon and is gifted with great beauty and


SUNDARARANDAM. . 987


goodness. In effulgence he is like the Sun, in patience
like the earth, in intellect like Vrihaspati* and in fame like
Vasava.t He is the protector of the world of creation and
his own kinsmen. He follows right in all his ways and
never swerves from his royal duties and is the slayer of foes.
O dame, he upholds the dignity of the people of four-castes—
he confers honors on the people and preserves them. He is
worshipped by all like the Sun, observes ascetic vows, knoweth
well the time when the saints should be honored and is
conversant with the nature and procedure of actions. He is
well acquainted with royal duties and abideth by the com-
mandments of the Brabmanas—is wise, gifted with a good
character, humble and the slayer of foes. He is the master
of Fayur Vedas and is adored by those who are well-versed
in Vedas—is proficient in the science of bended bow, Vedas
and Vedéngas.t He is broad-shouldered, large-armed,
has a conch-like neck and a beautiful countenance. His
throat is plump and his eyes are red; ind he is famed
all over the world under the name of Rama. He has the-
voice of a bugle, is of a cool hue and highly powerful,
has equally proportioned limbs and a green colour. His
three limbs (thigh, fist and wrist) are hard and three
others (brow arms and scrotum) are long; and three
(tops of the hairs, scrotums and knee-joints) equal and
three (uavel, abdomen and breast) high. And three (the
angles of the eyes, nails and palms) are copper-colored—
three are cool and three (voice, navel and gait) are
grave. His belly and throat have three folds of skin. The
sole of the foot, the lines thereon and the nipples are


* The god of wisdom.—T,

+ The lord of celestials.—T,

¢ A sacred science considered as subordinate to and in some sense a part
of the Vedas—six sciences come under this denomination—Siksha (pronouncia-
tion); Kalpa (religious rite) Vyckarana (grammar) Chandas (prosody) ¥yotish
(astronomy) and Nirusti or explanation of dificult words.—T.


988 RAMAYANA,


equally bended. His neck, eyes and back are short. He
has three locks of hair on his head. He has four lines on
his thumb indicating his proficiency ‘in the four Vedas. ©
His body is four hands tall; arms, thighs and cheeks are
plump; eve-brows, the -hollows of the nose, eyes, ears,
lips, nipples; wrists, knee-joints, scrotums, hips, hands
feet are all equally proportioned. Four teeth by the side
of each row, are gifted with auspicious marks of the
Sdstras. His gaits are like those of a lion, tiger, elephant
ora bull, His lips and jaws are fleshy and elevated. His
nose is long; words, countenance, nails, down and skin
are all cool; his two arms, two little fingers, two thighs
and two legs are long; his face, eyes, mouth tongue,
lips; palate, nipples, nails and feet are like lotuses, his
breast, forehead, neck, arms, navel feet, back and ears are
spacious. He is gifted with grace, fame and effulgence.
His paternal and maternal race are pure. His .armpit,
belly, breast, nose, shoulders and forehead are high ; his
fingers, hairs, down, nails, skin, beard, eye-sight and
intellect are thin and sharp. Raghava, with a due division of
his time is engaged in acquiring piety, wealth emanicipation
and desires. He is truthful and graceful, amasses wealth
and thereby protects his subjects. He is cognizant of the
divisions of time and country and dear unto all. His step-
brother Saumitri is gifted with incomparable prowess and is
his equal in attachment, beauty and accomplishments. The
person of that graceful one is gold-hued whereas that of the
highly famous Rama is green. And those two lions among ;
men had no other delight but seeing thee. And they
ransacking the whole world in quest of thee met us in the
forest. And ranging the earth for thee they beheld Sugriva,
of comely presence, the lord of monkeys, at the foot of the
mount Rishyamuka covered with trees, banished hy his elder
brother and resorting there in his fear. And we were serving
that truthful Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, driven from the


SUNDARAKANDAM. 989


kingdom by his elder brother. And beholding those two best
of men, wearing bark and with bows in their hands, that best
of monkeys, stricken with fear, leaped above and stationed
himself on the crest of the hill. He then sent me to them.
And thereupon by Sugriva’s decree I, anproached with
joined palms, those two foremost of men gifted “with beauty
and royal marks. And they were pleased by me, being
informed of the real facts. And then placing those two
best of men on my back I arrived at the top of the hill and
communicated the truth unto the high-souled Sugriva. And
conversing with each other those two lords of men and
monkeys attained great delight. And they consoled each
other narrating their respective misfortunes. And Rama
then consoled Sugriva, driven away by his greatly powerful
elder brother V&li on his wife’s account. Thereupon
Lakshmana related unto Sueriva, the lord of monkeys, the
grief, of Rama of unwearied actions, in consequence of thy
being borne away (by R&vana). And hearing Lakshmana’s
words, the lord of monkeys became pale, like unto the radiant
Sun possessed by Rahu. And collecting all those ornaments
which were thrown off by thee on the earth, when thou wert
borne away, the leaders of the monkey hosts, delighted
brought them before Rama. But they could not make out thy
whereabouts. And all those ornaments, which were handed
over to Rima, were collected by me when they fell tinkling
on the ground, Rama being beside himself with grief. And
placing them on his lap, the god-like Rama bewailed in
various accents. And they inflamed the more Dacarathee's*
grief. And being overwhelmed with grief that high-souled
one laid himself low on the ground. And consoling him in
various words, I raised him up again. And looking again
and again with Saumitri, at those costly ornaments, Raghava
handed them over to Sugriva. Raghava burns in grief, O
_worshipful dame, in thy absence, like unto a volcanic,
* Son of Dasaratha—Rima.—T,


990 RAMAYANA,


mountain burning with a perpetual fire. For thee, sleepless-
ness, grief and anxiety are distressing R&ghava like unto
three fires,* burning down the fire temple. Raghava is
‘aoved by thy separation like unto a huge mountain shaker
by aMterrible earthquake. O daughter of a king, he is
ranging at large in many a beautiful forest, river and
fountain—but he finds delight nowhere. O daughter of the
king Janaka, bringing about the destruction of Ravana, with
all his kith and kin, Raghava, the foremost of men, shall
soon regain thee. And thus R&ama and Sugriva entered into
a friendly covenant, to encompass Vali’s destruction and to
institute enquiries about thee. And thereupon returning to
Kishkindh with those two heroic princes, the lord of monkeys
killed Vali in battle. And destroying V4li by his prowess
in battle, Rima made Sugriva king over all monkeys and
bears. And in this way, O dame, the alliance between Rama
and Sugriva was made. And know me as Hanum&n, their
messenger who hath come to thee. Regaining his own
kingdom, Sugriva summoned all the mighty monkeys and
despatched them in various quarters in quest of thee. And the
highly powerful monkeys, resembling mountains, commanded
by that lord of monkeys, proceeded to all the regions of the
earth. And terrified by Sugriva’s decrees, those monkeys,
since then, have been ransacking the whole earth for thee.
And I am one of them. And the beautiful and mighty son of
Vali, by name Angada,hath proceeded with three armies under
him. And many were the days and nights that we spent, over-
whelmed with grief and having lost our way on that best of
mountains Vindhya. We gave up all our hopes for the
accomplishment of our end and our appointed time was
well-nigh spent. And in fear of that lord of monkeys we
addressed ourselves to put av end to our lives. Ranging
the mountain strongholds, rivers and fountains and not


+ The aggregate of the three fires maintained by the Brahman house-
holder.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 991


finding thy reverence, we were ready to do away with our
existence. And on the crest of that hill we took to fasting.
And beholding those foremost of monkeys engaged in fasting
Angada, sunk in grief, bewailed, O Vaidehi, mentioning thy
rape, the destruction of Vali in that way, our fastings and
Yatéyu’s death. While we were thus waiting, ready for death
and giving up all hopes for the fulfillment of our master’s be-
hest, there appeared,as if the cause of our success, the mighty
and powerful vulture,the brother of Ya¢dyu, by name Sampiti.
And hearing of the destruction of his brother, he in wrath,
said-—'By whom and where hath my younger brother been
killed? I wish to hear this from you, the foremost of
monkeys.” And Angada related unto him verily Yatdyu's
destruction at Janasthdna, for thee, by that grim-visaged
Rakshasa. And hearing of Yatdyx’s death, Aruna’s son
became afflicted with sorrow and informed us, O thou exqui-
sitely Sfiue damsel, of thy stay in the abode of Ravana. And
hearing those words of Sampati, enhancing our delight, we
all, headed by Angada, left that placer And leaping from
the crest of Vindhya mountain we reached the excellent brink
ofthe Ocean. Being greatly anxious to behold thee and
delighted, those plump monkeys headed by Angada, arrived
at the banks of the main. And worked up with a ‘strong
desire to see thee, they again engaged in anxious thought.
And beholding the ocean, the monkey hosts lost their heart.
And removing their fear, I leaped a hundred leagues across
the deep and entered Lanka, at night, infested with demons.
I have seen Ravana, and thee stricken with grief. O
thou of a blameless person, I have related all unto thee in
regular order. Do thou speak to me, O worshipful dame,
Tam Dicarathee’s messenger. Do thou know me as the Wind-
god’s son, the counsellor of Sugriva, who am engaged in
R&ma’s service and have come here for thee. It is all well
with thy Kakuthstha, the foremost of those using weapons,
“as well as with Lakshmana, O worshipful dame, gifted with


992 RAMAYANA,


auspicious marks, engaged in the worship of his superiors
and in the well being of thy lord. By Sugriva’s decree,
J alone have reached here. And J, ranging alone and wear-
ing shapes at will, have come to this southern quarter, to
find out thy whereabouts. By my good luck I shall be able,
with thy news, to remove the grief of those monkey hosts
who are lamenting for thee. By my good fortune, my cros-
ing over the main, hath not become fruitless. I shall be
praised there, O worshiful dame, for | have been able to see
thee. And the highly powerful Raghava shall soon regain
thee, destroying, with all his sons and friends, Ravana the
king of Rakshasas. There is a hill, O Vaidehi, named
Malyabana, the foremost of all the mountains. There lives
my father, the great monkey Xesari. Being commanded by
the celestial ascetics, he once repaired thence to the mount
Gokarna and at the holy watering place of the lord of the
rivers he brought about the destruction of (the Asura)
Samvasddana. O Vaidehi, 1 was born, on the field, of that"
monkey. And I] am known all over the world as Hanuman
by my own actions. To create thy confidence, O Vaidehi,
I have related thy lord’s accomplishments. And forsooth,
thou shalt soon be taken, O worshipful dame, by Raghava.”
Having her confidence formed by these reasonings and various
marks, Sité, worn with grief, took him (for Rama’s messen-
ger). And Janaki attained an excess of delight and shed
tears of joy from her eyes having curling eye-lashes.
And the beautiful countenance of that large-eyed dame,
having spacious eyes, appeared like the Moon released from
the hold of Rahu. She then took him for a real monkey”
and none else. Thereupon Hanuman again spoke unto her,
having a comely presence,—''I have related unto thee all
this. Do thou be consoled, O Maithilee! Tell me now,
what am I to do and what dost thou like. I shall soon repair
hence. When the Asura Samvasddana was destroyed in con-
flict by that best of monkeys at the desire of the celestial


SUNDARAKANDAM. 993


ascetics, 1 was born of the Wind, O maithilee. [lovk like a
moukey but am his equal in prowess.’”


SECTION xxxvi.


—=0:0:—


Tae highly effulgent son of the Wind-god, Hanum&a,
to create Suas confidence, again addressed her with the
following words :—'O great dame, 1 am a monkey, the
messenger of the highly intelligent Rama. Behold this
precious ring with Rama’s name engraven on it, given by
thy high-souled lord and brought as a token to create thy
confidence. Do thou take heart and may good betide thee,
there will be an end of thy grief soon.’ And taking the
ring that used to deck her Jord’s finger and looking at it,
Janaki seemed to have actually got her lord. And her
graceful countenance, having large eyes, looked, with
delight, like unto the Moon released fiuu the possession
of Rabu. And greatly delighted at her busband’s news
that modest damsel, affectionately welcoming Hanuman, ap-
plauded that great monkey—‘O foremost of monkeys, thou
ast brave, powerful and wise, since thou hast alone smitten
this abode of the Rakshasas. Thou hast, with thy laudable
prowess, leaped, a tundred leagues, across the ocean,
the abode of marine monsters, taking it for Goshpada.*
O foremost of monkeys, Ido not consider thee as an ordi-
tary monkey, since thou dost not care or fear Ravana. O
best of monkeys, thou art worthy of my welcome, since
thou hast been despatched by Rama, knowing self. Rama,
hard of bemg got at, hath not sent thee, specially to me,
without a trial of thy prowess. By my good luck, is it all
well with the virtuous-souled and ‘truthful Rima and the
highly powerful Lakshmana the enhancer of Sumitra's joy?
And if Kakuthstha lives untouched by ill, then why does

“TA measure as much as @ cow's loot-step will hold —T,


125


998 RAMAYANA.


he not burn the earth, ensircled by the ocean, with his ire like
unto the fire of dissolution? Or they are capable of dis- .
comfitting the celestials in a battle but me-thinks by my
ill-luck, the end of my miseries hath not arrived as yet.
Is Rama greatly pained? Does he grieve? Is that foremost
of men making preparations for my rescue? Has he forgotten
his work being overwhelmed with fear and poorliness of
heart? Is that son of the king performing still his manly
duties? Is that slayer of foes, desirous of acquiring victory,
pleasing his friends still with forgiveness aud gifts and
dealing his enemies with punishment, sowing dissensions
amongst them, and with other expedients? Is he still gaining
friends and are friends gathering around him ? Is he welcoming
his friends and are they honoring him the more? Is that
son of the king invoking the blessings of the celestials ?
Hath he attained manliness and assistance from the celestials ?
Hath Raghava lost all his affection for me for my living at
a distance from him? Will he save me from this disaster?
Hath not Rama, ever used to happiness and unused to
misery, been enfeebled by this disaster? Is he informed
always of the welfare of Kauslaya, Sumitra and Bharata?
Is not Raghava, worthy of honors, beside himself with grief
in my absence? Will not Rama rescue meg Will not
Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out one Aksaubhini
of terrible soldiers under the command of his ministers for
my rescue? Will not the graceful Sugriva, the lord of the
monkeys come to help me with hosts of monkeys having huge
deeth and nails? Will not the heroic Lakshmana, the
enhancer of Sumitr4’s joy, conversant with the use of wea-
pons, bun down the Rakshasas with his shafts? Shall I
not behvld soon that Ravana with his kinsmen hath been
destroyed in battle by Rama with terrible weapons? Is not
the gold-hued and lotus-smelling countenance (of Rama)
dried up in my absence like unto lotus dried up by the rays
of the sun in shallow water? Does he still hold patience


SUNDA RARENDAM, 995


in his heart,who,renouncing his kingdom for virtue and repair-
ing, on foot with me even to the forest, was not stricken with
fear and grief? His love for his mother, father or any other
person is not greater than or equal to his love forme. O
messenger, | shallkeep my life so long I do not hear anything
about my dear one.” Having addressed that lord of monkeys
with these highly sound and sweet accents, that graceful
and worshipful dame ceased, with a view to hear again from
him pleasant tales regarding Rama. And _ hearing the words
of Sita the terribly powerful M@ruti, placing his joined palms
on his head said,—‘'The lotus-eyed Rama doth not know that
thou art here, and hence he hath not been able to rescue thee
like unto Purandara regaining Sachee. And hearing about
thee from me soon shall Raghava come assisted by a large army
of monkeys and bears. And impeding the course of the unagi-
tated deep and building,by means of his terrible shafts,a bridge
across it, Kakuthstha, shall divest the city Lanka of all
the Rikshasas, And forsooth shall Ramadsuroy them, even
if the celestials, or Death himself stand in, his way. O
worshipful dame, stricken with grief in thy absence, Rima
is restless like unto an elephant smitten by a lion. I can
swear, Q worshipful dame, by the mounts Mandira, Malaya,
Vindya, Sumeru, Dardura and all the fruits and roots, that
thou shalt behold like unto the rising of the full moon, the
countenance of Rama having beautiful eyes, graceful,
Bimba-like lips and beautified with beautiful Aundalas.
‘Thou shalt soon behold, O Vaidehi, R&ma, on the
mount Prasravana, like unto the performer of hundred
sacrifices seated on the back of the elephant (Acravaéa).
Raghava doth not take meat nor drink honey—he takes
every day in the evening boiled rice and such wild fruits
as are sanctioned by the Sastras. His heart is so much
attached unto thee, that he does not drive away even flies,
insects and snakes from his body. R&mais always engaged
in meditations, overwhelmed with grief, and he has


996 RAMAPANA.


no other thought but seeing thee. R&ma hath no sleep and
even when asleep that best of men awakes exclaiming in sweet
accents, ‘O Sita !’. He always welcomes thee sighing and say
ing “O my dear love!”’, whenever he beholds any fruit, lower
or any object liked by the ladies. © worshipfnl dame, he is
always lamenting, exclaiming ‘O Sita! and that high-souled
son of the king, to regain thee, hath resorted to ascetic
observances.” On hearing ahout R&ma, Sith was greatly
delighted and she was equally grieved on hearing of his
sorrow. And it appeared like the rising of the moun and
the appearance of the clouds at the same time in an autumnal
night. .


SECTION XXXVI.


“Hearne those words, Sita having a moon-like counte-
nance, again spoke unto Hanuman,words, sound and pious :—
“O monkey, what thou hast said that R&ma is not attached
unto any other thing and is worn with grief,is like nectar mixed
with poison, Whether in the enjoyment of vast riches, or
emerged in the abyss of miseries, Death is pulling a man,
binding him roughly with a chord. O best of monkeys, people
cannot thwart the course of destiny. Behold me, Rama and
Saumitri, therefore sunk in miseries. I do not know when
shall Raghava get at the other end of the ocean of grief;
by displaying his prowess, like unto one, swimming across
the ocean when the boat is sunk. I do not know when shall
my lord see me, destroying the Rakshasas, killing Ravana
and devastating the city of Lanka. Do thou tell him to
come before this year expires for till then f shall live.
This is the tenth month and two months still remain,
O monkey and that is the time appointed by the
crue] Ravana. He was entreated very much by- his


SUNDARAKANDAM 997


brother Bivishana to restore me but he paid no-need to
his requests, Ravana doth not desire to restore me (unto
Rima) for he has been brought under the influence of
Death who is seeking him in battle. Bivishana’s eldest
daughter, O monkey, by name Kala, hath related this unto
me, being appointed by her mother. There is a leading,
steady, old, intelligent and educated Rakshasa, gifted witha
good character, named Abindhya and highly respected of
Ravana who told him that the destruction of the Rakshasa race
would proceed from Rama, but the vicious-souled one paid
no attention to his well-meaning words. I hope, O foremost
of monkeys, that my hushand shall soon regain me for pure
is my soul and he is gifted with many accomplishments.
R&ghava hath in him, O monkey, energy, manliness, strength,
kindness, gratitude and prowess. He brought about without
his brother's aid, the destructien of the fourteen thousand
Rakshasas at Janasthina, What enemy is not troubled at
this? The disaster-creating Rakshasas can never be com-
pared with that best of men. I am cognizant af his prowess
as Sachee is of Indra’s. O monkey, Rama the Sun, with
his atrow-like rays, shall dry up the water—the inimical
R&akshasas.” Saying this she was overwhelmed with grief
on R&ma’s account, and Hanuman again spoke unto her
having her countenance bathed in tears,—No sooner shall
R&ghava hear from me than he shall speedily repair hither
followed by a huge army of monkeys and beara. Or I shall
release thee even to-day from the grasp of that Rakshasa
and these miseries. Do thou place thyself on my back, O thou
of a blameless person. And having thee on my back I shall
leap over the main. [I am capable of carrying the
city of Lanka even with Ravana. I shall restore thee to-day,
O Maithili, unto Raghava on the mount Prasravana, like unto
fire carrying unto Indra, the sacrificial offerings. Thou shalt
behold to-day, O Vaidehi, Rama along with Lakshmana,
making preparations (for the destruction of his enemy) like


998 RAMAYANA.


unto Visnu, engaged in the destruction of demons. (And
thou shalt observe) that highly powerful one,. anxious to
behold thee and seated like unto Purandara on the summit
of that foremost of mountains. Do thou place thyself on
my back, O worshipful dame, do thou not neglect it, O beau-
tiful lady, and be thus reconciled unto Rama like unto Rohini
restored to the Moon. Ry the time, that we will take in
talking thus, thou shalt reach Rama like Rohini restored to
the Moon. Do thou therefore place thyself on my back and
I shall cross the ocean sailing by the atherial way. ‘O fair
one, carrying thee from this place, none amongst the inhabi-
tants of Lank4 shall be able to follow me. Inthe same way
I have come here I shall return by the welkin, O Vaidehi
placing thee on my back.” Hearing those surprising words
from that best of monkeys, Maithilee, having her entire frame
worked up with joy, again bespake Hanuman—‘Hanumin,
how darest thou take me to such a long distance? O lord
of monkey hosts, this attests to thy monkey-hood. O fore-
most of monkeys, little-bodied as thou art, how dost thou
desire, to take me hence to my husband the lord of men ?”
Hearing the words of Sita, the graceful son of the Wind-god
Hanum§n reflected aside—‘This is my first insult. The
lotus-eyed dame is not cognizant of my prowess or strength,
Vaidehi should therefore learn that I can assume shapes at
will.” Thinking thus, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys
and the slayer of foes, showed himself unto Sita, in his true
shape. And leaping down from the tree, that best of mon-
keys began to increase himself to create Sita’s confidence.
Wis person appeared like the hill Mand&ra and the flaming
fire. And that best of monkeys having a copper-colored
countenance, thunder-like nails and teeth and mountain-like
huge body, appeared before Sit& and said—‘I am capable
-of carrying this Lanka with her lord, the mountains, forests
gardens, buildings, walls and gate-ways. Do thou therefore
confide in me, O worshipful dame, and be not suspicious.


SUNDARARANDAM. 999 »


And O Vaidehi, do, thon remove Rama’s grief as well as
Lakshmana’s.” Beholding the Wind-god’s own begotten
son, Hanuman, resembling a huge mountain, Sita, the daughter
of Janaka, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, said—“O
great monkey, ] know thy strength and bravery, thy air-like
motion and thy wonderful fire-like energy. What ordinary
man can come here crossing the incomparable ocean, O
lord of monkey hosts, I understand that thou art capable
of returning and thou shalt be able to carry me. But I
should consider now how the work might be accomplished,
O foremost of monkeys, I should not go with thee. Perhaps
I might lose my sense with thy air-liké velocity, When
moving terribly thou shalt proceed high up in the welkin,
perhaps I shall then fall down. No-sooner I shall fall down
into the ocean infested with fish and other animals than I
shall be an excellent food unto them. O slayer of foes, I
shall not be able to accompany thee. For seeing thee carry
a woman, they shatl surely suspect thee. «nd finding me
stolen, those terribly powerful Rakshasas commanded by thé
vicious-souled Ravana, shall follow thee. O hero, carrying
me and encircled by those heroic Rakshasas with maces and
darts in their hands, thou shalt be beset with dangers.
And on the sky the Rakshasas shall be armed with
weapons and thou shalt be without any. How shalt
thou be able to fight and protect me at the same time,
Aad when thou shalt be engaged ‘in conflict with those
Rakshasas of terrible deeds, I, O foremost of monkeys,
stricken with fear, shall fall down from thy back. O fore-
most of monkeys those terrible and powerful Rakshasas
shall be able to defeat thee a little. And when thou shalt
be defeated in battle I shall fall down and those
vicious Rakshasas shall carry me away from thy
lands or destroy me. Victory or defeat is uncertain in a
battle. I shall thus be distressed by those Kakshasas setting
up terrible roars and thy endeavours shall be fruitless, O best


1000 RAR AWA,


of monkeys. “Thou art capable of destroying the Rakshasas
very easily (I admit)—but Rama's fame shall then be soiled —
if dost thou bring about their destruction. Or the Rakshasas
taking me away shall keep me in such a secret place, that
neither the monkeys nor Raghava shall be able to ascertain
my whereabouts, And all thy preparations for n.e shall thus
be useless. And mighty shall be the result of Rama’s coming
with thee. O large armed one, the life of Raghava of unmiti-
gated prowess, those of his brothers and of thy royal race
are all subject to me. And when they shall give up their
hopes of releasing me, they, worn out with grief and anxiety .
shall renounce their lives along with the monkeys and bears,
O monkey, being guided by my love for my husband, | do not
like willingly to touch any body’s person but Rama's. When
Kavana, by force touched my person, I had no other help, for
To was then without my lurd and therefore was subject to
another person, If Rama can take me away from here, des-
troying the Ten-necked one with all the Rakshasas—he shall
then perform the worthy action. I have heard of and myself
seen the prowess of the highly-souled (Rama) unconquerable
in a battle. There is none amongst the celestials, Gandharbas,
Nagas and the Rakshasas who can match him in a conflict,
Bebolding that highly powerful Raghava, in a conflict, like
unto Vasava in prowess, holding a wonderful bow. and
followed by Lakshmana, who can withstand his prowess
resembling the flaming fire ? O foremost of monkeys, who
can withstand Raghava in a conflict, followed by Laksh-
mana moving like an infurialed elephant and showering
shafts like unto the rays of the sun at the time of Dissolu-
tion? O best of moukeys do thou speedily bring here my
dear one along with Lakshmana and the lord of monkey hosts,
O heroic monkey, do thou soon satisfy me, who am stricken
with grief in consequence of my long separation from Rama.


SUNDARAKANDAM. toot


SECTION XXXVIII.


Hreaaine those words, that foremost of monkeys, skilled
in speech, was greatly delighted and again addressed
Sit& in the following words,—“O worshipful lady, O thou
of an auspicious presence, what thou hast said, speaks well
for a feminine nature and the modesty of a chaste damsel.
And because thou art a female, thou art ‘not capable of
crossing on my back, the main extending over a thousand
leagues, The second argument—lI shall not touch any
other person’s body than Rama’s, which thou hast produced,
O Janaki ! O thou gifted with modesty! truly becometh thee,
who art the spouse of that high-souled one. Who else than
thee, O worshipful one, can give expression to such words ?
Truly shall Kakutstha hear from the beginning to the end,
GO worshipful dame, of thy actions before me, and all thou
hast said. For many reasons, I gave vent to such words,
OQ lady,—I am anxious to compass Rima’s end, and my
heart is melted with affection. It is very difficult to enter
this city of Lanka, it is equally hard to cross over the main
—but I am capable of doing all these, and hence I gave
utterance to all those words. I wish to take thee even to-
day to the descendant of Raghu. It is for my devotion
unto him and regard for thee that I said so and for nothing
else. If thou dost not wish to go with me, O thou of a blame-
less person, do thou give me such a token as might create
Righava's confidence.” Being thus accosted by Hanuman,
Sit& resembling the daughter of a celestial, spoke,gently,words
with their letters strung on the vapour of grief,—‘Do thou
meution unto my dear lord (in my words) what had happened
unto me while living in the hermitage at the foot of the mount
Pratyanga, situate on the north-east of Chitrakuta, abounding
in roots, fruits and water. ‘At no distance from that place fre-


126


1002 RAMAYANA.


quented by the ascetics flowed the sacred stream Mandakini.
While ranging in that woodland fragrant with the odour of
many flowers, thou, having thy person wet in consequence
of thy sport in the water, didst sit on my lap. A crow, at
that time, longing to feed en my flesh, tore my breast with
its beak. And I threatened it with a pebble. But it con-
tinued tearing my ‘breast as if it sat there to feed on my
flesh and therefore did not fly off. Being enraged with that
bird, as I tried to tighten the cloth around my waist, it gave
way a little, and thou, rising up from thy seat and looking at
me, didst laugh over it. And I was greatly enraged with
thy laughter and ashamed, and, being wounded by the crow,
T approached thee. Thereupon, tired as | was, ] sat on thy
lap, and, exercised with ire, I was consoled by thee laughing.
Now I, having my countenance bathed in tears, gently
rubbed my eyes. And I was seen by thee, O my lord, in that
wise, greatly enraged with the crow. O Raghava, I slept
for sometime, at thy lap, out of exhaustion, and thyself
in turn, slept at mine, O elder brother of Bharata. In
the meantime, that crow again suddenly approaching,
tore my breast with its beak, as I awoke and was
rising up from thy lap, O Raghava.’ Thereupon Raghava
awoke with the shedding of blood. Beholding my breast
wounded, that larged-armed hero wroth like a serpent, sigh-
ing, said-O thou having thighs like the trunk of aa
elephant, by whom hath thy breast been wounded? Who
wants to play with an angry five-hooded serpent ?—Thereupon,
casting his looks around, he espied the crow, sitting in my
front with its claws besmeared with blood. That crow,
best of birds, was the son of the lord of the celestials
in‘disguise. And gifted with air-like velocity, he speedily
entered inside the earth. Thereupon that large-eyed
hero, best of the intelligent, with his eyes whirling with
ire, resolved to destroy that crow. And taking a blade of Kuga
off his’ seat, he tied it to a Brahma weapon. And that


SUNDARARAINDAM. te0g


blade; facing the bird, appeared with its flaming face, like
the fire that would destroy the world. And he hurled that
burning blade at the crow. And it pursued the crow high
up in the welkin. Being thus pursued; that crow, in order
to save himeelf, traversed various regions. And being
then renounced by his father (Indra) and the great ascetics,
he, ranging the three worlds, at last resorted to his (Rama's)
shelter. And, placing himself on the earth, he sought his
shelter, and K&kutstha, out of mercy, saved him, albeit
worthy of being killed. And he spoke unto him, greatly
famished, of a pale countenance and lying on the earth,—It is
impossible to render this Brakma weapon fruitless. There-
fore, do thou speak (as to what is to be done.)\—He then
destroyed the right eye of the crow. Having given up his
eye, he saved himself. Then bowing unte Rima as well
as king Dagaratha, the crow, liberated by that hero, went
to. his own abode. ‘Thou hadst on my behalf discharged
the Brahma weapon even at a crow. Why iuen, O lord
of earth, dost thou forbear bith who had carried me off from
thee? O foremost of nfen, do thou dispense unto mé thy
kindness capable of inspiring hope. O lord, possessing a
ford in thee, { (now) appear as if I had none. That kind-
ness is a prime virtue—lI have heard even from thee; and I
know that thou art exceedingly energetic and possessed of
great strength and high courage,—unfettered by consider-
ations of time and space, incapable of being agitated, thou in
gtavity resemblest the ocean, and like unto that lord of the
earth furnished with seas—V&sava. O Raghava, being thus
the foremost of those acquainted with weapons, powerful,
and possessed of strength, wherefore dost thou not direct
thy weapon against the Rakshasas’; Neither Ndges, nor
Gandharbas, nor the gods, nor the Maruts, are competent to
resist the onset of Rima in battle. If that puissant one still:
retains any regard for me, why doth he not by means of sharp-
ened shafts make root and branch work with the Rakshasas


3004 RAMAYANA.


And why, taking the permission of his brother, that repressor
of foes, the heroic Lakshmana gifted with great strength, doth
not deliver me? If those foremost of men be indeed equal
to Indra and the Wind, and incapable of being repressed
even by the celestials, wherefore do they disregard me?
Surely I must be guilty of some great crime, since although
capable, those subduers of enemies do not look at me.’
Hearing Vaidehi’s piteows words uttered with tearful eyes,
that leader of monkey-bands, the exceedingly energetic
Hanuma, said,—"O exalted one, I swear by truth, Rima
turneth away his countenance (from every work) in conse-
quence of grief for thee. And R&ma being seized with
sorrow, Lakshmana burns in grief. Now that I have been
able to obtain a sight of thee, this is no season for sorrow.
© auspicious one, even now thou shalt witness the end of
this woe. Filled with hope from my sight of thee, those
foremost of persons, those mighty princes, shall reduce the
worlds to ashes, And, O thou of expansive eyes, slaying
in battle the wicked Ravana with his allies, Raghava shall
take thee back to his palace. Now tell me what I shall
communicate unto Raghava, and the highly powerful
Lakshmana, and the energetic Sugriva, and all the assembled
monkeys.” Thus addressed, Sita again spoke unto him,
saying,— Do thou on my behalf, bowing down the head,enquire
after the welfare of that protector of men whom Kaucaly& hath
brought forth. Do thou on my behalf, and on account of
my words, enquire after the welfare of him, who, renouncing
wreaths and gems of all kinds,and beloved damsels possessed
of transcendent beauty, and wealth such as is difficult to
obtain on this spacious earth ; and who, honoring and bowing
unto bis father and mother, followed Rama,—in whom
Sumitrd hath an excellent son,—of that righteous one, who,
espousing the cause of his brother, renouncing choice
happiness, followeth his brother to the forest, ministering
unto him ; who is lion-shouldered, long-armed, intelligent,


SUNDA RAKANDAM. 100g


and of a prepossessing presence; who beareth himself to-
wards Rima as if he were his sire, and towards me, as if fF
were his mother; of that heroic Lakshmana who did not
kaow when I was ravished away ;—the servant of the elders,
crowned with auspiciousness,—who is competent and reineth
in his tongue ; who is the foremost of those dear unto the
king’s son,* and worthy of my father-in-law ; who is dearer
(unto Rama) than even my own self ; of Lakshmana, brother
unto Rama; that energetic one who undertaketh even such
tasks as he is not equal to, and seeing whom Raghava hath
forgotten his deceased siret,—him for the sake of my words,
thou must ask as to his welfare. Lakshmana is always mild
and pure, and dear unto Rama. Do thou speak to him so,
that, O best of monkeys, he may remove my miseries. O
leader of monkey-bands, do thou bring about success on this
undertaking. From this preliminary endeavour of thine,
R&ghava shall take pains on my behalf.—This ‘also shalt thou
say again and again unto that hero—my lord —‘O son of
Dagaratha, I shall keep on this life for another month; and
this I swear unto thee by truth that I will not live beyond
this month. O hero, even as Vishnu rescued Kausiki from
the nether regions,f it behoveth thee to rescue me, who have
ignominiously been confined by the impious Ravana.—=
Thereupon, saying,—‘Hand this unto Raghava,” Sita gave
to Hanuman a noble and excellent jewel for the head§,
which was tied up in her attire. Then taking that
best of gems, the hero tried to fix it om his finger; but


* Rima.

+ In consequence of the fatherly care of Lakshmana.—T.

According to Kataka, Kaugiki is Earth, who was rescued by Nardyane
from the subterranean regions. According to Tirtha, Kauciki is tndra’s Aur
piciousness, who on the occasion of the destruction of the Asura, Vritra, tools
refuge in the nether regions, and was brought back by Vishau.~-T.


§ Chuddmani. According to the commentator, the word means % gens
worn in the head.—T. : :


1006 ' * RAMAPANA.


it did not enter into it.* And taking the gem, aud bowing
unto Sit? and going round her, that foremost of motkeys
remained by her side in humble guise. And experiencing
rapture in consequence of his seeing Sit, he mentally
presented himself before Rima, and Lakshmana graced with
auspicious marks. And taking that costly and superb gem,
which by virtue of some power, king Janaka’s daughter had
managed to hide (from the gaze of the Rakshasis), Hanumfn,
feeling delighted like one, shaken by the wind blowing on
the top of the foremost of mountains, and then getting away
from it, prepared to set out.


SECTION xxxIx.


Hawinc made over the gem, Siti said unto Hanum4n,-—
“This sign is very well known to Rama. Seeing this gem,
that hero, Rama, shall recollect three persons,—his mother,
myself, and king Dagaratha, Thou, O foremost of monkeys,
wilt again be commissioned on this business. Do thou
bethink thee as to what thou wilt do afterwards, when thou
hast been entrusted with this task. O foremost of monkeys,
thou art capable of compassing this work, Therefore, think
as to what course of his (R&ma’s) shall remove (my) misery.
© Hanumin, undergoing toils, be thou instrumental in
removing my misery.” Saying, “So be it,” the Wind-god’s
offspring of terrible prowess, bowing down the head, prepar-
edto depart. Seeing that (Hanum&n) was about to set out,
that exalted one, Mithil&’s daughter, addressed that monkey,
gon-unto the Wind-god, in words choked by the vapour of
grief,—“O Hanum§n, do thou communicate good news to
both Rama and Lakshmana, to Sugriva with his counsellors,


PSS BS ae icv SEE SSA eR RE
~ © Another messing is,—‘But fearing discovery on account of the Ssilliance
‘of the jewel, he desisted.”—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1007


aud to ali the aged monkeys. And, O best of monkeys, in
consonance with righteousness, communicate good tidings
(uuto Rima), And it beboveth thee to strive so that the.
mighty-armed Raghava may rescue me from this sea of
sorrow. And, O Hanum§a, do thou speak so that the illus-
trious Rima may deliver me while I am still alive; and
thereby do thou reap righteousness. Ever breathing high
spirits, Dacarathi,* hearing my words, shall attain an access
of manliness for my deliverance. Soon as R&ghava shall hear
words couching tidings of me, that hero shall duly resolve
on displaying his prowess.” Hearing this speech of Sita,
Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god, with his joined hands
raised to his head, saidi—'Soon shall K&akutstha come,
surrounded by the foremost monkeys and bears; and, van-
quishing the foe in fight, shall remove thy grief. Find I
none either among men, or Asuras, or celestials, that dares
remain before him as he discharges his shafts. For thee, in
especial, he can stand in conflict even the Sun, Indra,
nay—Yama himself, that offspring of the Sun. For thee, he
prepareth himself to conquer the Earth bounded’ by the
main ; and victory, thou daughter of Janaka, shall be Rama's.”
Hearing his words excellently spoken and thoroughly true,
Janaki honored them highly, and spoke (as follows), And
gazing at him once and again as he prepared to go away,
Sita from affection honored the speech which had been
uttered (by Hanuman) out of attachment unto his master,--
‘If thou wish it, O hero, do thou, O subduer of enemies, stay
here for one day. Having rested in some hidden nook, thou
wilt depart to-morrow. O monkey, (if thou dost remain),
thy vicinity shall for a moment remove the huge grief of
me of slender luck. But even if thou go (passing to-day
here), I have, O tiger-like monkey, doubts as to thy return;
and, accordingly, doubt, certainly, as to my life. And the
grief incident to my not seeiag thee shall burn me greatly,


* Dagaratha’s son.—T : i


7008 RAMALANA.


even, O monkey, as grief burneth one that is already
consumed by sorrow over and over again, And, O hero,
O lord of monkeys, this doubt is also before me. How,
alas! shall the mighty lord of monkeys, albeit backed
by the monkeys.and bears, cross over the mighty main hard
to cross,—~and (how shall) those forces consisting of bears and
monkeys or those sons of the best of men (cross over the
same)? In all the three worlds, Vinat&’s offspring, thyself,
and the Wind-god, have alone the power of crossing over the
deep.—Then, for the accomplishment of this work, difficult to
compass, what, O hero, O thou best of those conversant with
business, what way dost thou see as to its success? Or thou
alone, O destroyer of hostile heroes, art quite enough for the
fulfilment of this purpose ; and thou shalt reap, in the shape
of fame, the fruit of thy achievement. But if (Rama) himself
together with all his forces, conquering R&vana and (recover
ing me) in battle, returned victorious to his own city,—this
would be worthy of himself. If blocking up Lank& with his
army, that afflictor of hostile hosts, K&kutstha took me
(hence), that would be worthy of him. Do thou, therefore,
adopt such means that the high-souled heroic warrior may
have an opportunity of putting forth prowess :” Hearing
those words fraught with sense and reason and informed with
affection, Hanum4n,by way of reply said mildly,—“O revered
lady, that foremost of monkeys—the lord of bears and mon
keys—Sugriva, possessed of truth, hath made up his mind on
thy behalf. That destroyer of R&kshasas, O daughter of
Videha, environed by thousands of millions of monkeys,
will come hither without delay. And exceedingly powerful
and mighty monkeys possessed of prowess, and speeding far
with the rapidity of thought, are in his command. Nothing:
can impede their courses, either upward, or downward, or.
tending in both directions ; and those ones of measureless
venergy never experience depression in the most arduous
undertakings. Braced by their exalted spirits, these, resort-


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1009.


ing. to the aerial way, have many a time and oft circumambu-
lated the Earth containing mountains and meads. There
are (in that army) rangers of woods, some equal and some
superior to me. And near Sugriva there are none who are
inferior to me. And since even I have reached this place,what
shall I say of those ones endowed with immense might ? Nor
are superior (monkeys) sent on errands ; it is only the inferi-
or ones that are sent. Then, O exalted one, thou needst
not grieve: let thy sorrow depart. Those leaders of monkey-
herds will come to Lanka by one bound; and, like unto
the risen Sun and Moon, those leonine men, having large
numbers to back them, will come to thy side, riding my back.
Those heroes and foremost of men, Rama and Lakshmana
both, coming to the city of Lank&,shall destroy her by means
of their shafts. And slaying Ravana together with his
adherents, Raghu’s son, taking thee, O paragon among
women, shall return to his own city. Therefore, do thou take
heart, good betide thee! Do thou remain, eagerly wishing
for the time. It will not be long before thou shalt behold
Rima resembling flaming fire. On the lord of Rakshasas
being slain along with his counsellors and friends, thou
shalt meet with Rama, even as Rohini meeteth with the
Moon. O- worshipful one, speedily shalt thou behold the
other shore of thy misery, O Maithili; and thou shalt see
Ravana slain by Rama by might of arm.” Having thus
solaced Videha’s daughter, Hanum&n,son unto the Wind-god,
again spoke unto Vaidehi, saying,—‘Soon shalt thou behold
that destroyer of foes, RAaghava of subdued soul, and the
bow-bearing Lakshmana also, come to the gate of Lanka.
And soon shalt thou behold the assembled heroic monkeys,
endowed. with the prowess of lions and tigers, and the splen-
dour of the monarch Sf monkeys, and having nails and teeth
for their arms. And thou shalt, O noble one, behold innumer-,
able companies of choice monkeys, resembling hills and
clouds,-roaring on the plateaus of Malaya in Lank&.


127


1010 RAMAFPANA,


Like an elephant tormented by a lion, Rama afflicted in the
vitals by the dreadful shafts of Manmatha, doth not attain
ease. Do not weep, exalted one, in sorrow. Let not fear
take possession of thy heart! Even as Sachi meeteth with
Sakra, shalt thou, O auspicious one, meet with thy lord.
Who is greater than Rama ? And who is equal to Saumitri 7*
And these brothers resembling Fire and the Wind, are thy
help. O revered one, thou wilt not have to dwell long in
this extremely dreadful place inhabited by the R&kshasas,
The arrival of thy beloved one is not distant. Just remain
‘expecting (as best thou may), during the time that elapses
between this and my meeting with Rama.”


SECTION XL.


— ee


Hasaine the speech of the high-souled offspring of the
Wind-god, Sit& resembling a daughter of the celestials, said
in words fraught with her welfare,—‘Even as the Earth
with corn half-way towards harvest is gladdened on receipt
of showers, have I, O monkey, been gladdened on seeing
thee that speakest sweetly. Do thou so dispense thy
kindness unto me that, with my desire attained, I may touch
that tiger-like one with my body reduced by grief. And,
O foremost of monkeys, present this sign unto Rama,
and tell him also for a sign that he had in ire hurled the
dart which destroyed a single eye of the crow. And tell
him also,t—'On my (first) fi/aka having been wiped out,
thou didst paint beside my cheek another otade of red arsenic
—~this thou shouldst remember. Why, O thou endowed
with prowess, resembling Indra the Great or Varuna, dost
thou disregard the ravished Sita, sitting in the midst of
: * 4. Sumitrd’s son, Lakshmana—T. .

...t Sita wishes Hanum4n to use her own language to Rama.—T.,


SUNDARARANDAM. 1081


Rakshas? This jewel for the head I had preserved with
care. In my misfortune, O sinless one, I used to inspire
cheerfulness by a sight of this, resembling thyself. This
graceful water-sprung (gem) I part from. Hereafter, over-
whelmed with grief, I shall not be able to live. For thee
only do [ bear insufferable miseries, heart-cleaving speech,
and companionship with Rakshasas. O destroyer of enemies,
for a month longer will I maintain being. Beyond that,
O king’s son, bereft of thee, I will not live. This Rakshasa
king is dreadful. (This being so), if 1 hear thee tarrying, I
would not live for 2 moment.” Hearing Vaidehi’s speech
pathetic and uttered with tears,the highly energetic Hanuman,
son unto the Wind-god, said,—“My revered one, 1 swear unto
thee by truth itself that Raima neglecteth every business
because of grief for thee. And R&ma being overwhelmed
with woe, Lakshmana burneth in grief. Now that I have
succeeded in seeing thee after no end of ado, this is no time
for lamentation. O fair one, this very moment thou shalt
witness the end of thy woe. Those blameless princes-—
foremost of men, gathering courage from my sight of thee,
shall reduce Lank& to ashes, And, O thou of expansive
eyes, slaying in battle Ravana along with his friends,Raghu’s,
sons shall take thee back to their own palace. Now, O
faultless lady, thou ought to give me such a sign as Rama
shall certainly recognise, and as shall more please him by
far.” “Ah!” (answered Sit&), “I have already furnished
thee with an excellent sign. This ornament, O Hanum&a,
when carefully examined by Rima, O hero, shall render
thy words credible.” Thereupon, taking that best of gems,
that graceful foremost of monkeys, bowing down the head
unto that exalted one, prepared to depart. Seeing that
monkey-leader intent upon leaping up, and surcharged
with energy,—with his person enlarged, Janaka’s daughter,
with a tearful countenance, spake in woe-begone guise,
her accents choked with the vapour of grief,~O Hanumiin,


3012 R&MAPANA,


communicate tidings of my good health unto those lion-like
brothers,. Rima and Lakshmana, to Sugriva along with his
counsellors, and to all (the monkeys). And it behoveth
thee so to compass things that the mighty-armed Raghava
may rescue me from this sea of sorrow. Do thou, going
to Rama, make known to him the fierce current of my grief,
as well as the railing of these Rakshasas. Good fortune be
thy portion, thou exceedingly heroic monkey!” Thus
furnished with the intentions of the princess, the monkey,
having gained his object, and, growing exceedingly exhila-
rated in his heart, reviewed the small work that yet remained
for him, became bent upon proceeding to the north.


SECTION XtI.


Sesame


Hawne been honored by her (Sit&) in excellent words,
the monkey proceeding, left that place, thinking,—‘‘A small
work it is that remains. Beheld have I this dark-eyed lady.
Passing by three means, I see that I shall have to resort
to the fourth. No ¢rez‘v with Rakshas can answer the end,
Neither can gifts prevail wit the wealthy. Nor is it possible
to sow dissensions among persons proud of their strength.
Then, display of prowess appeareth to me applicabie in this
case. Without resorting to prowess, way find I none for
ensuring success in this matter. If the Rakshas find their
foremost heroes fallen in battle, they may temper their
(martial ardour). He that, having compassed his (principal)
purpose, accomplishes many more without marring the
prime one, is entitled to act. He that doeth a small work,
js certainly not a worker,—he it is that knoweth to bring
about success in diverse ways, is alone capable of securing


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1013


“the same.* Although my sole commission was to effect —
this mach,t yet if 1 repair to the abode of the lord of
monkeys after having ascertained the strength of our
ownselves and that of the foe in the field, then I shall have
done the mandate of my master. How can my arrival (at
this place) be made to bring forth good fruit? How can I
forcibly bring on engagement with the Rakshasas ? And
how can the Ten-necked one in battle be made to form a just
estimate of the respective strength of myself and his
forces? Coming in contact with the Ten-necked one,
with his three orders, forces and charioteers, I shall, reading
the intention that is in his heart, as well as his strength,
-—happily return from hence. This grove of the fell (fiend)
resembling Nandana itself, containing various trees and
plants, and captivating to eye and heart,—will I destroy ;
even as fire destroyeth a dry wood. This grove being ravaged,
Ravana shail get into a fury. Then the Ra&kshasa monarch
shall summon up an army consisting of horses, elephants,
and mighty cars, equipped with tridents, iron axes and
other arms,—, and mighty shall be the encounter that shall
take place. And I with unimpaired prowess battling with
those terrific Rakshas, and annihilating that host despatched
by Ravana, shall merrily journey to the abode of the monkey-
king.” Then furious like the Wind, the offspring of the
Wind-god possessed of dreadful prowess set about knocking
down the trees with impetuous violence. Then that hero,
Hanum4n, devastated that garden of the damsels, resounding
with the roars of mad elephants, and filled with diverse trees
and shrubs. And with its trees crushed and its tanks dam-
aged, with its fair peaks shattered in fragments and its pools


* The commentator explains this passage thus -—~"He that by great pains
accomplishes a small work, cannot be a great actor; but he that bringeth
about his end in a variety of ways through the minimum of effort, is the
actor.”—T. . : . 7

+ de, see Sitd,


1014" RAMATPANA.


eloquent with, the.notes of birds, riven all over, with coppety
and withered sprays cast about (in all directions), and with
its trees and plants shorn of their liveliness,—that wood was
no longer beautiful,—as if it had been burnt up by a forest-
fire ; and its plants resembled damsels with their apparel
falling off. And that magnificent wood, with its arbours and
its picture-gallerys destroyed, and its ferocious animals,
beasts and birds crying in distressful accents,—and its rocky
structures and other mansions broken down, was bereft of
its loveliness. And that grove of the inner apartment belong-
ing to the damsels* of the Ten-necked one, with its numbers
of agoka trees and plants cast about disorderly, was, in very
sooth, through the might of the monkey, rendered a sight
composed of plants, efc., tending to awaken the regret of the
spectator.t Then having done what was wondrous disagree-
able unto the mind of the magnanimous lord of the world,
that monkey desirous of coping alone with a vast host, stood
by the main entrance, flaming in-effulgence.


SECTION XLil. ©


Tuer on account of the cries of birds and the sounds of
breaking trees, all the denizons of Lanka were seized
with trepidation in consequence of fright. And agitated
with fear, birds and beasts hutried (on all sides) ; and omens


_ * Promaddvanasya—gen—occurs twice in this passage. The commen-
tator, as usual, refines on the word,—to one he assigns a literal sense ; another
he explains—of the grove belonging to the protector of the fematles,—i, ¢. the
wood, which, by arousing their desire for marans, assnrec their stay
‘there 1—T.

+ There is a pun on the word sohx—occuring twice. One of. these,
‘originally acoka, but entering into a vowel combination with the: preceding
word, is the name of a tree ; and Soka means sorrow. The egohe trees pelos
shattered, inspired the onlooker with soka—sorrow.—T.


. SUNDARAKANDAM. 1015


boding evil unto the Rakshasas, began toe appear (every-
where).. And grim-visaged R&kshasis, awaking from their
sleep, saw that wood devastated, and that heroic mighty
monkey. And. observing them, that mighty-armed and
‘powerful monkey endowed with immense strength, magnified
his dimensions, capable of striking terror into the Rikshae
sas, And beholding that exceedingly strong monkey resembl-
ing a mountain, the R&kshasis asked Janaka’s daughter,
saying,—“Who is this? And whence, and wherefore, hath
he come here? And why did he carry on converse with
thee? Tell us this, thou of expansive eyes. O lucky
one, entertain no fear. And, O thou having eyes with
dark outer corners, what is the talk that this one hath held
with thee 2?” Thereat, the chaste Sit&, having all her parts
perfect, answered,—“What is my power to read R&akshusas
capable of wearing forms at will? Ye know who he is and
what he doeth. Serpents, without doubt, know the way. of
serpents. And, furthermore, 1 am very much frightened,
nor know I wha that one is. I take him to be a Rakshasa,—~
who hath come here through his capacity to put on any
shape.” Hearing Vaidehi’s words, the Riakshasis swiftly
took to their heels. Some remained,—and some departed
to inform Ravana of the matter. And before R&vana, the
R&kshasis of deformed visages informed him of the hide-
ous and dreadful monkey. “O king, in the heart of the ggoka
wood there is a monkey of a terrific body, who, possessed
of immeasurable might, stayeth, after having carried on a
conversation with Janaki. Nor, albeit questioned by us many
a time and oft, doth Janaka’s daughter, Sita, having the eyes
of a deer, intend to tell us who the monkey is. He may be
the emissary of V4sava, or of Vaigravana ; or he may have
been sent by Rama himself from eagerness to get at the
\Whereabouts of Siti. And he it is that, wearing a wonder-
ful form, hath destroyed thy charming arbour of the interior,
filled with beasts of various kinds~-And quarter there is


1016 RAMAYANA,


none which hath not been destroyed by him ; and only that
place where the exalted Janaki is, remaineth uninjured by
him,—whether for preserving Janaki, or from fatigue—it
doth not appear. But what is his fatigue? She it is that
hath been preserved by him. And that overgrown Singapa
tree, affluent with elegant foliage, under which Sit& herself
hath (always rested), hath been spared by him. It behoveth
thee to order sharp chastisement to be inflicted on that one
of a fierce form, who, having carried on converse with Sitd,
hath laid thy wood waste. Who, O Sovereign of the
R&kshasas,that hath not his life severed from him,—converseth
with Sita, who hath captivated thy heart ?” Hearing the
speeches of the Rakshasis, Ravana, lord of Rakshasas,
with his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like the fire of a
funeral pyre. And as fall drops of lighted oil from a flaming
lamp,fell drops of tears from the eyes of the enraged Ravana.
And that highly energetic one ordered his heroic servants,
resembling himself, to punish Hanuman. And from that man-
sion speedily issued eighty thousand of those retainers, carry-
ing in their hands maces and mailets*,—having huge
bellies, and large teeth, of dreadful forms, and possessed of
unwieldy strength,—all eager to engage in the conflict and
take Hanuman. And having come near that monkey staying
at the main entrance, those swelling spirits rushed on, even
as insects rush into a flame. And equipped with variegated
maces, and bludgeons, and golden angadas,t and arrows re-
sembling the Sun, they approached that foremost of monkeys,
And accoutred in maces,axes,and javelins, and bearing beard-
ed darts and lances in their hands, they suddenly surrounded
Hanumfa and remained before him. And the graceful and
energetic Hanuman also, resembling a hill, flourishing his
tail over the ground, sent up tremendous roars. And attain-

* Kuta—hammer. The commentator, however,says that it means a weapon


resembling a hammer.—T.
+ A bracelet worn on the upper arm. —r.


“SUNDARARENDAM 1017


ing mighty proportions, Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god,
brandished his tail, filling Lank& with sounds. And at the
sounds of his flourishing, as well as with those resounding
ones set up by himself, birds began to drop down from the
sky. And he loudly proclaimed,—Victory to the exceedingly
strong Rama and to the mighty Lakshmana! And victory
unto king Sugriva, protected of Raghava! Iam the servant
of the Sovereign of Kogala, Rama of untiring deeds,—-
(lam) Hanumfn, the destroyer of hostile hosts, offspring of
the Wind-god. Anda thousand Ravanas cannot cope with
me in.conflict, when I shall hurl crags and trees by
thousands. In the very presence of all the Rakshas, shalt
I, having desolated the city of Lank& and paid my
reverence to Maithili, go away, my end being compassed.”
They were struck with affright at his roars; and they beheld
Hanumin elevated as an evening cloud. And now knowing
for certain that the monkey had been despatched by his
master, the Rakshasas commenced assailing him with various
kinds of dire arms.* Environed on all sides by those
heroes, that exceedingly powerful one, staying by the main
entrance, took up a terrific bolt. And taking that bolt, like
Vinat&’s offspring handling a darting serpent, he slew those
rangers of the night. And grasping (the bolt), the Wind-
god's son began to range the welkin and destroy (the
Rakshasas), like the thousand-eyed(deity)slaughtering Daityas
with his thunder-bolt. And having slain those Rakshasas,
who were the retainers of Ravana, the heroic offspring of
the Wind-god—foremost of heroes—desirous of fight, stood
at the gate. Then certain Rakshasas, getting off from the
field in fear, informed Ravana of the destruction of all his
servants. Hearing that a mighty host of the Rakshasas had
been slain, the king, with his eyes whirling in ire, ordered
* Swdmisandehanihpancdh—may also mean, having been assured by


Révana as to his firm resoluve—i.e. the Radkshasas must fight with Hanuman,
however desperate the undertaking might prove.—T. hte


128


1018 RAMAYANA,


Prahasta’s son of incomparable prowess, and invincible in
battle.


—e


SECTION XLII.


“Elavinc slaughtered the servants, Hanum&n, having
reflected awhile, thought,—“I have broken down the wood;
but have not destroyed the edifice dedicated to the deities
of the Rakshasas. Therefore, this very day will I demolish
this structure.” Having thought thus in his heart, that
foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, son unto the Wind-god,
displaying his strength, bounded unto the Chaitya* building,
elevated like a summit of Meru. And having ascended the
edifice resembling a mountain, that leader of monkey-bands,
possessed of wondrous energy, looked like another Sun
risen (in the sky). And having broken down that superb
edifice, the irrepressible Hanum4n, flaming in auspiciousness,
resembled (the mountain) Pariy&tra. And magnifying his
dimensions through his energy, the offspring of the Wind-
god fearlessly fell to striking his arms with his hands,and thus
filling Lanka with the sounds, And at those sounds of
striking arms, capable of striking deafness into the hearer,
birds began to drop down there, as well as the warders of the
religious mansion, with their senses overwhelmed. ‘Victory
unto Rama versed in arms} And unto Lakshmana endowed
with immense strength! And victory unto king Sugriva,
who is protected by Raghava! Hanum4n, son unto the
‘Wind-god, destroyer of hostile hosts, is the slave of Rama
of untiring deeds. And not a thousand R&vanas cah cope
with me in conflict as | hurl stones and trees by thousands.
Having destroyed the city of Lank& and paid my respects
to Mithila’s daughter, I, my object gained, shall depart in the

eh ee


* A building designed for deities.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1019


preseace of all the Rikshasas.” Having spoken thus, that
one of a prodigious person, seated on the Chaitya, emitted
tremendous roars, striking terror into the Rakshas. In con-
sequence of that mighty cry, an hundred guards attached to
the Chattya sallied out, taking various weapons—bearded
darts, scimitars and axes; and they surrounded the Wind-
god’s offspring, as he went on increasing his body. And
they encountered that foremost of monkeys with various
maces, and axes, and golden Angadas, and arrows resembling
the Sun. And those numbers of Rakshas, encountering that
best of monkeys,resembled an extensive and mighty whirlpool
in the Gang3. Thereat, the Wind-god’s son, the mighty
Hanum4n,*waxing enraged,violently uprooting a huge piller of
the edifice, plated with gold, and having an hundred borders,
began to whirl it (in the air).t And the fire generated
there thus, burnt down the entire edifice. Seeing that
edifice in flames, the graceful monkey-leader, having slain
the hundred Rakshasas, like Indra slaying Asuras with his
thunderbolt,—remaining in the sky, said,— Thousands of
strong, high-souled and foremost monkeys like myself,having
been created, and remaining under the command of Sugriva,
including ourselves as well as other monkeys—are ranging
all over the world. Some are endowed with the strength of
ten elephants, some with the strength of an hundred, some
have the prowess of a thousand elephants, and some
the strength of elephants numbered by herds. Some are
equal in strength to the Wind,—and there are there some
monkey-leaders who have no limit to their strength. Sur.
rounded with monkeys of this sort, having nails and teeth for
their arms,—in hundreds and thousands and fofis and


ayutas, cometh ‘our Sugriva,—the slayer of all (foes),
ee
* Marutatmaya—son unto the Wind-god, left out on the score of re-
daadency—T.
+ The reader is powerfully reminded of a like feat of Manoah’s. sou—'the
Wereuless Samson.'—T.


1et0 RAMAFANA.


Neither this city of Lank&, nor you, nor yet R&vana, shall
exist,—-having created hostility with that high-souled hero
of the Ikshw&ku race.”


SECTION XLIV,


_


Commanven by the lord of R&kshasas, Prahasta’s son,
the powerful Jamvumfli, having large teeth, went out bow
in hand. And he wore a red wreath and attire, with a
garland hung round his neck, and elegant ear-rings ; and
he was huge, and terrible, with his eyes whirling,—invincible
in encounter. And he impetuously stretched a graceful bow,
resembling the bow of Sakra, and roaring like vaj7a and the
thunderbolt.* And the entire welkin, and all sides and
quarters, were suddenly filled with the mighty sounds of that
bow as it was being stretched. And seeing him approaching
in a car yoked with asses, Hanuman endowed with vigour
both rejoiced and shouted. Thereat, the highly energetic
Jamvumili pierced with whetted shafts that mighty monkey,
Hanumin, who was seated on an awry plank at the gate
serving as a perch for pigeons.t He pierced that lord of
monkey’s face with half-moon (shaped) arrows, his head with
one having its head made like a hook and his arms with ten
ndrdchas.~ And pierced by the arrows, his coppery face
looked beautiful like a blown autumnal red lotus shot at by the
solar rays.—And his naturally red countenance being painted
with blood, looked lovely like a majestic red lotus in the sky,
washed with the honey of the red agoka.—Wounded by the
shafts, the redoubled monkey grew enraged. And he espied


* For distinction between the two, vide ante.—T.

+ This is all that I can make of the commentator’s gloss oa seranani-
tenhas-T. .

¢ Iron asrows.—T. 4


SUNDARAKANDAM. 102¢


a huge and gigantic crag beside him. Thereat, at once up-
rooting it, that one endowed with celerity and strength hurled
it (at his foe). And the enraged Rakshasa opposed it by ten
shafts. Witnessing his action rendered fruitless, the energe-
tic Hanumfin of terrific prowess, uprooting a large sé/a,
began to whirl it (in the air). Seeing the exceedingly strong
monkey whirling the sd/a tree, the highly powerful Jamvumili
dischanged a many shafts. And he severed the sé/a by
means of four shafts, and wounded the monkey in the arm
with five, in the chest, with one, and with ten, between the.
teats. With his body covered all over with shafts, (Hanum&n)
getting into a furious passion, taking up the same bolt, again
began to swing it with rapidity. And that terrific one
gifted with exceeding impetuosity, having whirled the bolt
with wondrous rapidity, let it light upon Jamvumili’s spacious
breast. And (anon) there was neither seen there his head, nor
his arms, nor his thighs,nor his bow, nor his car, nor his steeds,
nor his arrows at that place. And that mighty car-warrior,
Jamvumali, speedily slain, fell down to the earth, like a
tree whose trunk hath been crushed. Hearing Jamvumili
as well as his exceedingly powerful servants slaughtered,
Ravana became transported with anger, and his eyes became
reddened in wrath. And on the mighty son of Prahasta
having been slain, the lord of the night-rangers, with his
teddened eyes rolling in rage, speedily commanded the
sons of his counsellors, endowed with vast energy and
Prowess, (to encounter Hanuman in battle.)


3023 RIMAPANA


SECTION Xiv,


Tren ordered by the lord of Rakshasas, the sons of his
counsellors, seven (in number), in splendour resembling fire,
issued forth from that mansion. And surrounded by a mighty
army, furnished with bows, endowed with wondrous strength,
and accomplished in arms—the foremost of those acquainted
with weapons—each burning for victory, with mighty cars
yoked with steeds, covered with golden net-works, bearing
pennons and standards,and having sounds like those proceed-
ing from clouds,—exultingly stretching with immeasurable
prowess bows decked with gold,—resembling clouds surcharged
with lightning,—those warriors sallied out. Learning that the
servants had been slain, their* mothers, along with their
friends and kindred, were overpowered with grief. And
vieing with each other in eagerness, those (warriors) decked
in ornaments of polished gold, confronted Hanuman staying
at the gate. And with their cars sending roars, the Rakshasas,
pouring showers of shafts, ranged (the field), resembling
clouds during the rainy season. And covered with those
arrowy showers, Hanuman had his person concealed, like the
monarch of mountains hidden by a downpour. And that
swift-speeding monkey, coursing the cloudless sky, evaded
those shafts of those heroes, as well as the impetuosity of
their cars. And that hero, playing pranks with those bow-
men, appeared like the masterful Wind playing tricks with
the bow-bearing clouds.t And sending up a dreadful shout,
and thereby filling that vast host with fright, the energetic
Hanum&n rushed on that Rakshasa army. And that subduer
of enemies slew some with slaps, and some he rived with
nails, and some he killed by blows, and others with (the

EEE EAE ER SUS ALES IO ARLE RRS IL


* ¢, ¢. the mothers ef the sons of the counsiNors—T.
4 ie, having the iris.—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1033


Pressure of) his chest. And some dropped down on the
ground at the very same spot at the sounds that he emitted.
And on their being slain or falling on the earth, that army,
afflicted with affright, began to fly in all directions. And the
elephants roared in frightful tones, and the steeds fell down
on the earth.—And the Earth was covered with broken boxes,
_flagstaffs, and umbrellas, (belonging to the cars), as also with
the cars themselves.—And rivers running gore were seen on
the way, and Lank& uttered various frightful cries, And having
slain those overgrown Rakshasas, that exceedingly powerful
and heroic monkey of terrific power, desirous of again coping
with other Rakshasas, retraced his steps to the self-same
entrance..


SECTION xivi.


—o—


‘Learwine that the sons of the counsellors had been
slain by the high-souled monkey, the Ten-necked one sup-
pressing the apprehension that was in his heart, restored the
balance of his mind. And he directed five of the foremost
leaders of his forces, the heroic Virupaksha, Yupaksha, the
Rakshasa Durdharsha, Praghasa, and Masakarna, versed in
polity, endowed with the speed of the Wind in conflict and
alert on every occasion,to take Hanum&n captive.Ye generals,
do ye taking a mighty host with steeds, elephants and cars,
chastise that monkey. And coming to that dweller of the
woods, ye had better act heedfully, and should accomplish
this work in consonance with place and season, Having
regard to his acts, I do not take him to be a monkey. He
is a great being endowed with extraordinary prowess every
way. My mind is not satisfied that he isa monkey. He
may have been brought into being by Indra, through ascetic
might, for injuring us. Backed by you, I have defeated


1024 RAMAYANA.


(deities), and Niages, and Yakshas, and Gandharbas, and
Asuras, and Maharshis. And, for certain, they have herein
tried todo us some wrong. Therefore there is no doubt
about this,—do ye by main force take him. And, ye generals,
go ye, taking a mighty force with steeds, elephants and
cars. Do ye chastise this monkey. This monkey of deli-
berate prowess should not be disregarded by you. I have
seen* monkeys of immense prowess,—Vali with Sugriva
and the exceedingly powerful Jambavan, and Nila the
general, and others with Dwivida at their head. Their speed
is not dreadful, nor their energy, nor their prowess, nor
their intelligence, nor their strength, nor their courage, nor
their capacity to change shapes. Therefore ye should know
him as some great being staying in the form of a monkey.
Exerting yourself to the uttermost, do ye chastise him.
These three worlds combined, with Indra, celestials and
mortals, are incapable of long staying before you in the field
of battle. Still a person versed in polity, albeit anxious to
secure victory in battle, should carefully preserve self, as
success in war is unstable.” Thereupon, they, possessed of
the energy of fire, accepting the words of their master,rushed
forth vehemently, accompanied with cars, mad elephants,
fleet steeds, sharp and whetted weapons,~-and forces of all
kinds, Then those heroes saw that effulgent mighty monkey,
shining in his native splendour, like unto the risen sun,—
possessed of great strength and immense speed, and magnani-
mity of mind,—seated at the gate. And soon as they saw
him, they, frightened at his appearance, assailed him with
their respective terrible weapons, And Durdhasa discharged
at Hanumin’s head five white iront arrows with yellow
heads, and possessing the lustre of lotus-leaves. Having


* There is a word—sighra, soon—in this sloke, of which I fai) to perceive
the relation. —T.

+ This may rather look an ineongruous mizture of images; but the teen
artows may have been silvered over.—T.


SUNDA RARANDAN. 1025


been pierced in the head with those shafts, the monkey,
roaring, leapt into the sky, making the ten cardinal points
resound, Then the exceedingly powerful and heroic Durdhara,
mounted on a car, with his bow stringed, came forward,
showering innumerable arrows by hundreds. Thereat, even
as the wind driveth away rain-pouring clouds at the end of
the rainy season, the monkey, remaining in the sky, resisted
(his antagonist) as he kept on pouring his shafts. And sore
beset by Durdhara, the Wind-god’s son again emitted cries,
and that puissant one also increased himself. Then darting
far up in the air, the monkey suddenly descended on the
car of Durdhara with extreme vehemence, like unto a
mass of lightning alighting on a mountain.—Thereat his
eight steeds getting mangled, and the wheels and pole of
his car having been broken, Durdhara leaving the car, fell
down to the earth, deprived of life. Seeing him down on the
earth, those irrepressible subduers of enemies, Virup&ksha
and Yupaksha, waxing wroth, sprang up. And springing up
suddenly, they by means of maces, dealt blows on the chest
of the monkey, who was staying in the unclouded sky.
Thereat resisting the furious rush of those gifted with ebullient
energy, that exceedingly powerful one descended to the
earth with the violence of the Fair-feathered (bird).* Then
getting at and uprooting a sé/a tree, that monkey, the
Wind-god’s offspring, slew both of those heroic Rakshasas.
Learning that those three had been slain by the monkey
gifted with speed, the mighty and onrushing Praghasa
laughing in scorn advanced (in the encounter), And the
energetic Bhasakarna also came forward in rage, taking a
dart. And (they) meeting together, Praghasa assailed the
famous, tiger-like monkey with a sharp-edged axe, and
Bb&sakarna (attacked) the elephantine monkey with a javelin.
And with his- limbs wounded by them, and his hair wetted
with blood, that monkey resembling in splendour the infant


* Suparna—a name of Garura—T.


129


gtor RAMAYANA,


sun, grew furiously enraged. And that elephantine monkey,
the heroic Hanum&n, uprooting a mountain-peak, with beasts,
snakes, and trees (in it), slew those Rakshasas ; and, crushed
by that mountain-summit, they were reduced to powder. On
those five generals having fallen, the monkey slew the
remaining forces. And as the thousand-eyed Deity destroyed
Asuras, the monkey destroyed steeds with steeds, elephants
with elephants, warriors with warriors, and cars with cars.
And with horses and elephants, swift steeds, with broken
wheels and mighty cars, and R&kshasas slain, all the ways
were blocked up. And having destroyed in battle the heroic
generals with all their forces and vehicles, that hero in
the same way rested at the gate like Kala himself engaged in
destroying people, when he hath gained respite.


SECTION XLVt.


— Sees —


Hearne that the five generals had been slain by
Hanuman alone with their vehicles and followers, the king,
gazing at prince Aksha, who was ready and eager to go to
battle, commanded him to take the field. And that puissant
one of a bow decked with gold, on being commanded (by
Ravana) with a glance, started up, like unto fire on being
fed by clarified butter by foremost regenerate persons on the
sacrificial ground. And that best of Nairitas* possessed of
prowess, ascending a car resembling the infant sun in
effulgence, and surrounded all round with networks of
burnished gold, sallied forth in quest of that mighty monkey.
And (that warrior) in prowess resembling an immortal,sal lied
out ascending that car, obtained with long-continued
asceticism, embellished with a network of glowing gold,


© RaAkshasas.


SUNDA RARANDAM. 1027


furnished with pennons,having a standard studded with gems,
nicely yoked with eight excellent steeds having the fleetness
of thought, incapable of being overpowered either by
celestials or Asuras,competent to course over uneven ground,
of the lustre of lightning, sky-ranging, completely
garnished, equipped with quivers, with swords fastened to
the banners in eight directions, with darts and lances
arranged in proper places, splendid with every object in fult
measure, bearing golden threads, wearing the brilliancy
of the sun and moon, and possessing the effulgence of the
sun. And filling the firmament and the earth containing
mountains with sounds proceeding from steeds,elephants and
mighty cars,—he, accompanied by his forces, presented
himself before the capable monkey, who was seated at the
gate. And coming before the monkey, Aksha, having the
gaze of a lion,with eyes betokening regard, gazed at Hanuman
resembling the Fire on the occassion of the universal dissolu-
tion at the end of a yuga, intent on destroying creatures, and
who was seated and was influenced alike by surprise and
regard. And seriously considering the impetuosity of the
high-souled monkey as well as his prowess in relation toa
foe,—as also his own strength, he increased (in strength) like
the Sun on the expiration of a Yuga. And growing enraged,
(Aksha), staying calmly in the field, with concentrated soul,
challenged Hanum4n difficult to resist in conflict and of
prowess worthy to witness, with three whetted shafts, And
finding the monkey proud and untiring, capable of vanquish-
ing his foe, and possessed of exalted spirits, Aksha took up
his bow and held his arrows in his hands. And wearing
a golden corslet, angadas, and eariugs, and possessed of
fiery vigor, he closed with the monkey; and their meeting
was something unparalleled on this earth,—and was calculat-
ed to raise the respect* even of the celestials and the


* Sambhramoprade, according to Ramanuja, means, capable of exciting
fear —T.


1038 ° RAMEVANA., F


Asuras. And witnessing the mighty conflict of the prince
and the monkey, Earth emitted cries, and the Sun did not
burn, and the Wind did not blow, and the mountains shook,
and the welkin sounded, and the main was vexed. And
that hero, skilled in aiming, fixing and discharging arrows,
shot at the monkey’s head three fine-headed feathered shafts
plated with gold near the feathers, and resembling venomous
serpents. And with his rolling eyes washed with blood in
consequence of the shafts having alighted at his head,
Hanumin, resembling a new-risen Sun having arrows for its
rays, looked splendid like the light-engarlanded Sun. And
seeing in battle that son of the foremost of monarchs, with
his excellent weapons upraised and his beautiful bow, that
best of the counsellors of the lord of monkeys, rejoiced, and
intent on encounter, increased himself. And with his ire
heightened, that one endowed with energy and prowess, like
unto the ray-decorated (Sun) on the crest of Mandara,* began
to burn with the fiery rays of his eyes, Aksha, along with
his forces and vehicles. And as a mass of clouds showereth
rain on a high hill, the arrow-showering Rakshasa resembling
clouds, having the bow for his rain-bow, discharged shafts
at that foremost of monkeys, representing a mountain. And
then the monkey, having sounds like those of clouds,
beholding in battle Aksha of terrific prowess in conflict,
and strong in energy, strength and shafts, sent up shouts
from elation of spirits. And as an elephant approacheth a
deep pit covered over with grass, (Aksha) from a spirit of
childishness elated in conflict with his prowess, with his ire
heightened, and eyes resembling blood, drew near the
monkey in the fleld. And as Aksha went on hastily pouring
shafts, that one uttering roars resembling the rumbling of
clouds, looking terrible in consequence of his arms and thighs
flung about, darted into the sky with exhuberant energy. And


* The Sun is on Mandara in mid-day; therefore the meridian Sun is
meant here.—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1029


as he leapt up, that strong and powerful one—foremost .of
Rikshasas—that car-warrior and the best of choice car-
wartiors—rushed at (Hanuman), showering arrows on him,
like a cloud showering hail-stones on a mountain. And
dashing in the. midst of the arrows like the wind, and thus
baffling them, the heroic monkey of dreadful prowess in
conflict, and endowed with the speed of thought, began to
range the path of the air. And witnessing Aksha with
regardful eyes, as that one intent on contest, taking his bow,
was covering the sky with various excellent arrows, the
Wind-god’s offspring was plunged in thought. Wounded in
the arm with shafts by that high-souled, noble prince, that
mighty-armed one, capable of adequately appreciating the
nature of actions, thought on (Aksha’s) prowess in battle.
“This exceedingly powerful one, endowed with the splendour
of the infant sun, is doing dire deeds incapable of being
done by a boy; and [ am loth to slay one that hath shown
himself equal to every martial feat. This one ig high-souled,
mighty in energy, of concentrated self, and capable of bearing
extreme hardships in war; without doubt, by virtue of
his actions, he is worthy of being honored by Nagas, Yakshas
and ascetics. With his mind braced by prowess and hope,that
foremost of heroes eyeth me staying in the fore-front. The
prowess of this light-handed (one), I ween, maketh even
the hearts of the celestials and Asuras tremble. If 1
disregard him, he shall certainly vanquish me, for his
prowess in battle ‘increaseth (fast). Therefore I must even
slay him: it is not proper to suffer an increasing fire.” Thus
reflecting on the strength of his foe and having ascertained
his line of action, that puissant one endowed with great
strength, summoned energy and set his heart on slaying
him (his antagonist). And remaining in the path coursed
by the air,that heroic monkey, the offspring of the Wind-god,
with his slaps slew his eight powerful and excellent steeds,
capable of bearing pressure and trained to diverse circular


1030 RAMAYANA,


movements, And successfully assailed by the councilor
of that lord of monkeys, the car with its seat smashed, and
its pole broken, and deprived of its steeds, fell to the earth
from the sky. Thereat, forsaking that car, the mighty car-
warrior sprang up into sky with his bow and holding his
sabre,—and (resembled) an ascetic of fierce energy conse-~
quent on austerities, going up to heaven, renouncing his
body. Then the monkey possessed of the energy and. vigor
of the Wind, approaching him as he was ranging the air
coursed by the king of birds, the Wind and the Siddhas, at
length fast caught hold of hisdegs. And as the foremost of
birds, Garura taking a mighty serpent, whirls it, that foremost
of monkeys, resembling his sire in prowess, whirling Aksha
in the conflict, violently dropped him on the earth. And
with his arms, thighs and chest crushed, bleeding, (having
his bones and eyes smashed, his joints riven, and his tendons
snapped, the R&kshasa lay on the earth,slain by the offspring
of the Wind-god. And tormenting him (Aksha) on the earth,
that mighty monkey caused great fright unto the ruler of the
Rikshasas ; and he was gazed at by the assembled Maharshis
and the orbit-coursing ones and all beings with Yakshas
and Pannagas, come to see him. And on the prince
being slain, that monkey was gazed at by the celestials with
Indra, who had been seized with extreme wonderment.
And having slain in battle prince Aksha resembling a son
of the celestials and possessed of blood-red eyes, the hero
(again) neared the same gate, and waited there like Kala
bent upon destroying all creatures.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1031


SECTION xevilte


On prince Aksha having been slain by Hanuman, the
magnanimous monarch of the Rakshasas,wrought up by wrath,
repressing his feelings, ordered Indrajit resembling a
celestial, (to take the field against the foe.) “Thou art the
foremost of those bearing arms; and thou hast afflicted
even the gods and Asuras (in battle) ; thy deeds have been
witnessed by the celestials with Indra; and thou hast pro-
cured a weapon* even from the Great-father. And coping
(in conflict) with thy might of arms, all the celestials with
the Maruts, headed by the lord of celestials himself, could
uot stay in the field. And there is none in these three worlds
(save thyself), who doth not come under the influence of
fatigue in battle. And thou art preserved by the prowess
of thy arms, and protected also by thy ascetic merit ; and
being skilled in the knowledge of season and place, thou,
methinks, art the foremost of them all in intelligence, And
there is no deed which thou canst not perform in the field ;
and there is nothing in counsel capable of being arrived at
by arguing on the lines prescribed by the scriptures, which
thou art not equal to; and there is none in all the three
worlds who doth not know thy strength and prowess in arms.
And thy ascetic energy is like unto mine, as well as thy
prowess and might in arms in battle. And having thee
in the conflict, my mind assured (of victory), doth not expe-
rience sorrow, Slain have been all the servants, as also
Jamvumili, and those five generals, the heroic sons of my
councilors, and the swelling forces including steeds,
elephants and cars. And low lieth Mahodara, and prince
Aksha hath also been slain. O destroyer of foes, my mind


* vis, the Brahma weapon.—T.


1032 RAMAYANA.


did not feel the same confidence in them that I do in thee.*
And seeing this mighty host slain, as well as the prowess
and energy of the monkey, and the taking into consideration
thine own strength, do thou put forth thy energy according
to thy strength. And on nearing the scene (of conflict),
do thou, O foremost of those bearing arms, seeing thine
own strength and that of the foe, so exert thyself that the
latter, (now) resting quietly in consequence of having created a
carnage (on the hostile hosts), may wax enfeebled.t O hero,
army can serve no purpose here; for hosts fly (before)
Hanum4n or are reduced to nothing. Neither can it avail
to use arms of terrific power and resembling the thunderbolt.
Nothing can resist the rush of the Wind-god’s offspring ;
and this one like unto fire is incapable of being slain with
weapons. Revolving well (in thy mind what I have remarked),
do thou in order to the attainment of success, with an
intent mind remember the divine virtue of this bow, and
repairing (to battle) strive to vanquish the foe, baffling his
attacks.{ O foremost of intelligent ones, (that I send
thee to battle) is certainly not proper; yet this course of
action is endorsed by Kshatriyas and those following
the morality of kings. O subduer of enemies, one should be
versed in various branches of learning as well as be masterful
in war.§ He that craves victory in fight, should be acquaint-
ed with various branches of knowledge.||


* According to another reading, the meaning would be :—"O best of
warriors, do thou, considering thy own strength and that of the enemy, so
exert thyself that he may no longer inflict terrible losses on our army.”
(Tirtha)—T.

+ Another meaning is: Looking on thyself, and (not on my forces), as
constituting my main stay, put forth thy prowess—T.

¢ One should know in what branches of knowledge one’s enemy is proficient,
and, understanding this, one should strive for victory.—T.

§ According to a different reading,the meaning would be, ‘Thou art compe-
tent to fight agreeably to the rules,”—T.

| The Sloka is very difficult and incapable of interpretation without at


places meanings being read into it—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1033


Hearing the words of his father, (Indrajit) gifted with
celestial prowess, determined to fight, instantly circumambu-
lated him, Excited with a desire for fight and worked up
with energy, Indrajit, eulogized by the friendly Rakshasas,
set out for battle. And that highly effulgent and graceful
son of the lord of the Rakshasas, having expansive eyes
resembling lotus-petals,—issued out like unto the rising of
the ocean during a parva.* Thereupon Indrajit of unbear-
able prowess, equal to the lord of the celestials, ascended
acar drawn by four horses, having sharpened teeth and
resembling Garura in velocity. And that master of a car and
foremost of bowmen, conversant with the use of all weapons
-=—the best of those using swords—proceeded soon in his car
where Hanuman was. And hearing the sound of his car and
the twang of his bow, that heroic monkey attained an excess
of delight. And taking up a bow and sharpened darts,
Indrajit, versed in the rules of war, proceeded towards
Hanuman. And as he issued out for battle, greatly uelighted,
with arrows in his hands, all the quarters became dark,
and jackals began to set up terrible cries. And there
arrived the Nagas,tthe Yakshas, the Maharshzs, the planets,
and the Siddhas, and the birds, covering the welkin, and,
greatly delighted, began to make a noise. And beholding that
car having a flag like that of Indra, approach very quickly,
the monkey began to emit terrible roars and increase
himself. And Indrajit too, seated on the cclestial car and
having a painted bow, began to stretch it, emitting a sound
resembling that of thunder. Thereupon closed in conflict
those two greatly powerful (heroes)—gifted with swift move-
ments and fearless in battle—the monkey, and the son of the
lord of Rakshasas, like unto the lords of celestials and Asuras.
And bafiling the shafts of that hero of a mighty car, an accom-
plished bowman and a finished warrior, the immeasurably

* A name given to certain days in the lunar month at the full and change
of the moon, and the 8th and 14th of each half month.--T.


130


164 Riudrana.

powerful monkey increasing himself began to range in

the welkin.* Thereupon the heroic (Indrajit)—slayer of
foes—began to discharge incessantly shafts, large, sharp,
well-feathered, painted in gold and swift-coursing like unto
thunder. And hearing again the noise of his car,the sounds of
drums, bugles, and war-drums, and the twangs of the bow, he
again leaped up (in the sky). And baffling the aim of (Indrajit),
who had always an eye on it, that great monkey ranged at
a distance from those shafts. And again facing the arrows
and stretching his hands, the Wind-god’s son again leaped up.
And those two heroes,gifted with swift movements and versed
in the art of war, engaged in a combat, admired of all
beings. And Hanum&n could not find out the short-comings of
the R&kshasa, nor could that high-souled one detect the
weak points of the son of the Wind-god. And these two
gifted with celestial prowess, engaged in conflict, became
unbearable unto each other. And seeing him unhurt though
aimed at with infallible arrows, the high-souled (Indrajit), con-
trolling his senses, engaged in deep and devout meditation}
{to realize the true identity of Hanuman). Thereupon, that
son of the lord of Rakshasas pinned his thoughts upon
that foremost of monkeys, and, finding him incapable of
being slain, h8 began to devise plans how he could be bound.
And that hero, foremost of those versed in the use of
weapons, discharged at that best of monkeys the highly
powerful weapon conferred on him by Brahm§, the Great-
father of the celestials. And knowing him incapable of being
slain, Indrajit conversant with the use of weapons, bound

* Literally it means the passage of his father. Hanumdén's father being
the Wind, it means the sky.—T.

+ According to Hindu philosophy, one by virtue of yoga and self-control
can realize many great things which are beyond ordinary human concep.
tion. Beholding Hanuman unhurt though assailed incessantly with tercible
shafts, Indrajit at once jumped at the conclusion that he must be a great spirit


in a mortkey-form. To realize who he in reality was, he engaged in yoga
or devout meditation. —T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1035


that large-armed son of the Wind-god with that weapon.
And being bound up by that R&kshasa with the weapon,
the monkey became motionless and fell down on the earth.
And thinking that he was bound up with a Brahma weapon,
he did not feel the least pain in consequence of
Brahmf&’s blessing. And that heroic monkey began to
think of the boons conferred on him by the Great-father
of the celestials. And thinking that the weapon was
conferred by the Self-create and consecrated by sacred
Mantras, Hanum§n began to think of boons conferred
by the Gveat-father. “In consequence of the power of the
Lord of creation | am incapable of extricating myself
from these bonds.”’ (Knowing this by means of devout medita-
tion,he reflected again,)—This has been ordained by Him,and
I must put up with this pain for sometime.” Revolving well
the power of the weapon, the boon of the Great-father, and
his own prowess to extricate himself from the bonds, the
monkey followed the Great-father’s behest,—“I do not fear
though bound by this weapon, since I am being protected by
Brahma, Indra and the Wind-god. It will be better if I am
carried off by the R&kshasas, for I shall reap very
great benefit by my conversation with the lord of Rikshasas.
Therefore let the enemies carry me.” Having resolved
this, the considerate (monkey)-slayer of foes—remained
motionless. And being ruthlessly bound by the foes
and remonstrated with by them, he began to moan piteously.
And beholding that slayer of foes motionless, the R&kshasas
bound him up with cotton and bark. And he gladly
allowed himself to be tied up and rebuked by his enemies,
thinking that he might converse with the lord of the
Rikshasas, if he, out of curiosity, should like to see him.
Being bound with bark, that powerful (monkey) got
himself freed from the binding of the weapon, for the binding
force of a Brahma weapon becomes null when there is
any other binding. And beholding that best of monkeys tied


1036 .RAMAFANA.


up with bark-and liberated from the binding of the weapon,
Indrajit reflected that the binding force of the Brahma weapon
became powerless when there was any other binding. ‘‘Alas,
(those Rakshas) have rendered my mighty deed fruitless.
They know not the action of Mantras.* And on the
Brahma weapon being baffled, any other weapon cannot effect
anything ; and thus we have all been placed in a critical
predicament.” On being released from the weapon, Hanuman
did nut betray any signs of his liberation, albeit he was
pulled by the Rakshasas and pained by the bonds they had
bound him with. And the monkey, Hanumin, was pulled by
those cruel Rakshasas having fatal boxes, in the direction of
the lord of Rakshasas. And seeing (Hanum&n) freed from the
(Brahma) weapon yet bound by the bark of trees, he (Indrajit)
showed the exceedingly powerful and highly heroic monkey
unto the king along with his adherents. And the Rakshasas
related unto the ruler of Rakshas everything touching that
foremost of choice monkeys, resembling 2 mad elephant
who was in bonds. “Who is he? And whose son? And
wherefrom ¢ And what's his errand? And by whom is he
backed ?”’——thus did the heroic R&kshasas converse on
beholding Hanuman. And others said,—Kill him,” “Burn
him,”—~"Eat him up.” The Rakshasas, growing enraged, thus ,
said unto each other.—Having passed some way, that
magnanimous one saw there old servants sitting at the feet
of the lord of Rakshasas,—as well as a mansion embellished
with countless jewels, And the exceedingly energetic
Ravana saw that foremost of monkeys dragged hither and
thither by R&kshasas of frightful forms. And that best of
monkeys too saw that lord ef Rakshasas, endowed with
strength and energy and resembling the resplendent sun.
And with his reddened eyes rolling, the ten-necked one,
gazing at that monkey, ordered his principal counsellors,


* That the action of a Brahma mantra upon one is nullified if one is
bound physically. —T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1037


boasting of high pedigree and noble character, (to
interrogate the incomer). And by turns questioned by them
as to his mission and purpose, as well as the fundamental
occasion (of his inroad), that foremost of monkeys replied,—
“A messenger, I come (from Sugriva.)’’


SECTION XCLIX.


—


Ano struck with his* deed, that one of dreadful vigor,
Hanumin, his eyes reddened in wrath, steadily looked at
the lord of Rakshas ; flaming in gorgeous and precious gold,
with a splendid diadem studded with pearls; (adorned
with) excellent ornaments, containing diamonds and costly
gems,--seeming to have been forged by the mind; appareled
in costly linen; smeared with red sandal paste, and
beautifully painted with various and variegated devices ;t
looking splendid with his sightly yet terrible eyes; having
sheeny, sharp and long teeth,—with hanging lips ;—~and
that hero (saw) that one of great energy, radient with
ten heads ; like unto Mandara with its summits containing
serpents ; resembling a mass of blue collyrium; with his
breast graced by a chain ; with his countenance possessed of
the lustre of the moon ; looking like a cloud beside the new-
risen Sun; with his dreadful arms bound with Zeyuras, and
graced with excellent sandal paste, brilliant with engadas,
and resembling five-headed serpents ; seated on a superb
seat,—upon a spacious, variegated, and gay sheet embellished
with crystals, and studded with gems ; ministered on all sides
by gorgeously adorned damsels,hearing hair-furnished fans,—
the strength-elated pne surrounded by four Rakshas—his

* Indrajit’s.—T.


t e. g. the three horizontal marks painted on the forehead by Saivas and
Sékias—T.


1038 RAMAYANA


counsellors versed in the mystery of counsel,—viz.,
Durdhara, Prahasta,the Raksha Mah&p&rewa, and the minister
Nikumbha,—like the entire world girt round by the four
seas-and encouraged by other counselors, fair of
forms and versed in counsel, even like the sovereign of
celestials by the celestials. And Hanuman beheld the
immensely energetic lord of R&ikshasas surrounded (on all
sides by his advisers), like a cloud containing water on a
summit of Meru. And undergoing exceeding trouble at
the hands of the Rakshas of dreadful prowess, (Hanum&n)
struck with mighty amaze, gazed at the lord of Rakshas.
And seeing the sovereign of Rakshas, appearing splendid,
Hanuman, bewildered by his effulgence, mentally reflected :
“Ah! the form! Ah | the patience! Ah ! the strength! Ah !
the splendour! Ah! the entire auspiciousness of the king
of Rakshasas ! If the lord of Rakshasas were not impious unto
the height, this one could well be the protector themselves
of the celestial regions with Sakra. But in consequence of
the fell and remorseless acts of this one, which are the
aversion of every one, all the worlds with gods and demons
hold him in fear. This one, heing angered, dares to convert
this earth into one entire ocean.” Beholding the potency
of the Rikshasa king of immeasurable prowess,the intelligent
monkey thus indulged in a variety of thought.


SECTION L.


Szzinc the tawney-eyed one staying before him, the
mighty-armed Ravana, affrighter of (the worlds), was over-
whelmed with fierce wrath. And gazing at that foremost of
monkeys girt with power, and with his soul exercised with
apprehension, he (thought),—“Is this the worshipful Nandi,
come hither in person, by whom I, on my jeering at him, had


SUNDAR 1KANDAM. 1039


formerly been cursed in Kailaga y* Or is this one wearing
the shape of a monkey Vali’s son, Vana?” And with his
eyes coppery with rage, the king asked his foremost
counselor, Prahasta, in words fraught with sense and suiting
the season, —"Ask this wicked-minded one, whence is he?
And what led him to ravage the grove, and what was his
object in brow-beating the Rakshasas? And what hath been
his purpose in entering my metropolis incapable of being
subdued ; and what for did he also fight (with my retainers ?)
Do thou ask the wicked-minded one about this.” Hearing
R&vana’s speech, Prahasta said—Take heart! Fair fortune
to thee! Thou needst not be alarmed, O monkey. If thou
hast been sent to Ravana’s residence by Indra, tell us truly
everything. Let no fear, O monkey, be thine. Thou shalt
be liberated. If thou belong to Vaigravana, or to Yama, or
to Varuna, and hast entered into this city of ours disguising
(thy proper shape),—or if thou hast been despatched by
Vishnu burning for victory, (tell us this truly), Thy --owess
-is certainly not that af a monkey,—thy form alone is that
ofa monkey. Unfold this (unto us) faithfully—O monkey,
and thou shalt get (back) thy liberty. But if thou shouldst say
aught untruthful, thy life shall pay dear for it. Or tell us
wherfore thou hast entered into Ravana’s mansion.” Thus
addressed then, that foremost of monkeys said unto the lord
of "Rakshasas,— “Tam not Sakra’s, nor Yama’s, nor Varuna’s.
Ihave no friendship with Dhanada,t nor have I been des-
patched by Vishnu. This is my race; and I have come
hither a monkey for obtaining a sight of the Rakshasa
chief. And it is to attain a sight of the R&kshasa lord that I
have destroyed his peerless grove; and it is for this that, the
powerful Rakshasas seeking for fight, I for the preservation
of my person have resisted them in conflict. I am incapable
of being slain with weapons even by the celestials and the


* Ravana had formerly laughed at Nandi for his monkey-face.—T.
t Lit.—giver of wealth—a designation of Kuvera.—T.


1040 RAMA yaNa,


Asuras themselves. This boon I also* happen to have
received from the Great-father. It is because I was desirous
of seeing the king that I have suffered this weapon to restrain
me, Although the Rikshasas have brought me (hither thus),
yet 1 am free from any weapon (restraining me). I come
near thee on a certain business of Rima. Knowing me for
a messenger of Raghava endowed with measureless prowess,
do thou, O lord, listen to my words, calculated to work
thy profit.”


SECTION LI.


Serine the Ten-necked one of mighty energy, that
foremost of monkeys, endued with strength, calmly spoke
unto him words containing sense,’—-I have come unto
thee at the command of Sugriva, O lord of Rakshasas. Thy
brother, the king of monkeys, enquires after thy welfare.
Listen to the desire of thy brother, the high-souled Sugriva,
and his words fraught with righteous sense and capable of
working one’s good here and hereafter. King Dagaratha,
master of cars and elephants and steeds,—is the friend of
all like unto their father, and is furnished with the splendour
of the sovereign of celestials. His eldest son,—mighty-armed,
and masterful, the darling (of his sire), hath, in accordance
with his father’s order, entered the forest of Dandaka with
his brother Lakshmana and his wife Sita. His name is
Rima, and he is exceedingly energetic, and ever abideth
on the path of virtue. His spouse, the celebrated Sita,
daughter unto Videha, the high-souled king Janaka, either
died or was carried off in Janasthina. Seeking for that
exalted lady, the king’s son, accompanied by his younger
brother, arriving at Rhrishyamuka, met with Sugriva. And


* Like thyself.


SUNDARARANDAM. 104!


Sugriva promised that he would undertake the search for
Sita, and Rama (on his part promised) that he would confer
on Sugriva the kingdom of the monkeys. And, thereupon,
slaying Vali in battle, the king’s son established Sugriva
as the lord of the monkeys. Thou formerly hast known
that foremost of monkeys, Vali. That monkey was slain
in battle by him (R&ma) with a single shaft. And, thereupon,
the lord of monkeys, Sugriva, true to his vow, eager for
searching Sita, despatched monkeys in all directions. And
thousands and hundreds and mtyutas of monkeys are explor-
ing all sides, below and above in the sky. And some are
like Vinata’s offspring,* and some like the Wind; their
course is incapable of being resisted; and those heroic
monkeys are endued with strength and celerity. 1, Hanuman
by name, am the son of the Wind-god. For Sita, 1, desirous
of seeing her, have come hither, bounding over the main
measuring a full hundred Yoyanas, And as I was roving, I
came to see Janaka’s daughter in thy house. Thou art
cognizant of righteousness and interest, and hast attained
prosperity through thy asceticism. Therefore, O eminently
wise one, thou ought not to confine another's wife. Actions
opposed to righteousness, and bringing on countless evils,
and causing extermination,—ill become persons of thy sort.
Who is there even among celestials and ‘Asuras that is
competent to stay before the shafts shot by Lakshmana and
Rama in wrath? There is none, O king, in all the three
worlds, that is capable of attaining ease, after inflicting
injury on Raghava. Treading the path of virtue and profit,
do thou pay heed unto my speech fraught with good for
three times ;+ and do thou return Janaki unto that fore-
most of men. Seen have I this exalted lady,—which was
difficult to compass. As for what remaineth to be. done,
Rama himself shall bring it about. That Sita I have beheld


* Garura—T.
+ Present, past, and future.—T.


1042 RAMAPANA,


overwhelmed with grief, whom, albeit resembling a five-
hooded serpent in thy mansion, thou knowst not. And
even as food thoroughly mixed with poison, being taken, is
incapable of being digested,this one is incapable of being sub-
dued even by the celestials and Asuras. It is not proper to
destroy religious merit reaped by undergoing’ extreme
mortification, as well as access of life (attained by the same
means).* Thou deemst thyself by virtue of thy asceticism
incapable of being destroyed by the celestials and Asuras;
and herein thy great merit (incident to thy acsterities) is
the cause.—But Sugriva is not a god or a Yaksha or a
R&kshasa. Raghava, O king, is a mortal and Sugriva is
the lord of monkeys. How canst thou, O king, save thy-
life from them ? He that, confiding in his strength,committeth
himself to foul proceedings, cannot count upon his righteous
deeds, but his evil ones follow him. Virtue destroyeth vice,
(yet vice like thine destroyeth all virtue).t Thou,without doubt,
hast obtained the fruit of thy righteousness, and the fruit
also of this iniquity thou shalt reap without delay. And
taking to heart the carnage in Janasthana and the slaying
of Vali as well as the friendship of Rama with Sugriva, do
thou understand thine own good. I, alone that I am, can at
my will destroy Lanka with her steeds and elephants and
cars; but he whose envoy I am hath not yet decided on
this point. Rama hath in presence of the tawny-eyed (ones)
forsooth promised the annihilation of the foe by whom Sita
hath been sore oppressed. On wronging Rama, Purandara
himself cannot escape scot-free,—what shall I say of persons
like thee ? Her whom thou knowest as Sild staying in thine
abode—know her for the Fatal Night that shall bring
destruction down on all Lank&. Therefore, beware of thyself
turning about thy neck the fatal noose in the shape of Sita!


* By such an iniquitous act as this—T.
+ The parenthetical part is the commentator’s filling in of the difficiency
in.the sentiment.—T.


SUNUARAKANDAM. 1043}


Do thou rather study thy welfare. Thou shalt behold this
city crowned with edifices and stalls, in flames fed by the
wrath of Rama, and consumed by the energy of Sita. Do
not bring to destruction thine friends and ministers, and
kindred, and brethren and sons, and thine entire welfare
thine enjoyments and wives and this Lanka. O sovereign
of the Rakshasas, do thou faithfully listen to these words
of me, a monkey and the servant and envoy of Rama.
Abolishing all the worlds with their creatures mobile
and immobile objects. the illustrious Rama is capable of
creating these anew. Neither among celestials nor Asuras,
Yakshas, Rakshas, nor serpents, Vidyadharas, Nagas,
Gandharbas nor beasts, Siddhas, the foremost Kinnaras,
nor all birds,—nowhere among any class of beings in all
time breathes he who can cope with Rama equal to Vishnu’s
self in prowess. Having done such a wrony unto the
foremost of all creatures—even unto that lion of a monarch,
Rama, thy life is in high peril. Neither deities nor Daityas,
nor the foremost night-rangers, nor Gandharbas and
Vidy&dharas, nor Nagas,nor Yakshas, can stay in fight against
Rama—the leader of these three worlds, And neither
Brahm, self-create, having four countenances, nor the three-
eyed Rudra, destroyer of Tripura, nor the august Indra,
the generallissimo of the celestials, can stay in fight before
Rama.” Hearing the distasteful yet excellent speech of the
bold and matchless monkey, the ten-necked one, with his eyes
whirling in wrath, ordered the destruction of that mighty
monkey.


SECTION Lit.


ee


Hearine the words of the high-souled monkey, Ravana,
bereft of his senses by wrath, ordered that he should be put to
death. On the death of that one who had proclaimed his own
position of being an envoy,having been ordered by the wicked-
minded Ravana, Vibhishana did not agree (with the decision).
And knowing that the lord of Rakshasas was wroth and that
that affair* was at hand, Vibhishana, resolved to act aecording
to justice, began to reflect as to what was to be done.
Having arrived at a decision, that oné skilled in speech,
paying homage unto that conqueror of foes, his elder brother,
spoke unto him in words eminently good—“O lord of
Rakshasas, forgive me and renounce thy wrath. Extend
thy favor unto me, and hear these words of mine. Lords of
the earth, endowed with integrity and knowing high and
low, never put messengers to death. The taking the
monkey's life, O king, is opposed to morality and repugnant
to social usage; and it is also unworthy of thyself. Thou
understandst morality, art grateful and versed in the morality
of sovereigns, and canst distinguish between high and low
among beings, and even thou knowst the prime segse of
things.If discerning persons like thee come under the govern-
ance of passion, mere toil is the pains that are undergone to
master the scriptures. Therefore, O destroyer of enemies,
be pacified. O lord of R&kshasas, difficult to approach,
consider what is proper or otherwise, and then do thou mete
out punishment to the envoy.” Hearing Vibhishana’s speech,
Ravana lord of R&kshasas, overcome with a mighty wrath,
answered,—"O slayer of foes, to slay the sinful doth not

* The destruction of Hanumén.—T.


t The commentator says, the passage means,—‘Give up thy promise {to slay
Hanuman) and abate thy anger. —T.


- SUNDA RARANDAM. 1045


cause sin. Therefore shall I slay this monkey, worker of
iniquity.” Hearing these words grounded in unrighteousness,
evil every way, and worthy of the base, that foremost of
intelligent ones, Vibhishana, spoke words couching supreme
import,—“O lord of Lank&, be propitious. O Sovereign of
Rakshasas, listen to speech containing the significance of
virtue and profit. O king, an envoy is not to be put to death
on the occasion of his discharging his proper functions.
This righteous people say everywhere unto all. Surely this
is an overgrown enemy; and he hath perpetrated immense
injury (unto us). But say the good, envoys are not to. be
slain, albeit many are the punishments that have been
assigned for messengers. Distigurement of the body, stripes,
shaving of the head,—one of these or all combined,—these
are said to be the punishments that should be inflicted on
envoys. But I have not heard of the punishment of death
being a penalty of the envoy. Why doth one like thee,
having one’s intelligence rendered meek as respects righteous-
ness and profit, and capable of proceeding on certain
decisions on the merits or otherwise of things,—come under
the sway of passion? Those possessed of power never
give way to anger. Neither in religious discussion, nor in
social concerns, nor in appropriating the right sense of
the scriptures, is there any that can approach thee, O hero.
Verily thou art the foremost among celestials and Asuras. In-
vincible to the gods and Asuras themselves gifted with
prowess, high spirits and intelligence, thou hast in battle
oftentimes put to the rout the chiefs of celestials and
monarchs. Those heroes that have heretofore mentally
entertained enmity against such a one as thou, foe of deities
and Daityas,—heroic and valient and unconquerable, have
not been deprived by thee of their lives.* Nor do I see any


* There is a particle api, even, which stands in the way of this sloka fitting
in with the context.—‘Zven those heroes who have mentaily efc’—isa lame


1046 RAMAYANA,


good that may likely accrue to us from the slaying of this
monkey. Let thy vengeance descend on those that have
despatched the monkey. Whether honest or otherwise, this
one hath been commissioned by others. Advocating interest
not his own and identifying himself with another, an envoy
doth not merit the being put to death. O king, if this one
be slain, no other sky-ranger whatever would show himself
unto us. Therefore, O captor of hostile capitals, do not seek
to slay this one. Thou shouldst spend thyself on celestials
with Indra (at their head). On his being killed, another see
I not who, O thou that lovest warfare, can move those
haughty sons of a king to take up arms against thee. And,
O bringer-in of joy unto the heart, it is not proper for thee,
invincible to celestials and Asuras gifted with prowess, high
spirits and intelligence, to disappoint the Nairitas (as to their
eagerness for encounter). They are devoted to thy good,
and are heroic and intent on thy well-being, born in lines
having high and fiery virtues, and cndowed with intelligence,
—the flower of those bearing arms—and have been main-
tained by thee. Therefore let a portion of the forces, having
received thy order, march to-day, and bring (hither) those
foolish princes. It is meet that thou shouldst display thy
prowess before foes.” Thereat, the lord of the night-rangers,
that potent enemy of the celestials and the foremost of
R&kshasa monarchs, lending free play to his intellect,
accepted the excellent words of his younger brother.


reason why Hanuman, who had wronged Ravana so outrageously in overt
acts, should be let off.—T.


SUNDARARANDAMH. 1047


SECTION ull.


Fearne those words of his, the high-souled ten-necked
one spoke unto his brother a speech consonant to season
and place,—‘‘Properly hast thou spoken,—to slay a messenger
is improper. But let him be punished with any chastisement
save slaying. Certainly the tail is a darling ornament toa
monkey. Therefore tet his tail be set on fire anon;
and this having been consumed, let him go away. Then
shall his best friends and kindred and acquaintances see
him crest-fallen, with his person deformed.” And the lord
of Rakshasas ordered,—“With his tail in flames, let this one
be taken all round Lanka containing terraces.” Hearing
his words, the Rakshasas, cruel through wrath, cover up his
(Hanumin’s) tail with worn pieces of cotton cloth. Thereat,
even as fire in a forest increaseth on getting dry fuel. the
mighty monkey grew in dimensions on his tail being wrapped
up. And having soaked (the cloth) in oil, they set fire to
it. Thereat with his soul overpowered with rage and
hatred, and his countenance like the risen sun, he lashed
them with his flaming tail. And those—rangers of the
night—those Rakshasas—old and young and females—again
bringing that foremost of monkeys,-grew exceedingly glad.
And that hero (being bound), entertained a purpose in
harmony with the season, ‘Albeit bound, the Rakshasas
cannot forsooth cope with me. Snapping these bonds, |
shall, darting up, again slaughter these. Although agreeably
to the mandate of their master these wicked-minded ones
have bound me, yet have they not been able to clear scores
with me. I can slay all these R&kshasas in battle; but I
suffer this (maltreatment) for not marring the (pure delight)
Rama shall derive from my deed.® I shall once more range


This, ar interpreted by RAmAnuya; but the sense isnot satisfactory.


1048 RAMAYANA.


around Lank&. Let this be so. At night I could not satis-
factorily examine the fortifications.* For certain, by me is
to be beheld Lank& when night hath departed. Let them
bind me anew. The Rakshasas pain me by setting fire to
my tail; but my mind doth not tire.’ Then the Rakshasas,
rejoicing greatly, went off, taking that mighty monkey
endowed with strength, an elephant (in prowess) among
monkeys. And blowing conchs and trumpets, and bruiting
it abroad by various actions,t those R&kshasas of cruel deeds
took (Hanum&n) about the city (of Lanka). And led by
those Rakshasas, that subduer of enemies, Hanuman, experi-
enced delight, and going about the mighty metropolis of
the Rakshasas, the redoubted monkey surveyed variegated
cars, enclosed court-yards, well-ordered terraces, streets
thronged with edifices, crossings, by-ways, and the interiors
of dwellings. And on terraces and highways the Rakshasas
proclaim the monkey, saying,—‘“This is a spy.” On
Hanumin’s tail being in flames, Rakshasis of frightful eyes
related unto that exalted lady{ tidings of this great mishap.
“OQ Sita, the copper-faced monkey with whom thou hadst
held talk, is being led around with his tail flaming.;’ Heariug
these cruel words, like unto loss of life, Vaidehi, burning in
gtief, approached the Fire. And wishing for the welfare of the
mighty monkey, that large-eyed lady with an intent mind
began to pray unto that bearer of sacrificial offerings, —°If
Ihave served my lord, if 1 bear a character, if I have ascetic
merit, if [have been the wife of one alone, then prove thou
cool unto Hanuman.” Thereat; as if communicating the
welfare of the monkey unto that one having eyes like those
of a young deer, the Fire flamed up,—and Hanumin’s sire,


How HanumAn’s resistance would have anywise marred Rama’s joy, is not
easy to understand.—T.

* Another meaning is —J¢s places inacessible on account of works.—T.

+ Publishing Hanumén’s penalty.—T,

¢ Sita —T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1049


albeit furnished with fire and a tail, blew ice-cold before that
worshipful one, breathing health (unto Hanuman). On his
tail’ flaming, the monkey reflected—"This fire is flaming.
Why doth it not then burn me all over ? I see it of exceeding
brightness, yet it paineth me not. (On the contrary), at the
end of my tail it seemeth like a mass of ice, Or this is
clearly due to Rama's power, even like the wonder (that I
witnessed) while bounding over the main—the mountain
under the lord of streams.* If the Ocean and the intelligent
Mainika could show such regard for Rima, what may not
the Fire do (for him?) Fire doth not burn me for Sita’s
(absolute) goodness, for Raghava’s prowess, and for (his)
friendship with my sire.” Then the elephantine monkey
again reflected for a while—Why should one. like me
suffer one’s self to be bound by vile R&kshasas? Therefore
it is meet that I should, displaying my prowess, avenge (this
wrong).” Thereat that vehement and mighty monkey
snapped his bonds, and furiously springing into the sky, the
terrible monkey uttered a shout. And then the graceful son
of the Wind-god arrived at the gate of the city resembling
a hill, where Rakshas there were none. And after having
attained the magnitude of a mountain,anon that self-controlled
one diminished himself and cast off his bonds. And having
freed himself, the graceful one again became mountain-
like ; and eying around, he saw a bolt standing against the
gate. And that mighty-armed one, the Wind-god’s son,
taking up that bolt of burnished iron, again slaughtered the
guards, And having slain the warders, that one of terrific
prowess crowned with a luminous wreath forged from his
flaming tail, and appearing like the sun garlanded with glory,
once again cast his eyes over Lanka.


* Maindka—T.


1050 RAMAYANA.


SECTION Liv.


Castine his eyes on Lank&, the monkey, his wish
attained, increasing his person and bursting with spirits,
considered as to how to give the coup de grace to his
exertions. ‘What recently is to be done by me here to finish
this business, that may afflict them the more? I have
ravaged the woed, and slain the choice Rakshasas, and
destroyed by main force a portion of the army. Now it
remains to demolish the fortifications. On the fortifications
being destroyed, my work shall have its toils crowned with
joy. Bygyndergoing slight labor in this business, shall have
my pains furnished with fruit. That bearer of sacrificial
offerings* who flameth on my tail,—it is my duty to
propitiate him with these excellent edifices.” Thereat that
mighty monkey, with his tail aglow, and resembling a cloud
(uminous)with lightning,began to range before the dwellings
in Lankd. And that monkey with a calm mind, eying (all
round), ranged one house from another, and gardens, and
stately piles. And that one gifted with exceeding vehemence,
and in strength resembling the Wind, bounding up set fire
unto the dwelling of Prahasta. Then Hanuman endowed
with prowess, leaping up, set unto Mahap&rgwa’s mansion
fire resembling that at the universal dissolution, And (then)
the mighty monkey darting up, set fire unto Vajradanshtra’s ;
and (then) that highly energetic one set fire unto Suka’s and
unto the intelligent Sarana’s. And the leader of monkey
bands in the same way burnt down Indrajit’s mansion ; and
then he burat the abodes of SumAli and Jamvumili; and
Ragmiketu’s mansion and Suryyacatru’s, and Hraswakarna’s,
and the R&akshasa Romaga’s; and the houses of Yuddhonmatta,
and Matta, and the Rakshasa Dwajagriva, and the calm


* Vide ante—T,


SUNDARIKANDAM., 10st


Vidyujjibhwa, and Hastimukha ; and of Karala, and of Vi¢&ta,
and of Sonitaksha; and Kumbhakarna’s mansion, and
Nikumbha's, and the residence of Yajnagatru, and of
Brahmagatru. And leaving alone the dwelling of Vibhishana,
that exceedingly energetic one—foremost of monkeys—by
and by burnt (all the houses there). And in those costly
mansions and dwellings, that famous one, that foremost of
monkeys, burnt all the wealth of those affluent persons.—
Having passed the dwellings of all, that powerful and auspi-
cious one approached the residence of the lord of Rakshasas,
Ravana. And in that foremost of mansions, adorned with
various gems, resembling Meru or Mandara, graced with
diverse auspicious things, he set unto the same, fire
flaming at the end of his tail. And the heroic Hanuman
roars, resembling a cloud (appearing) at the end of a Yuga.
And assisted by the wind, that highly powerful and vehement
one (Fire) flaimed up, like fire at the wreck of all, and.
the fire attained energy. And the wind spreading the
flaming fire all round those dwellings, those mansions
furnished with golden networks ; and containing pearls and
gems; enjewelled and magnificent, were shorn of their
splendour. And cracked edifices began to topple down to
the ground, like the mansions of Siddhas falling from the
firmament on the exhaustion of their righteousness. And
there arose a mighty uproar of those Rakshasas, as, bereft
of their good fortune, despairing of preserving their abodes,
they rushed in all directions,—‘‘Forsooth it is Fire himself
that hath come hither in the form of a monkey.” And
females crying with babes on their breasts, suddenly plunged
{into the fire}. And some fair ones with hair dishevelled,
and surrounded on all sides with fire, as they fell down from
dwellings, looked lovely like lightning from the welkin.
And he (Hanumin) saw various kinds of metals, mixed with
diamonds, and coral, and lapises and pearls and silver, run-
.ing down in streams from the mansions. And as Fire is not


10s RAMAPANA .


cloyed with wood and straw, Hanum&n never at ail felt
satiety on slaying those foremost of R&kshasas. And the
Earth could not contain the Rakshasas slain by Hanum§n.
And as Rudra had burnt down Tripura, the vehement and
high-souled monkey, Hanuman, burnt down Lanka. And
rising to the brow of Lanka's mount,* the fire of terrific
energy kindled by the impetuous Hanuman, spread wide
his tongues, And with the Wind assisting him, the smokless
Fire in the dwellings, with his flames feeding on the bodies
of the R&kshasas representing sacrificial offerings, spread
his magnitude, touching the horizen—resembling the con-
flagration kindled at the universal dissolution. And possess-
ing the fierce energy of a fof? suns, the mighty Fire
completely encompassing the entire Lanka, increased (in
volume), riving the mundane Egg with various sounds
resembling thunder-claps. And the Fire of terrific might,
having his flames resembling Kinguka blossoms, rising up to
the sky, clouds caused by volumes of smoke arising from
extinguished fire, in hue resembling blue lotuses, looked
exceedingly beautiful. ‘Either the thunder-bolt-bearing
Indra the Great—chief of celestials, or Yama himself, or
Varuna, or the Wind-god, or the Fire generated by Rudra’s
third eye, or the Sun, or Dhanada, or Soma. This is no
monkey,—this is verily A@/at himself. Or is this the
R&kshasa-annihilating Fire of Brahm& himself—the Great-
sire of all, the four-faced Disposer of the world’s destinies,—
come hither, wearing the form of a monkey? Or is this
Vishnu’s Energy, inconceivable, unutterable, infinite and sole,
and of surpassing power,—now come hither in its own
illusory nature, assuming a monkey-form ?” Seeing that city
suddenly consumed, with her souls, dwellings, and trees,
Ra&kshasas of note, assembled together, thus talked unto each
other. And then Lank4, suddenly consumed with Rakshasas,


* Trikuta on which Lanké rested—T.
+ A name of Yama—T.


SUNDARAKENDAM. 1054


horses, cars, serpents, crowds of birds, beasts and trees, began
to bewail tumultuously and loud in forlorn guise —‘O
father! O son! O love! O friend! O lord of my life and
frame ! all our religious merit is abolished.” Indulging in
various lamentations, the Rakshas thus created a mighty and
frightful uproar. And with the flames encircling her, and
her foremost heroes fallen, and her warriors destroyed,
Lank&, overcome by the might of Hanum&n’s wrath, became
as if she had been blighted by an imprecation. Then the
mighty-minded Hanuman beheld the Rakshasas in terror and
trepidation and castdown, and Lank& marked by fire and
bright flames,even as the Self-sprung eyeth the world destroyed
by his rage, And devastating the forest filled with many
excellent trees, slaying many a terrible Rakshasa in conflict,
and burning down the city of Lanka filled with picturesque
houses, the monkey, Hanuman, Wind-god’s son, stationed
himself there. And destroying many a R&kshasa, felling
many trees in the forest and setting fire to the houses c. the
R&kshasas, the high-souled (monkey) became engaged in
thoughts touching R&ma. Thereupon all the celestials
praised highly the high-souled, excellent and mighty son of
the Wind-god, foremost of heroic monkeys, gifted with the
velocity of the Wind. And all the celestials, the foremost
ascetics, the Gandharbas, the Vidhyddharas, the Pannagas,
and all other great heroes, attained excess of delight. And
having devastated the forest, slain the Rakshasas in conflict
and burnt the grand city of Lank&, the great monkey appear-
ed there. And seated on the variegated top of a splendid and
high mansion, the foremost of monkeys,spreading the rays of
his burning tail,looked like unto the sun of many rays. And
having consumed the city of Lank&, the gréat monkey
quenched the fire of his tail in the ocean. Thereupon
beholding Lank& burnt down, the celestials along with
Gandharbas, Siddhas, and the great ascetics, were struck
with wonder.


1054 RAMALANA.


SECTION LV.


—


Benoowe Lank& burnt down and devastated and the
demons terrified,the monkey Hanum&n began to reflect. And
worked up with fear and remorse,he reflected,~“What a mighty
iniquity have I perpetrated‘by burning down Lanka of my own
accord ? Blessed are those high-souled ones who control their
wrath by dint of their own good sense,like unto fire quenched
by water, What iniquity is there which cannot be perpetrated
by the angry ? They can even slay the worshipful and vilify
the pious with harsh words. The angry cannot decide what
should be spoken and what not. There is no vice which
cannot be committed by them, and there is nothing which
cannot be spoken by them. He is the proper person who can
subdue his rising ire by means of forgiveness as a serpent
leaves off his worn skin. O fie on me who am vicious-minded,
shameless and the perpetrator of a mighty iniquity. Not
thinking of Sita, I have slain my master with fire. Forsooth
hath the worshipful Janaki been burnt, since the whole city of
Lank& hath been devastated with fire. And she being burnt,
foolishly have I spoilt the work of my master. I have defeated
the great object for which I have laboured so much, In burn-
ing down Lanka, I have not saved Sit&. To have burnt down
Lanka is assuredly a trifle, but in my ire I have lost my great
object. Forsooth hath Janaki been consumed, since I behold
no spot in Lank& which is not made desolate with fire—
in fact the whole city hath been reduced to ashes. As I have
committed such an injury under the influence of my perverse
understanding, it behoveth me to relinquish my life here. I
shall jump into this flame or into a submarine fire, or I shall
resign my mortal frame to the animals that infest the ocean.
For, living, I shall not be able to face that lord of monkeys,
and how shall J, having spoilt their work utterly, show myself


SUNDARAKANDAM| 1055


unto those foremost of men ? I have through my culpable
passion furnished an illustration of the reckless monkey-
nature, which is well known over the three worlds. Fie on
this activity, born of (the quality of) passion, which is the
source of incompetence and rashness ; since although capable,
I did not protect Sita. On Sit having met with destruction,
both of them* shall cease to exist ; and on their ceasing to
exist, Sugriva shal] die along with his friends. And hearing
these tidings, how shall the righteous Bharata, attached unto
his brother (Rima), along with Satrughna, live? And on
the virtuous Ikshw&ku race being extinct, without doubt, all
the subjects shall be overwhelmed with grief. Therefore,
I of curst luck hath had my harvest of virtue and profit
taken away ; and being under the influence of baleful passion,
I am the cause of the destruction of creatures.” As he was
reflecting thus, he bethought him of auspicious omens which
he had witnessed since. “Or it may be that one of charming
limbs hath been preserved by her proper energy. The
blessed one may not have met with her end, for fire doth
burn fire. And Fire should not touch the spouse of that
virtuous one of immeasurable energy,—who is protected by
by her own character. And that bearer of sacrificial offerings
hath not burnt me, is owing to Rama’s power and the virtue
of Vaidehi. And why should she that is a very goddess unto
the three brothers, Bharata and the others, and that hath
enchanted the mind of Rama, meet with destruction? And
when that everywhere unspent Lord, having burning for
his office, hath not consumed my tail, why shoud he burn the
exalted lady ?” Then Hanuman wiih wonder again thought
of the sight of the golden mountain under the water.t ‘By
virtue of her asceticism, veracity, and devotion unto her lord,


she it is that can consume Fire, but Fire cannot burn her.’
a eed ak oe
* Rama and Lakshmana.—T.


+ Remembering the incident of his seeing the mountain Maindka through
Sité, Hanumdn was put in¢mind of Sit4’s superhuman power.—T.


1036 - RAMAYANA,


And as Hanuman was thinking of the magnitude of that
revered lady’s religious merit, he heard the converse there
of high-souled Charanas. “Ah! hard is the feat that
Hanumin hath forsooth achieved. He hath created a terrific
and fierce conflagration in the abode of the Raksha. The
females of Rakshas accompanied by boys and old folks, are
flying amain ; and in consequence of the hubbub it seems as
if (Lanka) is in lamentation through her mountain-caverns,
Burnt is this city of Lank& with her turrets, walls and gate-
ways; and we are astonished that Janaki is not burnt.”
These words resembling ambrosia Hanumfn heard (at that
time) ; and his mind was filled with joy. And what through
the auspicious omens that he had witnessed, and what
through the speech of the saints, Hanuman was delighted
(beyond measure). Then the monkey, with his end attained,
knowing that the king’s daughter was unhurt, became bent
upon returning after seeing her once again.


SECTION CVi.


Tren seeing Janaki seated at the foot of the Sinsapa
tree, (Hanum&n) saluting her said,—‘By luck it is that I see
thee unburt.” Then eying him again and again as he was
on the point of departing, Sit& said unto Hanuman in words
informed with affection for her husband,—“If, my child, it
liketh thee, do thou, O stainless one, stay here today in
some retired spot. To-morrow having refreshed thyself, thou
shalt set out. Thy vicinity, O monkey, for a while beguiles
me of slender luck of my measureless grief. Thou wilt go,
O powerful monkey ; but ere thou return, it is, O foremost
of monkeys, doubtful whether I shall live. And, O hero,
the not seeing thee shall try me sorely, who have fallen from


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1057


one misfortune into a greater one, and who, my mind
distracted, have been exercised by sorrow. And, O hero,
this mighty doubt is (ever) present before me. How shall
that exceedingly powerful one or that host of monkeys or
thosé two sons of that man of men, albeit backed by mighty
monkeys, cross over the ocean incapable of being crossed ?
Three beings have the power to bound over the deep ;—~
Vinat&’s offspring, thou, and the Wind-god, Then in this
business at hand hard to accomplish, what means dost thou,
versed in business, see, whereby the end may be attained ?-—
O slayer of hostile heroes, thou alone art quite competent
to perform this task ; and thou shalt attain fame through thy
rising prowess. But if blocking up Lank& with his forces,
that afflictor of enemies, Kakutstha, taketh me (from hence,)
then that shall be worthy of him.—Therefore do thou so
order things that that powerful and high-souled hero
in conflict, may act as becomes himself.” Hearing
her resonable, affectionate and pregnant speech, that
hero, Hanuman, answered,—‘O noble lady, that lord and
foremost of monkeys, Sugriva gifted with strength, is
determined on thy behalf. And that master of monkeys,
Sugriva, O Vaidehi, surrounded by thousands and Kotis
of monkeys, shall speedily come here (for the purpose).
And those best of men, those heroes, Rama and Lakshmana,
coming together, shall afflict Lanka with their arrows. And
slaughtering the Rakshasa with his own adherents, Raghu’s
son, O exceedingly fair one, shall ere long take thee back to
his palace.—O gentle damsel,do thou console thyself. Remain,
expecting the hour. Soon shalt thou see Ravana slain in battle
by Rama. On the lord of Rakshasas being slain along with
his sons, councilors, and friends, thou shalt meet with Rama
as Rohini meeteth with the Moon. At once shall Kakutstha
come, accompanied by the foremost of monkeys,—who,
conquering (Ravana) in conflict, shall remove thy grief.”
Having thus consoled Videha’s daughter, Hanum4n, son unto


133


1058 ot RAMAYANA,


the Wind-god, setting his heart upon departure, saluted
Vaidehi. And having soothed Vaidehi, and displayed his
surpassing strength, having rendered the city disconsolate,
and baffled Ravana, exhibited his terrific might, and saluted
Vaidehi, Hanuman became bent upon returning, crossing over
the mid-sea. Then that repressor of foes, the powerful
monkey, anxious to see his master, ascended Aristha, fore-
most of mountains ; (as if covered) with a sheet consisting
of blue woods of tall padmakas, and clouds lying in the
interspace between peaks,—and displayed from love by the
glad light of the Sun; appearing to be beholding with the
minerals scattered about serving for its eyes ; seeming to be
reciting aloud in consequence of the solemn sound of waters,
to be carolling clearly through its many fountains, and to stay
with uplifted arms by means of devadarus ; appearing to be
crying distressfully on account of cascades sounding all round ;
seeming to be trembling in consequence of verdant autumnal
woods waving, and to be piping on account of kickakas
vocal through the breeze ; eloquent; with the foremost
poisonous serpents appearing to be sighing forth ire;
appearing to be sunk in contemplation on account of caverns
covered with snow and looking solemn in consequence ;
as if moving about by means of hills looking like
its cloud-legs ; seeming to yawn in the sky with peaks
towering heavenwards,—scattered with summits, and graced
with innumerable caves; surrounded with sd/as, palms,
tamdlas, Karnas, and bamboos ; graced with spreading and
flowering underwoods ; abounding in various beasts, and
decked with mineral streams,—containing numerous rills—
thronged with collections of crags ; frequented by Maharshis,
and Yakshas, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras and serpents ;
impracticable in consequence of plants and trees; with
caverns harbouring lions; filled with tigers and other
(ferocious beasts) ; and furnished with trees having tasteful
fruits and roots. And the Wind-god’s offspring—foremost of


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1059


monkeys—ascended that mountain. Aud on the lovely level
‘of that mountain, the crags, crushed with sounds under the
tread of that one burning to behold Rama and wrought up
with excess of joy, were scattered all round. And ascending
that lordly hill, the mighty monkey magnified himself,
desirous “of going from the southern to the northern shore
of the salt waters. And getting to the top of the mountain,
that hero, son unto the Wind-god, cast his eyes upon the
dreadful main inhabited by terrible snakes. And that
foremost of monkeys, offspring of the Wind-god,* (mentally)
went from the south to the north, as if it were the air. And
then that best of mountains, sore pressed by the monkey,
began to emit cries,and with various creatures (on it), entered
underneath the Earth, with its peaks tottering and its trees
toppling. And borne down by the violence of his thighs,
trees bearing flowers, being shattered, as if destroyed by
Sakra’s weapon, fell to the ground. And the dreadful yells
of mighty lions in pain, inhabiting caves, entered the ear,
piercing the heavens. And Vidyadharis with their attires
falling off and their ornaments disordered, suddenly rose
from the mountaint unto the sky. And exceedingly powerful
and mighty snakes of virulent venom,—having flaming
tongues, with their hoods and necks tortured, began to roll
{on the earth). And Kinnars and serpents, Gandharbas,
Yakshas and Vidyadharas, forsaking that foremost of
mountains in affliction, took refuge in the sky. And that
graceful mountain also, tormented by that powerful one,
entered the nether regions with its tall trees and summits.
And that mountain, which (heretofore) had measured ten
yoyanas in area and thirty in height, became level with the
earth, And desirous of crossing over the salt waters, with


“ Mdruta—this term is used twice in this sfoka, once for Hanuman, and
next forthe Wind-god. One of these is left out on the score of redun--
dency.—T. ;

+ Dharanidhardt.—ab—from the bolder of the Earth, the latter being
supposed to rest on a mountain.—T.


tobo RAMAYANA.


their shores menaced by sounding (waves), the monkey rose
to the sky.


SECTION LVII.


Ano springing up like unto a winged hill, that one
endowed with energy, the untiring Hanuman, began to swim
on the ocean of the firmament having for its blown lotuses and
lilies, snakes, Yakshas and Gandharbas ; with the Moon for
its comely Kumuda ;* and with the Sun for its Kérandavas ;
charming to behold; having Tishya and Sravana for its
swans, clouds for its mosses and grass, Punarvasu for its
mighty fish, the red-bodied one ¢ for its huge aquatic animal,
Airivata for its spacious island, Swati for its sportive
swan, breezes for its billows, and moonlight for its cool
waters. And as if swallowing up the welkin and touching
the lord of stars, abolishing the sky decorated with stars and
the solar disc, and cleaving the clouds, the unfatigued
Hanuman began to cross over that sea. And (on all sides)
mighty masses of clouds, sable, crimson, blue, Mangis-
tha-hued, and green-red, looked exceedingly beautiful. And
now entering into clouds and now imerging from them, he,
again and again becoming visible and lost to sight, looked
like the Moon. And that one clad in white raiment, coursing
through diverse clouds, the hero’s body was (alternately)
visible and invisible, like unto the Moon inthe sky. And
the Wind-god’s son went on in the sky, scattering the clouds
and descending again and again. And sending up mighty
sounds, that exceedingly energetic one gifted with a power-
ful voice like that of the clouds, having slain the foremost
Riakshasas and rendered his name famous, having filled the

* Lily—T.
+ Bhama—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. root


city with lamentations and afflicted Ravana, having distressed
the mighty heroes and paid obeisance unto Vaidehi,—again
held his course along the mid-ocean. And touching
Mainaka—foremost of mountains—that one endowed with
prowess proceeded amain like an iron dart let go froma
string. And from a distance approaching and beholding that
mighty mountain, Mahendra, resembling clouds, that
redoubted monkey began to roar. And having a lusty voice
resembling that of clouds, that monkey, roaring, filled all
quarters with his lofty shouts. And arriving at that place,’
he, eager to behold his friends, emitted tremendous rvars,
and began to flourish his tail. And as he went on roaring
in the path ranged by Suparna, the firmament with the solar
disc seemed to be rent by his shouts. And (it came to
pass that) those powerful and heroic (monkeys) that had
formerly stationed themselves on the northern shore of the
ocean, anxious to see the Wind-god’s offspring, heard the
sounds proceeding from Hanum&n’s vehement speed, resem-
bling the rumbling of clouds agitated by the winds. And
all those rangers of woods, (staying) dispirited, heard the
roars of that foremost of monkeys, like unto the roaring of
rain-pouring clouds. And hearing those sounds as he kept
crying, those monkeys (sitting) around, eager to see their
friend, became extremely anxious. And that best of
monkeys, Jambavin, with a joyful heart addressing all the
monkeys, said,—“Hanuman hath succeeded completely.
There is no doubt about this. If he were unsuccessful, he
would not utter shouts as these.” And hearing the sounds
produced by the violent movements of the arms of that high-
souled (hero), as well as the shouts of that magnanimous one,
the monkeys, filled with delight, leapt up on all sides. And
they, eager to have a sight of Hanum&n, joyfully went from
mountain-top to mountain-top and from peak on to peak.
And influenced by joy, the monkeys remained holding a
bough at the top of a tree, and waving their clean


1062 RAMAYANS


apparels. And as the wind roareth in a cavern, roared the
powerful Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god. And seeing
that mighty monkey resembling a mass of clouds, alighting,
those monkeys stood juining their hands. And then the
vehement monkey resembling a hill, having leapt up from
that mountain, alighted on the top of that (other) mountain*
filled with trees. And bursting with delight, (Hanum{n)
dropped near a fountain, like unto a hill whose wings have
been clipped. Then with joyful hearts, all the principal
monkeys stood encircling the high-souled Hanuman. And
surrounding him, they experienced excess of delight, and
drew near the newcomer with joyful faces. And bring-
ing fruits and roots, the monkeys honored that chief of
monkeys, the offspring of the Wind-god. And some, filled
with delight, sent shouts, and some raised ululations ; and
the foremost monkeys fetched branches of trees.t And that
mighty monkey, Hanumén, saluted his superiors and the aged,
headed by Jambavan; as well as Prince Angada. And
honored by the monkeys, as he very well deserved to be,
and gratified by them, (he) briefly said—Seen have I the
exalted lady.” And taking V4li’s son by the hand, he sat
him down in a charming tract of the woodland belonging
to the mountain Mahendra—-Then asked (by them),
Hanum§n addressed those foremost monkeys,—“I have seen
Janaka’s daughter in the A¢oka woods. That blameless
one is guarded by dreadful Rakshasis. The girl weareth a
single braid of hair, and burneth to attain a sight of Rama.
She is faint in consequence of fasting, and dirty, weareth
matted locks and is emaciated.” Hearing the words, "I
have seen” from the Wind-god's offspring resembling
ambrosia, all the monkeys were filled with rejoicing. And
thereupon, some of mighty ones roared, and some shouted,
and some blustered, and some raised ululations, and others


* Mahendra—T.
+ To serve for a seat for Hanum4n.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1063


stormed (in return). And some elephantine monkeys in joy
upraised their tails, and some lashed with their long and
broad tails. And others, transported with joy, bounding up
to the mountain-summit, touched that foremost of monkeys,
the handsome Hanuman, And when Hanuman had ended,
Angada said these excellent words in the midst of the heroic”
monkeys,—''There is none, O monkey, that is like unto
thee in strength and prowess. As having bounded over the
spacious main, thou hast come back {here), thou art, O
excellent monkey, the only giver of our lives. By thy
gtace it is that, our end attained, we shall meet with
Raghava. Oh for thy fidelity! Oh for thy prowess 1 Oh
for thy fortitude! By luck hast thou seen that exalted
one, the illustrious wife of Rama, by luck it is that Kakutstha
shall forego his sorrow in jconsequence of separation from
Sita.” Then surrounding Angada,Hanumin, and Jambavan,
the monkeys, exceedingly rejuiced, sat down upon a spacious
stone. And having sat them down on the spacious rock,
the monkeys became eager to hear of the bounding of the
main and of (Hanumarf’s) seeing Lanka,Sita and Ravana. And
they stood with joined hands,looking wistfully into Hanuman’s
face. And the graceful Angada was there, surrounded by
many monkeys, and honored by them, even as the lord of
celestials is honored in heaven by the celetials. When the
famous and renowned Hanuman, and Angada with bracelets
on his arms, had sat down,the elevated and mighty mountain-
suminit was illuminated with splendour.


1064 RIMAVANA,


-SECTION tuvilk


Turn on the summit of the mountain, Mahendra, those
powerful monkeys, headed by Hanum&n, rejoiced exceedingly.
And when the high-souled delighted monkeys had sat them
down, Jamvaban, glad at heart, asked that offspring of the
Wind, the happy Hanuman, all about his proceeding : “How
hast thou seen the worshipful one? How doth she fare
there? And how doth the cruel Ten-necked one bear him-
self towards her? Do thou truthfully relate all this unto us,
O mighty monkey. How couldst thou track the exalted
lady? And what did she say in reply (to thy querries)?
Having learnt the real state of things, we shall decide what
is to be done. And do thou also tell us what we, repairing
there, shall unfold unto that one of controled self and what
we shall keep to ourselves.” Thus directed by him, that
one (Hanum&n) with his down standing on end, bowing down
the head unto that revered one, Sif, replied,—In your
sight, | bounded up with a concentrated mind, eager to reach
the southern shore of the ocean. As I voyaged on, a great
impediment occurred in the way. I sawa goodly and noble
golden peak, standing, obstructing my way. I found the
mountain as an obstacle to my course. Nearing the grand
and splendid golden mount, I thought within myself,—‘I will
rive this.’ And the sun-like summit of that mighty mountain,
Prahasta, was cleft in a thousand fragments by my tail.
Seeing his own condition, that mighty mountain, gladdening
my heart, addressed me with the sweet speech,—‘O son,
know me for thy uncle. -I am a friend unto the Wind,—_
famed as Main&ka, and living in the great deep. Formerly
all the foremost mountains were furnished with wings. And
(once on a time) they began to range the earth at will,
committing devastations. Hearing of the conduct of -the


SUNDARAKANDAM. ~ robs


mountains, that possessor of the six kinds of riches, Indra
the Great, the swayer of Paka, with his thunderbolt cut off
‘by thousands the pinions of the mountains. At that time,
my son, I, having been delivered by thy sire, the high-souled
Wind-god, was cast into the abode of Varuna. O repressor
of foes, I shall have to assist Raghava. Rama is the fore+
most of the righteous, and possessed of prowess like that of
Mahendra himself.’ Having heard this from the magnani-
mous Main§Ska, I apprised the mountain of my mission, and
my thoughts held their course. Having given me his per-
mission, the magnanimous Main&aka, the mountain that had
put on the form of a man, vanished, and, assuming his
mountain-form, went into the vast sea. And I, summoning
my best celerity, began to journey the remainder of my way.
And having swiftly proceeded long in the path, J saw the
exalted lady, Surasi, mother of the serpents. And that
worshipful one stationed in the sea, said,—‘By the celestials
hast thou, O best of monkeys, been assigned as my food.
Therefore shall I eat thee up. Thou hast been ordained as
mine by the gods.’ Thus addressed by Surasa, J, remaining
in humble guise with joined hands, and with my countenance
turned pale, J uttered these words,—'Riama, the graceful
son of Dagaratha, repressor of foes—hath entered the woods
of Dandaka, in company with his brother Lakshamana and
Sit& His wife Sita hath been carried off by the wicked
Ravana. At R4ma’s mandate I go to her as an envoy. In
this business, thou, O chaste one, shouldst help Rama. Or
having seen Mithila’s daughter, as well as Rama of untiring
deeds, I shall come to thy mouth,—this I promise unto thee
truly.” Thus accosted by me, Surasd, wearing forms at her
will, said,—'None is able to escape me. Even this is the
boon that I have received.’ Having been thus addressed
by Surasi, I attained the magnitude of ten yoyanas ; and then
anon I dilated to another ten. But she opened her mouth
wiger than my magnitude. Seeing her stretched mouth, I


134


1086 RAMAYANA.


again diminished myself, and on the instant again reduced
myself to the measure of a thumb. And speedily entering her
mouth, I immediately came out. Then the exalted Surasa
again spoke unto me in her native shape,—'Thy end having
been attained, go, O mild one, O foremost of monkeys,
according to thy pleasure. Bring about the meeting of
Vaidehi with the high-souled Raghava. Be thou blessed, O
mighty-armed one. I am well pleased with thee, O monkey’
Then I was praised by all beings, with,—‘Excellent !
‘Excellent! Then like unto Garura I again sprang up into
the air. But now my shadow was overtaken by somebody,
though I saw no one. And my velocity being deprived, I
looked at the ten cardinal points; but I found there naught
which could deprive me of my speed. Then I thought,—
‘What is this obstacle that hath suddenly arisen in respect
of my course? No form find I here?” And as I stood
aggrieved, my glance fell downwards. Then I saw there a
dreadful R&kshasi supine on the flood. And laughing
(scornfully), that grim one said these inauspicious words
unto me, who was inert, although undaunted,—“Whither
art thou bound, O thou of a gigantic body? Desired by
me, who am hungry, do thou becoming my food, gratify this
body deprived of diet for a long time.’ Saying, ‘Well, 1
accepted her speech, increasing my body at will more
than the capacity of her mouth; and her huge and
dreadful mouth extended wide to eat me up. She did not
understand me,* nor that I had altered my shape. Then in
the twinkling of an eye contracting my vasty shape, I,
-extracting her heart, darted into the sky. Thereat, throwing
about her arms,that terrific one dropped into the salt waters.
On that chaste one, resembling a hill, having her heart torn,
T heard the meek speech of magnanimous persons, who had
come there of themselves,—'This dreadful Rakshasi,
Sinhika, hath been swiftly slain by Hanuman.’ Having


* Understand that 1 was able to assume any shape at pleasure.—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1067


slain her, I again, remembering the delay that had occurred
touching my work, set out on the great road, and at length
saw the southern shore of the sea, covered with mountains ;
where is situated the city of Lank&. On the sun having set,
I entered the city of the R&kshasas—their home—unnoticed
by the Rakshasas of terrific vigor. I had entered in when. 2
certain female casting forth violent laughter, and wearing
the.splendour of clouds at the end of a Kalpa, presented
herself before me, And striking with my left clenched fist
that exceedingly dreadful (form), having flames for her hair,
who had sought to take my life-—and vanquishing her (thus),
I entered (Lanka) at dusk. Then that one affrighted
addressed me, saying,—‘1, O hero, am, the city of Lank&,
Vanquished have I been by thy prowess. Thou shalt
everywhere conquer all the Rakshasas’. There I wandered
all the night (seeking for Janaka’s daughter) and (at
length) entered Ravana’s inner apartment; but that one
of a Diity waist I found not. And not finding Sit& in
Ra&vana’s abode, I was cast in a sea of sorrow; nor found {
how to cross over it. And as I was sorrowing, I sawa
mansion with a charming grove encircled by a wall of
excellent gold. And leaping over the wall, I saw a grove
rife with trees; and (at last) saw in the midst of an agoka
wood a great Singapd. And ascending the tree, I saw a golden
tract of plantains; and hard by from the Siagapé tree I
espied that transcendentally beautiful one, dark-blue, having
eyes resembling lotus-petals, with her face faded in conse-
quence of fasting, clad in the same single piece of cloth, her
hair covered with dust,—her limbs emaciated by the heat
of sorrow and grief,-Sita, ever engaged in the welfare of
her lord; surrounded by cruel and deformed R&kshasis
living upon blood and flesh,—like unto deer environed by
tigresses. And 1 managed too swiftly to present myself
before that one, menaced momentarily in the midst of the
Rakshasis, wearing a single braid. of hair; woe-begone; .


1068 RAMAYANA,


ever thinking of her lord; her limbs discolored by lying
down on the ground, like unto a lotus on the approach of
winter,—having eyes resembling those of a young deer, ‘who
had turned her face away from all the enjoyments offered
by Ravana, and who had resolved to put a period to her
existence. Seeing that lady the illustrious wife of Rama in
that condition, I seeing her remained even on: that Sinpapd
tree. Then I heard in Ravana’s mansion loud and solemn
sounds mixed with the tinklings of zones and bangles, There-
at exceedingly agitated, I changed my proper shape ; and
remained like a bird in a dark part of the Sinmgapd tree. Then
the wives of Ravana along with R&vana himself of
exceeding strength came to that place where Sita was. And
seeing the Jord of R&kshasas the exceedingly beauteous
Sit contracted her thighs and covered her full breasts with
her arms, And seeing Sit& flurried and extremely excited
and casting about her gladness up and down, not finding any
relief and trembling forlorn, the Ten-necked one said unto
her undergoing extreme anguish,—“Without saying any-
thing, I fall down (here). O fair one, do thou regard me.
If, O haughty one, thou do not honor me from pride of heart,
T shall, O Sita, two months hence, see thy blood.” Hearing
these words of the wicked Ravana, Sit&, growing exceeding
wroth, spoke these excellent words,—"O worst of Rakshasas,
having used improper speech towards the wife of Rama of
measureless prowess, and the daughter-in-law of Dagaratha,
lord of the Ikshwaku line, why hast thou not thy tongue
fallen off? Fie upon the prowess of thee that, O wretch,
hast carried me off while my husband was away ; and not
being seen of that high-souled one. Thou art never like
R&ma,—thouw art not even fit to be his slave. R&ghava is
invincible, truthful, heroic and (even) hungering for warfare.”
Thus addressed in harsh-speech by Janaki, the Ten-necked
one flamed up in wrath, like Fire in a funeral-pyre. And
with his wicked eyes whirling in rage, he raised the clenched


SUNDAR4AKANDAM. 1059


fist of his right hand to slay Mithila’s daughter; but then
the females set up a cry of “Oh” and “Alas.” And rising
up in the midst of the females, the wife of the wicked-
minded one, the excellent one, named Mandodari, prevented
him. And she spoke soft words unto him influenced by
lust,—O thou that resemblest Indra the Great in prowess.
Do thou to-day sport with me. Janaki is not superior to me.
And, O lord, do thou sport with the daughters of celestials
and Gandharbas, and with. the daughters themselves of
Yakshas. What wilt thou do with Sita?’ Then that
exceedingly powerful ranger of the night was speedily raised
up and taken (back) to his residence. On the Ten-necked
one having departed, the Rakshasis of fearful faces
fell to railing at Sita in cruel and rough words,—But
Janaki heeded their speech as a straw; and their fury was
lost upon Sita. Desisting from their unavailing railing, the
flesh-feasting Rakshasis imparted unto Ravana the mighty
intent of Sita. Then, they all failing in their hope and
deprived of energy, and tired, came under the sway of sleep.
And on their sleeping, Sita intent on the welfare of her lord,
lamenting piteously, in forlorn guise, and striken with
extreme sorrow, mourned profusely. Then sitting up in their
midst, Trijat& spoke,—Do ye without delay fall to your own
selves ; but never (eat up) the dark-eyed Sita, the chaste
‘daughter unto Janaka and the daughter-in-law of Dagaratha.
In truth | have seen a dismal dream capable of making one’s
hair stand on end ; (presaging) destruction unto R&kshasas
and victory unto the husband of this one. For protecting
us, R&kshasis from Raghava, let us solicit Vaidehi. Even
this is relished by me. If we relate such a dream unto the
aggrieved one, she, being freed from her diverse woes, shall
attain the height of joy. Propitiated by our bowing down,
Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, shall rescue the R&kshasis from
a mighty fear.” Thereat, that bashful maiden, rejoiced at
the prospect of her husband's victory, said,—'If all this prove


1070 RAMAYANA.


true, then for certain, {ye shall) meet with succour at my
hands. Witnessing such a hard condition of Sita I began
to reflect ; nor did my my mind attain ease or freedom from
thought. And I cast about for finding means of addressing
Janaki. And 1 began by extolling the Ikshw&iku race.
Hearing the words that I uttered, embellished with
descriptions of the virtues of R&jarshis, that exalted lady
replied with her eyes covered with tears. ‘Who art thou?
And how hast thou, O foremost of monkeys, found thy way
here ? And what is thy delight in Rama? This it behoveth
thee to relate unto me.” Hearing her speech, I too said —
‘O revered one, thy husband, Rama, hath found a help-
mate in a one endowed with terrific strength, named Sugriva
redoubtable, the highly powerful lord of the monkeys.
Do thou know me as Hanuman his servant, despatched here
by thy spouse—R4ma of unwearied actions. O famed damsel,
that highly effulgent son of Dagaratha—the foremost of men,
hath sent as a token this ring. I desire to know, O worshipful
dame, what behest of thine may I obey now. Shall I carry thee
to Rima and Lakshmana on the northern shore of the Ocean ?”
Hearing this and revolving within herself Sits, Janaka’s
daughter, replied—Discomfitting Ravana,may Raghava him-
self carry me hence.’ And bowing my head unto that worship-
ful and blameless dame, I wanted of her a token as might
conduce to Raghava’s pleasure. Whereto replied Siti—‘O thou
of mighty-arms do thou take this exellent jewel for which thou
shalt be highly regarded by Rama’. Having said this that best
of fair ones gave me the’excellent jewel, and wrought up
with anxiety, related unto me the story of crow (for Rama's
information). ~ Thereupon bent on returning here, 1, with,
a fixed mind, circumambulated and bowed unto that worship-
fuldame. And revolving within herself she again replied—
‘Hanum&n, do thou relate this unto Raghava ia such a wise
that the heroes Rama and Lakshmana, along with Sugriva
might instantly come here. Or else there remain two


SUNDARARANDAA, 1071


months more of my life. Raghava shall not see me and I
shall quit my life like one having no husband. Hearing those
piteous accents | was worked up with ire and at once resolved
upon destroying the city of Lank&. Thereupon my body
increased like unto a mountain and desirous of entering into
conflict I began to lay waste the forest. The whole forest
was devastated—the birds and deer strayed away in fear and
the Rakshasees, having terrible faces, awaking, beheld all
that. - And beholding me in the forest, they all, gathering,
instantly conveyed the message unto Ravana. O King,
thou of mighty prowess, this thy forest and castle has been
broken down by the vicious-souled monkey not knowing thy‘
strength. O- King, he has been impelled by his vicious
sense, to do thy mischief. Do thou order for his head so
that he might not return. Hearing this the lord of the
Rikshasas despatched a chosen band of demons named
Kinkaras.* 1 despatched with my mace in no time eighty
thousand of them no sooner than they entered the forest
with darts and maces. And the few, who were saved,
proceeded very quickly unto Ravana and related unto him
the destruction of the soldiers by me. Thereupon I thought
of destroying the Chattyat palace and destroyed with the
pillar all the R&kshasas stationed there. Excited with wrath
I destroyed that palace, the best in the whole city of Lanka.
Thereupon (Ravana) despatched Fambhumdli, the son of
Prahasta. With my fierce mace I destroyed that mighty -
Rakshasa, versed in the art of war, along with his retinue and
surrounded by a band of terrible and grim-visaged demons.
Hearing this, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas sent the highly
powerful sons of the ministers followed by a regiment of
infantry. But I despatched them to the abode of Death by
means of my dart. And hearing of the destruction in battle


* Literally it means servants—here it means his own personal attendants
who were brave and heroic.
t A place of sacrifice or religious worship.—T.


1072 RAMAPANA,


of the ministers’ sons of feeble prowess Ravana sent five
heroic commanders. But I slew all of them along with
their hosts. Thereupon the Ten necked demon sent his
highly powerful son Afska in the battle followed by a
number of R&kshasas. No sooner the princely son of
Mandodari, versed in the art of war, rose high up in the
welkin than 1 got hold of his legs and whirling him for
hundred times ground him to the dust. And hearing of the
discomfiture of Aksha, Ravana, exercised with ire, sent his
second son, the highly powerful Indrajit incapable of being
repressed in battle, And discomfitting that best of
Rakshasas with his host I attained to an excess of delight.
That hero of great prowess and mighty-arms with a number
of other proud heroes was despatched by Ravana in great
confidence. And beholding my unbearable prowess and
his own soldiers slain, speedily he went away fettering me
with his Brahma weapon. Thereat the other Rakshasas
bound me up with a rope and carried me to Ravana. And
thereupon I was welcomed by the vicious-souled Ravana
and was asked why I did come to Lanka and slay the
Rakshasas. Whereto I replied,—"I have done all this for
Sita. To behold her I have come here, O hero. I am the
monkey Hanuman, the own begotten son of Maruta. Do
thou know me as Rama’s ambassador and the minister of
Sugriva. And on Rama's embassy have I come here before
thee. Do thou hear of my mission—! do relate unto thee,
O lord of Rakshasas, the message which the monkey chief
hath commanded me to communicate unto thee. O great hero,
Sugriva hath asked of thy welfare and hath desired me to
communicate unto thee these well meaning words, conducing
to the acquirement of piety, wealth and desires. ‘While I
lived on the mount Rishyamuka covered with huge trees
I made friends with Raghava dreadful in conflict. He hath
spoken to me, O king, ‘My spouse hath been taken away by
a Rakshasa. It behoveth thee to promise me thy help in this.’


SUNDA RARANDAH. 1094


And in the presence of fire, Rima, along with Lakshmana,
contracted friendship with me who had been deprived of his
kingdom by Vali.. And he hath made me lord over all the
monkeys after slaying V&4li in conflict with a single shaft,
It therefore beboveth us to assist him by all means. And’
by virtue of this contract I have despatched Hanuman unto
thee as an envoy. Do thou therefore speedily bring back
Sit& and return ber unto Raghava before the heroic monkeys
discomfit thee. Who knoweth not the prowess of the
monkeys who in the days of yore used to visit the celestials
invited ?” With these words the king of the monkeys hath
despatched me unto thee. And thereupon he eyed me as if
burning me with the looks of his angry eyes. And the
vicious-souled demon—R&vana, of terrible deeds, ordered
for my destruction, not knowing my prowess. Thereupon
Bivishana, the high-souled brother of that lord of the
R&kshasas interceded on my behalf in the following strain—
‘O thou foremost of the Rakshasas, do thou alter thy
resolution. The way, thou art following, is beyond the pale
of royal policy. The destruction of an envoy is not
sanctioned by the royal morality, O Rakshasa. They
communicate simply the mandate f their masters. O thou
of incomparable prowess, there is no sanction for the destruc+
tion of a messenger albeit he perpetrateth a mighty iniquity.
Sometimes they have however been disfigured.’ Being thus
accosted by Bivishana, Ravana ordered all the demons, say-
ing “Burn down this monkey’s tail.’ Hearing his mandate,
the Rakshasas, of well-protected armour and terrible prowess,
enveloped my tail with the fibres of cotton, silk and jute,
And then striking me with their clenched fists they put fire
to my tail. Although bound and fettered with many ropes
I did not feel the least anguish for I was very uch anxioua
to behold the city during the day. And thereupon fettering
me and putting fire to my tail and announcing me in the public
streets those heroic Rakshasas got at the city gate.- And


135


1074 RAMAYANA.


thereupon contracting again my huge person and relieving
myself of the fetters 1 stood again in my pristine state.
And taking up iron darts 1 slew all the Rakshasas there.
And leaping over with great velocity the city gate, I, with
my burning tail, burnt down the whole city from the palace
to its outer gate like unto the fire of dissolution devastating
the entire creation. And I was not the least flurried at it.
‘Forsooth hath Janaki been destroyed—for behold I nothing
in Lank& which hath not been burnt down—indeed the
whole city hath been reduced to ashes. For certain have I
burnt down Sita while burning the city Lank’—-and I have
thus baffled the great work of Rama.’ While I was reflecting
thus, being overwhelmed with grief, 1 heard the auspicious
accents of the Charanas, exciting my wonder, ‘Janaki hath
not been burnt down,’ Hearing those wonderful words I
regained my sense. I was then convinced by an auspicious
sign that Janaki was not burnt down, for I was not
reduced to ashes albeit my tail was burning. My heart was
excited with joy and the wind spread its delicious fragrance.
And by virtue of those manifest omens, by my confidence in
the prowess of Rama, and Sit4, and the voice of ascetics, I
was greately delighted at heart. And beholding Vaidehi again,
Lleft her. And thereupon ascending the mount Aristha I
began to leap, desirous of beholding you. And following
‘the track of the Wind, the son, the Moon, Gandharbas,
and Siddhas I have beheld you all.. By virtue of Rama’s
grace and your prowess I have satisfied the charge of
Sugtiva. 1 have thus related unto you, what I had
performed in Lanka, and it now remains with you to fulfill
the rest.”


SUNDARARANDAM. 1075


SECTION LIx.


Havine related all,, Hanuman, the Wind-god’s son
began again, saying—“Fruitful is Raghava’s endeavour and
Sugriva’s energy—for greatly pleased have I been with
Sit’’s conduct. O heroic monkeys, Sit’ hath been keeping
the life of a highly chaste damsel. She can maintain the
animated creation by virtue of her asceticism and burn it
with her ire. Ravana, the lord of the Rakshasas is also
highly advanced in asceticism by virtue whereof he hath
not been ruined albeit he hath touched Sit&’s person. Even
the flame of fire cannot do, allhough touched by the hands,
what Janaka’s daughter can bring about by her ire. I have
related unto you what had happened. It now behoveth us
to behold Vaidehi along with those two sons of a king, after
commanding all the monkeys headed by Jambavan and
others, I am alone capable of destroying the city of Lank&
along with the Rakshasas and their lord—~Ravana. What
more, ¢an I achieve if I am accompanied by the heroic
monkeys like ye, powerful, having control over their own
minds, well-armed, able and desirous of winning victory !
I shatt-alay Ravana in conflict along with his sons, brothers
ardly atid retinue. I shal! destroy all ‘the Rakshasas and
‘baffle afl the weapons of Indrajit conferred on him by
Brahmi, Rugra, Wind and Varuna albeit they are invisible
in battle. Without your permission my prowess hath been
brought to a stand still. Hills and mountains, uprooted and
discharged by me continually, can destroy even the celestials,
what of those night-rangers¢ Even if the ocean overfloweth
its banks, the Mount M&ndara moveth off its place, the
enemy’s host cannot frighten Jambavan in conflict. And
specially the heroic monkey, Vali’s son, is alone capable of
destroying the whole host of the Rakshasas. Even the


1076 RAMAPANA.


mount Mandara is weakened by the velocity of the thigha
of the high-souled monkey Neela—what of the Rakshasas
in conflict? What hero is there amongst the celestials,
Asuras, Yakshas, Gandharbas, serpents and birds who can
equal Manida or Divida in battle? I do not find any
one who can oppose in the battle field the two best
monkeys, the sons of Asvi gifted with great velocity. By
me alone hath the city Lank& been devastated burnt
down and reduced to ashes. And I had announced in
the public streets there—May victory crown the highly
powerful Ram and Lakshmana, and may the king Sugriva
advance in prosperity being protected by Raghava. I am the
servant of the king of Kogola, the own begotten son of the
Wind-God and my name is Hanuman. I have announced thus
everywhere, (And I beheld there) in the Asoka forest of the
vicious-souled Ravana, at the foot of a Singshapa tree, the
chaste Sita waiting very poorly. She was encircled by the
Rakshasees, worn out with grief and anxiety and was like
unto the rays of the Moon shorn of their brilliance being
enveloped with clouds, And Vaidehi, having a beautiful
waist and devoted unto her husband, did not care for Ravana
proud of his prowess and was accordingly confined by him.
And that graceful daughter of the king of Videha was by
all means devoted unto her lord and had all her thoughts
centered in him like unto Poulomi* devoted unto her.lord
Purandara. And } saw her in that garden, wearing a single
piece of cloth soited with dirt, surrounded by the Rakshasees
and remonstrated with now and then by those ugly
demons. Having a single braid of hair, poorly, engaged - in
thoughts touching her lord, she was lying on the earth
shorn of all grace like unto a lotus on the appearance of
the winter. She had not the least attachment for Ravana
and was resolved upon putting an end to her existence,


* The wife of Indra the lord of the celestials who was confined by the king
Nahasa.—T. is


SUNDARARANDAM. 1077


And somehow creating ‘her confidence I addressed that
damsel having the eyes of a fawn and related unto her the
whole story. And hearing of the friendship between Rama
and Sugriva she attained to an excess of delight. She is well-
behaved and devoted unto her lord par excellence and blessed
is the high-souled and ten-necked demon that she hath not
destroyed him (yet). And Rama shall become an instrument
only in bringing about his destruction. She hath really been
gteatly reduced and worn out by the separation of her lord,
Her person hath been shattered like unto learning waning
by its prosecution on the first day of a lunar fortnight.
Thus liveth there the great Sita worn out with grief. Do
ye now perform what you think proper.”


SECTION LX.


Hanae his words, Vali’s son Angada spoke, saying, —
"These two monkeys, the sons of Asvi, are very powerful
and gifted with great velocity and are specially proud in
consequence of the boon conferred on them by the Great
Grand-father. Formerly to.honor Asvi the Frand-father, of
all’ the worlds, made these two monkeys incapable of being
slain by any. And crushing the mighty host of the celestials,
these two heroes gifted with great prowess, and maddened
with haughtiness in consequence of the boon, drank up
nectar. And these two, if worked up with ire, are capable
of. destroying the whole city of Lanka with her horses,
.chariots and elephants. What of other monkeys, I, myself,
am capable of destroying soon the city along with the
Rakshasas and the mighty Ravana! And there is not the
least wonder about it if I am aided by powerful monkey


1078 RAMAPVANA,


heroes like you, having control over themselves, well armed,
capable and desirous of winning victory. I have heard,
that, by Wind-god’s son alone Lanka was burnt. Ye are all
famed for your manliness, it doth not béhove you to speak
before Rama, ‘We have seen the worshipful dame but
have not been able to bring her.’ Ye foremost of monkeys,
there is none amongst the celestials or Asuras who can equal
you either in leaping or in prowess. And therefore winning
Lank&, slaying Ravana along with his R&kshasa host in
conflict and taking Sit&, let us go, delighted and having our
ends accomplished. What else is there for us to perform
than bringing the daughter of the king Janaka when the
R&kshasa crew shall be slain by Hanuman? And we shall
place Janaka’s daughter between Rama and Lakshmana.
What is the use of putting the other residents of Kishkinda
into trouble? It therefore behoveth us alone to go to Lank&
and after slaying the best of the Rakshasas, to see Sugriva,
Rama and Lakshmana.” Thereupon Jambavana, the
foremost of tlie monkeys, greatly delighted spoke unto
Angada, who was thus resolved,the following pregnant words,
—'"O great monkey, O thou of best understanding, what
thou hast spoken, is, (I think) not proper, for we have been
despatched by them to ransack the. southern quarter, but
we have not been commanded by the king of the monkeys
and the highly intelligent Rama to bring her. And it shall
not please him even if we rescue her. And mentioning his
own lineage, that best of the kings, R&ghava, promised
before all the leading monkeys, that he would himself
rescue Sita. How would he now falsify his own saying?
What is the use of uudertaking this work for nothing . which
shali not conduce to his pleasure? And useless shall be
the display of your prowess, O ye, foremost of the monkeys.
Let us therefore proceed where Rama, with Lakshmana, and
the highly effulgent Sugriva is, and relate unto them our
proposed work. What thou hast judged, O prinee, is liked


SUNDARAKANDAH. 1079


by us. And still you should took to R&ma’s resolution and
bring about his end. :


SECTION LXt.


Au the heroic monkeys, headed by Angada and the
great monkey Hagum4n, approved highly of the words of
Jambavan. And these leading monkeys headed by the Wind-
god’s son proceeded leaping from the summit of the Mount
Mahendra. And these highly powerful ones, having huge
persons, resembling the Mount Mandara, covered the welkin
as if like so many mad elephants, They carried, as it were
with their own looks, the highly powerful Hanumin, gifted
with great velocity, having control aver his own self, and
adored by the Siddhkas. They were resolved upon satisfy-
ing Rima’s end and acquiring glory for themselves. ‘Their
desires were satisfied and mind elevated in consequence of
their beholding Sitd and burning down Lanka. All of them
were anxious to communicate this pleasant news, to enter
into conflict and were resolved upon bringing about Rama's
wellbeing. And leaping and ascending the sky they got at
the Madhuvana,* preserved by Sugriva, resembling the
celestial garden, covered with many trees, picturesque and
incapable of being divastated by any. And the monkey-
chief Sugriva’s maternal uncle, the heroic and high-souled
Dadhimukha always guardeth that picturesque and spacious
garden of the lord of monkeys. They were greatly worked
up with. anxiety, And beholding that large orchard, those
yellow-coloured monkeys were greatly delighted and beg-
ged honey of the prince. And the prince respectfully


* An orchard teeming with various trees bearing delicious and sweet fruits,-T,


1080 - RAMAPANA.


allowed: these elderly monkeys headed by Jambavan. to
drink honey. And being thus commanded by the intelligent
ptince—Vali’s son, those monkeys ascended the . trees
infested with bees and feasting on fragrant fruits and roots,
were greatly delighted and intoxicated. And thereupon those
monkeys, beside themselves with joy for being allowed to
drink honey began to dance hither and thither. Some sang,
some laughed, some danced, some bowed down, some read,
some walked hither and thither, some leaped and some
talked at random. Some sprang upon one another, some
quarrelled with one another, some leaped from one tree
to another, and some jumped down on the earth from
the tops of the trees. Some rose up with great velocity from
the earth to the tops of the huge trees—some sang, others
approached them laughing—some wept and others approach-
ed them weeping. Some were stricking with their nails
and others struck them in return. And thus the entire monkey
host were bewildered with intoxication. There was. none
amongst them who was not drunk and none who was not
excited with pride. Thereupon beholding all the «fruits
eaten up and the trees divested of leaves and flowers, the
monkey Dadhimukha was worked up with ire and attempted
to prevent them. And that heroic, elderly monkey, the
guard of the garden, was in return remonstrated with by
them who were greatly intoxicated. Thereat the highly
spirited monkey again made up his mind to protect the
garden from their devastations, He used harsh words,
undauntedly towards some, struck the weak with his palm,
quarrelled with some, and consoled others with soothing
words, They were greatly excited with drink, and being
prevented forcibly by Dadhimukha, they giving up all fear,
began to pull him. And striking him with their nails, biting
him with teeth, crushing him with their palms and feet, they,
being drunk, almost reduced him to death and devastated
the mangoe forest.


SUNDA RAKANDAM. roBt


SECTION Uxtt.


: "PT nereveon Hanum&n, the foremost of the ‘monkeys,
spoke unto them, saying—“O monkeys, do ye undisturbed
drink honey. -I shall myself thwart them who will obstruct
you.” Hearing his words, Angada, the best of the monkeys,
delighted, said—‘Drink honey, O monkeys, we must follow
Hanumfn’s advice, who hath already been crowned with
success. We must follow him even if he leadeth us to an
unworthy action, what of this which is most becomiig ?”
Hearing these words from Angada, the leading monkeys
attained to an excess of delight and eulogized him again and
again. And adoring Angada—their prince, those monkeys
proceeded by the way leading to the Madhuvana like unto
trees carried by a stream. And entering that orchard they
forcibly attacked the waiters there. Hanuman saw Maithilee,
and others heard of her from him—and those monkeys,
renouncing all fear in consequence and obtaining permission,
drank honey and feasted on various sweet fruits. And they,
given to the drinking of honey, attacking the guards who
were approaching by hundreds, gave them a sound beating.
Some monkeys,collecting honey with their hands measuring a
Drona,* drank it; others collecting themselves delightedly
into a band spoiled it ; while other yellow-coloured monkeys
drank and sprinkled it. And some, being beside themselves
with intoxication, struck others with the remaining quantity,
while others waited at the foot of the trees, holding their
boughs. And some, being exhausted with drinking, spread
leaves and laid themselves thereon—and some being drunk
and delighted struck others down in mad fury. And some
lost their steps. Some roared and some delightedly set up


* In common use a measure of thirty-two secrs or rather more than sixty+
four Tbs. quadrupeds.—T.


136


1082 RAMAYANA,


the music of the birds. Some of the monkeys, inebriete with
honey, slept on the earth; some laughed at others
impudently and some cried aloud. Some spoke contrary
to what they had done—and others put a different
construction thereon. And all the waiters of the garden
andthe servants of Dadhimukha, were repressed by those
terrible monkeys with censure and thrown up in the sky by
their knee-joints. And terrified, they fled to different
directions. And being worked up with anxiety, they
approached Dadhimukha and said—'Commanded by Hanuman
the monkeys have forcibly devastated the Madhuvana and
we were thrown high up by them in the sky.” Hearing of
the destruction of the orchard, Dadhimukha, being greatly
enraged, consoled all the monkeys. “Proceed ye before,
1 shall soon follow you and repress by force all those
monkeys, greatly excited with pride and the drinking of the
excellent honey.” Hearing these words from Dadhimukha
those leading and heroic monkeys proceeded with him towards
Madhuvana. And Dadhimukha proceeded with great velocity
in their midst taking up a huge tree in his hand. And all
his attendants, taking trees, mountain crags, proceeded,
wroth, where those leading monkeys were. And biting their
lips in wrath and remonstrating with them again and again,
those monkeys began to suppress them by force. And
beholding Dadhimukha greatly enraged, all the monkeys,
headed by Hanum4n, approached him with great vehemence.
And as the mighty Dadhimukha of huge arms,was proceeding
towards them vehemently with a huge tree, Angada, wroth,
caught him by the hand. He was beside himself with
intoxication aad therefore did not show him the least mercy,
albeit. he (Dadhimukha) was worshipful unto him. And
accordingly with great vehemence he ground him to the dust.
His arms and thighs were broken and his countenance was
disfigured and that great heroe, the foremost of the monkeys,
pathed in a pool of blood, remained senseless for sometime.


SUNDARARKANDAM. 1083


And thereupon releasing himself from them by some device
that leading monkey, proceeded to a nook, and addressed his
atténdants, saying—'Let us all proceed there where our
lord, the spacious-necked Sugriva liveth with Rama. I shall
relate unto him all the unfair dealings of Angada
and forsooth shall that wrathful king punish all these
monkeys. The picturesque Madhuvana is the most favourite
orchard of the high-souled Sugriva. It was enjoyed by his
forefathers and is not even approached by the celestials.
And meting out punishment unto these monkeys, eager to
drink honey and almost half dead, Sugriva shall slay them
as well as their friends and relatives. Those vicious-souled
ones are worthy of deing slain since they have transgressed
the royal mandate. And then shall my wrath, arising
out of impatience, bear fruits.’ Having thus spoken unto
the guatds of the forest the highly powerful Dadhimukha
leaped high up in the welkin and went away with them.
And in no time he reached where the highly intelligent
monkey Sugriva, the offspring of the sun, was, And
beholding Rama, Lakshmana, and Sugriva and the level
ground he descended from the sky. And descending from
the sky that great and heroic Dadhimukha, lord over all the
monkeys engaged in protecting the forest, placing his folded
palms on his forehead and with a poorly countenance, laid
low his crown at Sugriva’s feet.


SECTION -xilt.


——


Ano beholding that monkey place his crown at his feet
the -monkey-chief, with an anxious mind, accosted him,
saying—"Rise up, rise up, why hast thou lain thyself at my


1084 RAMAYANA.


feet? 1 declare thou hast no fear, speak out the truth,
From whose fear hast thou come here? It behoveth
thee to suggest the. becoming proceedure. Is it all well
with my orchard Madhuvana? 1 long to know every-
thing, O monkey.” Being thus addressed hopefully by
the high-souled Sugriva, Dadhimukha, gifted with an intel-
ligence of a very high order, rose up and spoke—"“Neither
thyself, nor Vali, the lord of the monkeys, O king, allowed
that orchard to be freely used by the monkeys—but that
hath been now laid waste by them. I prevented them
along with these attendants, but disregarding me, they drank
and feasted there at their pleasure. They were prevented,
O lord, in their act of devastation, by these guards, but those
monkeys, without caring for me the least, feasted there.
Some of them went beyond the pale of good conduct, others
ate at their pleasure, and all frowned (at us). And when
these attendents, being insulted by them, were greatly
wroth, they were driven out of the garden, by those powerful
and enraged monkeys. And they were greatly assailed by
those many thousand heroic monkeys, worked up with ire
and having reddened eyes. Some had their arms broken,
some had their knee-joints crushed and some of them were
thrown wp in the sky. Thyself their lord living, these
heroes are beaten, and the entire Madhuvana is being freely
enjoyed by them.” The highly intelligent Lakshmana,
the slayer of foes, addressed Sugriva, the foremost
of the monkeys, while he was thus being informed,
saying,—"O king, why hath this monkey, the guard over
the forest, come to thee, and what sorrow hath led bim to
give vent to these expressions 7” Being thus addressed by the
high-souled Lakshmana, Sugriva, skilled in the art of speech,
replied—"O worshipful Lakshmana, the heroic monkey
Dadhimukha speaks that the war-like monkeys headed by
Angada have drunk honey. They would not have engaged in
such an unfair proceeding had they been unsuccessful in’


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1085


their mission. They have surely achieved success while they
have thus been bent upon devastating the orchard. For this
the warders were struck on their knee-joints for obstructing
their revelry and for this they went so far as to disregard
the powerful monkey Dadhimukha. I myself appointed
this monkey the lord of my orchard. Forsooth hath
Hanum4n espied the worshipful Sita and none else. There
is none else but Hanum&n who is the instrumental of
this work, for that best of monkeys hath in him
a high intellect, knoweth the art of ‘success, is gifted
with courage, strength and prowess and is conversant
with Sastras. That work is sure to succeed whose leading
spirits are the mighty Jambavana and Angada, and worker is
Hanuman. Forsooth that orchard hath been laid waste by these
heroes headed by Angada. And ransacking the southern
quarter, those leading monkeys have come back and delight-
edly entered the Madhuvana. And the whole orchard has
been explored and enjoyed by those monkeys and the
attendants beaten and wounded on their knee-joints. To com-
municate unto me this intelligence, this monkey of known
ptowess, and sweet accents, named Dhadimukha, hath come
here. O thou of mighty arms, O son of Sumitr4, forsooth
they have beheld Sita, since the monkeys, just on their return,
have engaged in drinking honey. O best of men, they are all
well-known monkeys and without espying Vaidehi they would
not have engaged in the destruction of that orchard con-
ferred on us as a gift by the celestials.” Hearing these words
from Sugriva, pleasant unto ears, the virtuous-souled Laksh-
mana along with Raghava, was greatly pleased. And hearing
this from Dadhimukha, Sugriva, greatly gratified, addressed
that lord of the forest, again, saying,—"Greatly pleased I am,
since, they, being successful, have explored this forest. And
the insulting procedure of the successful is also pardonable.
Do thou soon go there and protect that orchard, and send
here all those monkeys headed by Hanum&n. Along with


1086 . RAMAYANA,


these two descendants of Raghu, I long to know soon
from these monkeys headed by Hanuman, and. proud like
lions. what they have settled for the regaining of Siti. And
beholding these two princes greatly delighted and their eyes
expanded with joy, the king of the monkeys, thought that
the accomplishment of the great work was near at hand, and
was accordingly greatly delighted.”


SECTION LXIV.


4

Bane thus addressed by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhi-
mukha, delighted, bowed unto him, Raghava and Lakshmana.
And adoring Sugriva and the highly powerful descendants of
Raghu, he along with other heroic monkeys, leaped up in the
sky. He went away with the same speed with which he
came and leaping down on the earth from the sky, entered
the orchard. And entering that forest he beheld all the leaders
of the monkeys spending the hours delightedly, having passed
urine, the outcome of honey. And approaching them, the
heroe, with folded hands and delighted, addressed Angada,
with the following words—‘“O gentle one, do thou not take
offence, for these monkeys, protecting the garden enraged,
unweetingly prevented thee. O thou of great strength, thou
art worn out with thy long journey, do thou drink thy own
honey, thou art our prince and the master of this garden.
It behoveth thee to forgive us for our wrath arising out of
ignorance. Like unto thy sire before, thyself and Sugriva
are the lords of these monkey hosts, O thou foremost of
them, and none else. O inuocent prince, | have related all
about this unto thy uncle. When ! described unto him, the
arrival of all these forest rangers, as well as of thine


SUNDA RAKANDOAM. 1087


accompanied by them, and the destruction of this garden by
you all, he was not the least offended, rather delighted.
And worked up with joy thy uncle Sugriva, the lord of earth
and monkeys, said ‘Send them all here speedily.” Hearing
those words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the foremost of the
monkeys and skilled in speech, addressed them all, saying—"O
ye leaders of the monkey hosts, I fear, Rama hath heard all
about this. Dadhimukha relates everything joyfully and hence
L infer this. And our work finished, O slayer of foes, it doth
not behove us to remain here (any longer). You have all
drunk honey at your pleasure and there is nothing left and
you should now go where the monkey king Sugriva is. O
leading monkeys, I shall follow what you will in a band
desire me to do. In actions I am surbordinate unto you all,
1 am not justified to command although | am a prince. You
are all of accomplished actions, it is not proper to repress
you forcibly.” Hearing those sweet words of the prince
Angada, the monkeys delightedly replied, saying—"O king,
O foremost of monkeys, who else can speak thus being a
master? Any one else, we think, is proud of his wealth.
Such like words become thee only and none else. Thy
humility speaks of thy future greatness. We are all anxious
to go there, where Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, is.
Verily we speak unto thee, O foremost of monkeys, that
without thy permission, none amongst us, is capable of
advancing a single step.” They addressing him thus, Angada
replied—“All right, let us all go.” Saying this he leaped
up in the sky and was followed by all those monkeys,
clouding the welkin as if with stones thrown up by a tool.
And placing befure them Angada and Hanumfa, the
monkeys leaping vehemently up in the sky roared like unto
clouds driven by the wind. And Angada nearing, Sugriva,
the lord of the monkeys, spoke unto the lotus-eyed Rama,
stricken with grief, saying—°May good betide thee. Do
thou console thyself. The worshipful dame has been found


1088 aAMAPANA,


out; there is not the least doubt about it. Or else they
would not have come as the time is already past. I (further
more) infer this from Angada’s joy, O thou of auspicious
presence. Without being successful in his mission, the
large-armed prince, Angada, the foremost of the monkeys,
would not have come to me. If the monkeys had engaged
in such an unfair proceeding without being successful
in their mission, Angada would have looked poorly and his
mind would have been over-whelmed with grief and
forgetfulness. And without beholding the daughter of the
king Janaka they would not have dared to destroy
Madhuvana obtained and preserved by my forefathers, Do thou
console thyself, O Rama, by whom Kaugaly& hath become
the mother of a good son. O thou, rigidly observing any
religious vow or obligation, forsooth hath Hanuman beheld
the worshipful dame and none else. No other wight is so
qualified an instrument in encompassing this end. O thou
of excellent intellect, Hanuman knoweth the art of success,
is gifted with intellect, perseverance and courage and is
versed in Sastras. That work cannot fail, which is worked
out by Jambavan and Angada and presided over by
Hanumin. Be not laden with anxiety, O thou of unmitigated
prowess. These monkeys have come here excited with
pride and drink. They would not have come with such a
grandeur had they been but unsuccessful. From their
breaking down the orchard and drinking honey I inferred
so. Thereupon he heard in the sky the joyous sounds of the
monkeys proud on account of Hanumfn’s work, proceeding
towards Kishkindh& and as if announcing their success.
Thereupon hearing the noise of these monkeys, Sugriva,
their chief, being greatly delighted, uplifted his tail. And
placing Angada and Hanum&n before them those monkeys
proceeded to behold Rama. And those heroes headed by
Angada, delighted and intoxicated, descended before Raghava
and the lord of the monkeys. And the mighty-armed


SUNDARARANDAM. - ~ 1089


Hanuman, lowering his head, related unto R&ghava, Sita’s
spiritual and physical well-being. And hearing from
Hanuman the sweet words that he had beheld Sita, Rama
and Lakshmana were greatly delighted. And being
confirmed thus by the Wind-god's son, Lakshmana, greatly
pleased, respectfully looked towards Sugriva. And Raghava
too, the slayer of foes, worked up with joy, cast respectful
looks towards Hanuman.


SECTION LXV.


"Tserevron getting at the Mount Prasravanc surrounded
by a variegated forest, lowering their heads unto the mighty
Rama and Lakshmana, placing before them their prince
(Angada) and bowing unto Sugriva, the monkeys began to
relate the story of Siti. And they described unto Rima,
the confinement of Sita in Ravana’s seraglio,the remonstrances
of the she-demons, her unflinching attachment in her lord
and the time appointed (by the Rakshasa for her destruction).
And hearing of Vaidehi’s well-being R&amasaid—“O monkeys
where liveth the worshipful Sit& ? And how is her attachment
unto me? Do ye relate everything unto me.” Hearing those
painful words of Rama, the monkeys desired Hanuman,
conversant with the whereabouts of Sita, to describe every
thing unto him. Hearing their words, Hanum4n, the Wind-
god’s son, versed in the art of speech, lowering his head in
Sita’s name and towards the southern direction (where she
liveth) began to relate how he succeeded in beholding Sita,
And conferring on (R&ma) the heaverily jewel set on a golden
leaf and burning with its own effulgence, Hanuman, with
folded hands, began—Anxious to behold Sita, the daughter


137 E


loge RAMAYANA.


of the king Janaka, I, ploughing over the main extending over
a hundred yoyana, wended my way and by and by reached
Lank&, the capital of the vicious-souled Ravana. Lank& is
situated on the southern bank of the southern occean. And
1 saw there Sitd, in the inner appartment of R&vana.
Centering all her thoughts in thee, breathes that damsel, O
Raima. I saw her reviled by the she-demons again and
again. She is being guarded in that garden by the grim-
visaged Rakshasees. And that worshipful dame, O hero, ever
used to happiness, is now stricken with grief in thy absence.
Confined in R4vana’s inner apartment, well protected
by those she-demons, wearing a single braid of hair and
poorly, she is engaged only in thoughts touching thee. She
in lying on earth, shorn of all grace like unto a lotus on the
appearance of the winter. She hath not the least attachment
for Ravana and is resolved upon putting an end to her
existence, O Ka&kutstha, O innocent prince, after enquiring
for sometime, I found that worshipful dame devoted unto
thee, and narrating the glories of the Ikshw@ku race, O fore-
most of men, I created her confidence by and by, and
addressing her I related everything. And hearing of the
friendship between thee and Sugriva she was greatly
delighted. And she has her respect for thee unshaken and
all her actions are for thee. O great man, O thou best of
men, I beheld the daughter of Janaka in this plight, engaged
in hard austerities and ever devoted unto thee. O thou of
great intelligence, O Raghava, offering me (this jewel) as a
token, she wanted me to relate unto thee, the occurrence at
the mount chitrakuta regarding the crow. And Janaki
addressing me said—‘O Wind-god’s son, do thou describe
everything of what thow hast seen here, unto Rima. And
relating everything before Sugriva, do thou present him with
this jewel which has been preserved by me with great care.
Phave kept with great care this excellent jewel of great
effulgence. Do thou remind him of the mark which he made


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1091


on my forehead with red arsenic. O innocent monkey,
greatly delighted am I on beholding the brilliant jewel
which he has sent through thee. Breathe shall I only
for a month, beyond that 1 shall never live, subject as
I am tothe demons. Thus was I accosted by Sit&, reduced
to a skeleton,observing pious observances, shut up in Ravana’s
.inner apartment and having eyes like those ofahind. I
have described unto thee everything, O Raghava, do thou
make arrangements for bridging over the ocean.” And
considering those two princes greatly consoled, the Wind-
god's son handed over that token unto Ra&aghava and
described everything from the beginning to the end.


SECTION LXV}.


Bane thus accosted by Hanumfn, Rama, the-.son of
Dagaratha, placing that jewel on his breast, wept with
Lakshmana. And beholding that excellent jewel, Raghava,
stricken with grief, with eyes full of tears, spake unto
Sugriva, saying,—'Forsooth my heart melteth on beholding
this jewel as milk trickleth down from the udders of a cow
on beholding its calf. This jewel was conferred on Sit&
by my father-in-law at the time of our wedding, and to
enhance its beauty, she wore it on her head. and this
jewel, obtained from the bed of the ocean, was conferred on
him (Janaka) by the intelligent Sakra, greatly delighted
for being adored in a sacrifice. O gentle one, this bringeth
back to my mind, the memory of my father, and father-in-law
the king of Videha. This excellent jewel appeared beautiful
on the crown of my dear one, and methinks, on beholding
it, I have as if got back my beloved spouse. Do thou relate


109% RAMAYANA.


unto me again and again, O gentle one, what Vaidehi hath
said, as if sprinkling me with the water of her words like
unto one rendered senseless. What greater grief can there
be, O Saumitri, tat I behold the jewel obtained from the
ocean but not Vaidehi? Truly doth Vaidehi tive for a long
time if she breathes for a month, But O hero, I cannot live for
a moment even without that one having dark-blue eyes. Do
thou take me there where thou hast beheld my dear spouse. 1
cannot live for a moment while I have received intelligence
about her. How liveth that timid damsel, having a beautiful
waist, being terrified, amidst the terrible and grim
Rakshasees? Truly her countenance is not appearing
beautiful like unto the autumnal moon, enveloped with clouds,
although cleared off the darkness. Do thou relate unto me
in sooth, O Hanuman, what Sita hath spoken unto thee. I
shall live by these words, as the sick are cured by-medicine.
O Hanum&n, what hath my dear wife, sweet-speeched, and
highly beautiful, spoken unto thee, being separated from me ®
How breathes she going through a series of calamities ?”


SECTION LXVII.


Bane thus’addressed by the high-souled Righava,
Hanum&n, related unto him all of what Sit& had said—O
foremost of men, the worshipful Janaki, related as a token,
all the incidents at the Mount CAé:trakuta from the begin-
ning te the end. Sleeping happily with thee, Janaki one day
awoke before, and in the meantime, a crow wounded her
breast with its beaks. O Rama, thou wert then asleep on
Sita’s lap and that crow again afflicted the worshipful dame.
And it again wounded her. And being bathed in blood and


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1093


suffering terrible pangs, that worshipful dame aroused thee.
O slayer of foes, O thou of mighty-arms, seeing her breast
wounded, thou, wroth like a serpent, didst speak saying—
‘O timid damsel, who, with his nails, hath wounded thy
breast ? Who hath played with an angry serpent having five
faces?’ And casting thy looks around thou didst behold a
crow facing the worshipful dame with sharpened nails
besmeared with blood. That crow, the best of the birds, was
Sakra’s son. And it entered speedily into the earth with
the velocity of the wind. Thereupon, thy eyes rolling with
ire, thou, O mighty armed hero, O foremost of the intelligent,
didst resolve to destroy that crow. And taking a Auga off
thy seat thou didst set it on Brahma weapon. And it flamed
like unto the fire of dessolution before that crow. And thou
didst Jet off that burning Awga towards that bird. And there-
upon that burning éuga followed the crow. And being forsaken
even by the celestials, who were terrified, and ransacking
the three worlds it did not get a refuge. Thereupon it again
came to you, O subduer of foes. And seeking thy shelter
it laid itself low on the ground. And O Ka&kutstha, thou
didst save it albeit it was worthy of being slain. And
thinking it improper to baffle the aim of the weapon, thou
didst, O Raghava, destroy the right eye of the crow. There-
upon bowing unto thee and the king Dagaratha? that crow,
bidding adieu, went to its quarter. O Raghava, thou art the
foremost of those skilled in the use of weapons, powerful and
gifted with an excellent character, why dost thou not
discharge weapons towards the R&kshasas? The celes-
tials, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Marutas—none of
them is qualified, O Rama, to equal thee in conflict.” ‘If thou,
gifted with great prowess, hast any affection for me, do thou
speedily, with well-armed shafts, destroy Ravana in conflict.
And obtaining the behests of his brother, why doth not
Lakshmana, the subduer of foes and best of men, protect me,
O R&ghava? Those two best of men, gifted with the


094 RIMAPANA.


effulgence of Wind and Fire,and incapable of being reptessed
even by the celestials, are disregarding me. Forsooth have
1 perpetrated a mighty iniquity since those two slayers of
foes, being capable, do not protect me’ Hearing those
sweet and piteous accents of Vaidehi I again spoke unto
that worshipful dame, saying—‘Forsooth can | swear by thee,
O worshipful dame, that Rama is sorely stricken with grief
fn thy absence. And Lakshmana too relenteth heavily
beholding him laden with sorrow. It doth not behove thee
to relent any more as I have succeeded in finding thee out.
Thou shalt at this very moment behold the end of thy grief.
And those two princes, the foremost of men and slayers of
foes, actuated with energy on hearing that I‘have seen thee,
shall reduce Lanka to ashes. And slaying in conflict the
terrible Ravana, with bis kith and kin, Raghava, in sooth, O
excellent damsel, shall take thee back to his own city, O
thou of a blameless person, do thou confer on me such a
token, as might be recognized by Rama and conduce to his
pleasure,’ Thereat, casting her Sooks around, she took out
an excellent jewel from her cloth, worthy of being set on her
braid and conferred it on me, O thou of great strength.
And O thou, the most favourite of the Raghu race, taking for
thee that gem with my hands and bowing unto her, I
addressed fnyself speedily for departure. And thereupon
beholding me ready to depart and increase in bulk and
about to leap up in the welkin, Sita, the daughter of- the
king Janaka, poorly, bathed in tears, overwhelmed with
sorrow and having her voice choked with grief, spake,
saying—'Blessed art thou O great monkey, since thou shalt
behold the large-armed and the lotus-eyed R&ma and the
highly famed Lakshmana, my lord’s younger brother.’ And
being thus accosted by Maithili, I said—'Do thou speedily
place thyself on my back, O worshipful dame, O thou the
daughter of king Janaka, and I shall soon show thee, O great
dame, O thou having dark blue eyes, thy lord along with


SUNDARAKRANDAM. 1095


Sugriva and Lakshmana.’ Whereto she replied—‘This, is
Hot the pious course, O great monkey, O thou the foremost
of thy race, that I shall, of my own accord, place myself on
thy back. And although before this I was touched by the
demon, O hero, it was because I could not help otherwise
subject as I] was to circumstances. Do thou thyself repair,
O foremost of monkeys, where those two princes are.’ Address-
ing me’ with these words she again said—‘O Hanumin, do
thou relate my well-being unto Rama and Lakshmana of
leonine prowess, and Sugriva accompanied by his followers.
Do thou so describe as the large-armed Raghava may save
me from this ocean of grief. Do thou narrate unto Rama this
my terrible sorrow and the affliction by the she-demons. May
good betide thee, on thy way, O foremost of the monkeys.’
Thus the worshipful Sit& gave vent to these piteous accents.
Hearing these words do thou believe that it is all well with
her.”


SECTION txvil).


6D ERRUPON, O foremost of men, out of thy love and
adoring me for thy friendship, that worshipful dame—
addressed-me again, saying—''Do thou thus speak every
thing unto Rama, the son of Dagaratha, so that he might
soon take me hence, slaying Ravana in battle. O heroe,
O slayer of foes, if it pleaseth thee, thou mayst relieve thyself
of the toil by living in a’ secret nook and then proceed
to-morrow. O monkey, in thy company, I do momentarily
forget the weight of my grief, unfortunate as I am. _O thou
gifted with great prowess, thyself departing, I shall wait for
thy return, but doubt I very much whether I shall live till’


1096 RAMAYANA,


then. Burnt I shall be with the fear of not beholding thee
again, wretched and striken with grief aslam. And so 1
shall be, hereafter, overwhelmed with a mightier grief. O
hero, besides, I entertain a grave doubt about thy assistants,
the monkeys and bears. 1 do not know how shall the host of
monkeys and bears and those two princes cross over the
mighty main? O innocent monkey of all the creatures
three only are qualified to cross over the ocean,thyself,Garuda
and the Wind. O thou foremost of those skilled in speech,
what hast thou settled about the accomplishment of this hard
work ? True it is that thou art alone qualified to accomplish
this work, O thou the slayer of inimical heroes—but such
manifestation of thy prowess shall increase thy glory only.
But if Rama, obtaining victory, can take me hence to his
own city, it shall redound to his glory. It doth not behove
the heroic Raghava, to take me away by stealth, like unto
Ravana capturing me from the forest under a disguise.
Truly it shall be his becoming work, if Kakutstha, the
repressor of enemy’s host, can take me away, enveloping the
city Lanka with his army. Do thou therefore initiate that
work as becometh that high-souled hero and may display
his prowess.” Hearing these sound reasonable and affectionate
words I gave her the last reply, saying—‘O worshipful dame,
Sugriva, the foremost of the monkeys, the lord of monkey
and bear hosts and gifted with manliness, hath resolved upon
rescuing thee. He hath under his command a number of
mighty and courageous monkeys gifted with great prowess
and quick-coursing like imagination. Their course is never
thwarted—whether going upwards or downwards—or moving
tortuously. They are never exhausted in their actions—~
highly courageous and of measureless prowess. And those
great and powerful monkeys, coursing in the air, have again
and again circumambulated the earth. Sugriva,bath many
monkeys—my equal—and greater than [, but none of inferior
strength. While I have crossed over the main--what of


: SUNDARAKANDAM. 1099.


these mighty heroes ¢ The leading heroes are hever sent on
amission but only those of inferior merit. No more of
bewailing, O worshipful dame. Do thou remove thy gtief.
And with one leap these leaders of monkey-hosts shall
reach Lanka. O great damsel, these two princes, placing
themselves on my back shall come to thee like unto the
rising Sun and Moon. Thou shalt soon behold before
Lanké&’s gate Raghava the slayer of foes resembling a lion
and Lakshmana with a bow in his hand. And thou shalt soon
observe in a band the heroic monkeys,gifted with the strength
of lions and tigers, and having nails and teeth for their
weapons. And thou shalt soon hear the roaring of the leading
monkeys on the summit of rhount Malaya, resembling
the muttering of the clouds. And thou shalt soon behold
R&aghava, the slayer of foes, installed along with thee on the
throne of Ayodhya after returning from the forest.” And that.
daughter of the king of Mithila although heavily laden with
sorrow in thy absence was greatly comforted and pleased by
my auspicious words boding the fulfilment of her desire.


END OF SUNDARAKANDAM.
