The Ramakrishna Mission
Institute of Culture Library
i
Pretented by
Cl' S ff.
G
] 372&2
k
PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLiLTION
OF
TrSHNUPURANAM
{Baseo on Professor H. H. Wilson’s translation,)'
SmT8D AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M A., M.R.A.S.,
Rector, Keshub Academy;
Author of the English Translations of the Erimadlhagavatam ^ :
Mahabharala, Bhagavat-Gita and other works.
CALCUTTA:
Punted by H. C. Dass,
Elysium Press ^ 6^[ii Beadon Street.
1300 .
P R E F ' 0 E.
That PurSna in which ParSsara, beginning with the events
‘f VarSlha Kalpa, expounds all duties, is called Vaishnaua and
; said to consist of twenty-three thousand stanzas. But the
:tual number of verses falls far short of the enumeration of
le Matsya and the Bhagavata. Vishnu Puranam consists of
I the characteristics of the Purina, namely, five specified
pics and has been divided into six books.
In this translation of Vishnupuranam I have principally
awn upon Professor H. H. Wilson’s splendid work, and
ive tried, as best as lies in my power, to interpret the
cient thought entombed in this great work. My work is
t so much intended for scholars as for the general readers
'|o have not the time and leisure to read the original,
bfessor Wilson^s book is very costly and cannot be always
cured by the readers; and in the face of this difficulty I
^e my edition will not be unwelcome to the general public.
ILCUTTA :
^mber


COKTENTS:


-:ol-


PAET I.

Section I.— Invocation. Maitreya inquires of his teacher
^aralara, the origin and nature of the universe. Parasara performs
a* rite to destroy the demons: reproved by Vasishtha, he desists:
Pulastya appears, and bestows upon him divine knowledge : he repeats
the Vishnu Parana, Vishnu the origin, existence, and end of all
things.—P. I.

Section II.— Prayer of Parasara to Vishnu. Successive narration
of the Vishnupurana. Explanation of Vasudeva ? his existence before
creation: his first manifestations. Description of Pradhana or the
chief principle of things. Cosmogony. Of Prakrita or material
Creation; of time; of the active cause. Development of effects:
Mahat; Ahankara; Tanmatras; elements; objects of sense; senses;
of the mundane egg. Vishnu the same as Bramha the creator ; Vishnu
the preserver ; Rudra the destroyer.— P. J.

Section III.— Measure of time, Moments or Kastha^s, &c., day
and fortnight, month, year, divine year : Yugas or ages: Mahajuga, or
great age: day of Bramha: periods of the Manus: a Manwantara :
night of Bramha, and destruction of the world : a year of Bramha,
his life : a Kalpa: Parardha : the past or Padma Kalpa the present or
Varaha,,— P. ii.

SacnojI IV.— Narayana's appearance, in the beginning of the
Kalpa, as the Varaha or Boar : Prlthivi addresses him : he raises the
world from beneath the waters^ hymned by Sanandana and the Yogis^
The earth floats on the ocean ; divided into seven ^ones. The lower
spheres of the universe restored. Creation renewed.— P. 14-

Sscnotl V.— Vishnu as Bramha creates the world. General
characteristics^ creation. Bramha meditates, and gives origin to
immovable th|m, animals, gods, men. Specific creation of nine
kinds ; Mahat/ Tanmatra, Aindriya, inanimate objects, animals^ gods,
meu, Anugmifa Kaumara. More particular account of creation.
Origin of different orders of beings from Bramha's body under
different conditions ; and of the Vedas from his mouths. Ail things
created again as they existed in a former Kalpa,— P. 19.

8bcti6n VL— Prigin of the four castes; their primitive state,
Progress of Society. Different kinds of grain. Efficacy of sacrifice.
Outies of men : regions assigned them after death.— P. 26.


11


Section VII.— Creation continued. Production of the mind-born
sons of Brahma ; of the Prajapatis ; of Sanandana and others ; of
Rudra and the eleven Rudras ; of the Manu ^wayambhuva, and his wife
Satarupa ; of their children. The daughters of Dakslr., and their
marria^je to Dharma and others. The progeny of Dharma and
Adharma. The perpetual succession of worlds, and different modes
of mundane dissolution. — V. 30.

Section VIII.— Origin of the Rudra ; his becoming eight Rudras ;
their wives ^nd children. The posterity of Bhrigu. Account of Sri
in conjunction with Vishnu. (Sacrifice of Daksha) — P. 34.

Section IX. — Legend of Lakshmi, Diirvasa gives a garland
to Indra ; he treats it disrespectfully, and is cursed by the Muni. The
power of the gods impaired ; they are oppressed by the Danavas, and
have recourse to Vishnu. The churning of the ocean. Praises of
Sri— P. 37.

Section X.— The descendants of the daughters of Daksha marri-
ed to the Rishis.— P. 48.

Section XI. Legend of Dhruva, the son of Uttanpada ; he is
unkindly treated bv bis father’s second wife ; applies to his mother ; her
.advice : he resolves to engage in roligiou.s exercises .* sees the seven
Rishis, who recommend him to propitiate Vishnu. — P. 50.

Section XII. Dhruva commences a course of religious aus-
terities. Unsuccessful attempts of Indra and ministers to distract
Dhruva’s attention : they appeal to Vishnu, who allays their fears and
appears to Dhruva. Dhruva praises Vishnu, and is raised .to the skies
as the pole-star.— P. 54.

Section XTII. — Posterity of Dhruva. Legend of Vena; bis im-
piety, he is put to death by the Rishis. Anarchv ensues. The pro-
duction of Nishad and Prithu : the latter the first king. The origin
4>f Suta and Magadha they enumerate the duties of kings. Prithu
compels Earth to acknowledge his authority : he levels it : introduces
cultivations : erects cities. Earth called after him Frithivi : typified
ns a cow. P.— 62.

Section XIV.— Descendants of Prithu. Legend of the PrCf
lehetas they are desirgd by their father to multiply mankind bj^;
worshipping Vishnu : they plunge into the sea, and meditate on
praise him : he appears and grants their wishes.— P. 69.

SictioN XV.— The world overrun with trees ; they are dcstfbyed
^ the Prachetasas. Soma pacifies them, and gives thetti Marisha
' tbwife; her story; the daughter of nymph Pramlocha. Lej^ehd

Kandu, Marisha’s former history. Daksha the Son Of the
Prachetasas ; bis' different characters ; his sons ; his daughters ; their
jtkSWf^age and prog^ ; allusion to Prabtada, his d^scendasL^P. 72.

Section XW- Inquiries qf Meitreya respecting ^ history


Section XVII.- Legend of Prahlada. Hiranyakasipu, the
sovereign of the universe: the gods dispersed, or in servitude to
him : Prahlada, his son remains devoted to Vishnu : questioned by his
father, he praises Vishnu : Hiranyakasipu orders him to be put to
death, but in vain : his repeated deliverance : he teaches his compa*
Dions to acbre Vishnu. — P. 14.

Section XVIII.— Hiranyakasipu's reiterated attempts to destroy
his son : their being always frustrated. — P. 91. '

Section XIX.— Dialogue between Prahlada and his father ; he
is cast from the top of the palace unhurt : baffles the incantation of
Samvara : he is thrown fettered into the sea : he praise^-U/^hnu.— P, 94.

Section XX.— Vishnu appears to Prahlada. Hiranyakasipu relents
and is reconciled to his son : he is put to death by Vishnu as the
^Nrisingha, Prahlada becomes king of the Daityas-.his posterity;
fruit of hearing the story.— F. 100.

Section XXI. — Families of the Daityas. Descendants of Kasyapa
by Danu. Children of Kasyapa by his other wives. Birth of the
Marutas, the sons of of Diti.— P. 103.

Section XXII. — Dominion over different provinces of creation
assigned to different beings. Universality of Vishnu. Four varieties
of spiritual contemplation. Two conditions of spirit. The perceptible
attributes of Vishnu : types of his imperceptible properties. Vishnu
everything. Merit of hearing the first book of the Vishnu Pura-
ng— P. 106.


PART II.

Section I. — Descendants of Priyavrata, the eldest son of Swayam-
bhuva Manu : his ten sons; three adopt a religious life; the others
become kings of seven Dwipas, or isles, of the earth. Agnidhras,
king of Jambu-dwipa divides it into nine portions, which be
distributes amongst his sons, h^bhi king of the south sticceeded by
Bharata; India named after him Bhdrata: his descendants reign
during the Swayambhuva Manwantara. — P. 113.

Section II.— Description of the earth. The seven Dwipas and
seven seas Jamhu-dwipa. Monnt Meru ; its existence and boundaries.
Extent of Illavrita. Groves, lakes, and branches of Meru. Cities of

G^hIs. Rivers. The forms of Vishnu worshipped in different
Varthas.— P. 116.

^ Section III. — D‘*scription of Bharata-Varsha ; extent; Chief
mountains : nine divisions : principal nations: superiority over Other
Varshasi especially as the seat of religious acts. — P. 120.

. ^^CTfOjN' IV.— Account of kings, divisions, mountains, rivers, and
^^^bitants of the other Dwipas viz. Piaksha, Silmala, Kusa, Krauneba,


\v


Sikt, and Pushkara : of the oceans separating them : of the tides :

the confines of the earth ; the Lokaloka Mountain. Extent of the
e^hole. — P. 122.

Section V.— Of the regions of Patala, below the earth*
Narada’s praises of Patala. Account of the serpent Sesha. .>First teacher
of astronomy and astrology.— P. 128.

Section VI.— Of the different hells, or divisions of Naraka,
below Patala ; the crimes punished in them respectively > efficacy ot
expiation ; meditation on Vishnu the most effective expiation, — P. 130.

Section VII.— Extent and situation of the seven spheres viz.,
earth, sky, ptarills, Mohailoka, Janaloka, Tapolcka, and Satyaloka.
Of the eggot Bramha and its elementary envelopes. Of the influence
of the energy of Vishnu.-— P. 134. » ,

Section VIL— Description of the Sun ; his chariot ; its twoaxles »
his horses. The cities of the regents of the cardinal points. The Sun's
course ; nature of his rays ; his path along the ecliptic. Length of
day and night. Divisions of lime ; equinoxes and solhtiees, months,
years, the cyclical yuga, or age of five years. Northern and southern
declinations. Saints on the Lokaloka mountain. Celestial paths of
the Fitris, gods, Vishnu. Origin of the Gangs, and separation, on
the top of Meru into four great rivers. — P. 137.

Section IX.— Planetary system, under the 13^6 of a Sisumara
or porpoise. The earth nourished by the Sun. Of rain whilst the
Sun shines. Of rain from clouds. Rain the support of vegetation, and
thence of animal life. Narayana the support of all beings.— P. 140

Section X.-- Names of the twelve Adityas. Names of the Rishis,
Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yakshas, Uragas, and Rakshasas, who attend the
chariot of the sun in each month of the year. Their respective
functions.— P. 148.

Section XL— The sun distinct from, and supreme over, the at-
tendance on his car ; identical with the three Vedas and with Vishnu ;
hU function 8 .-rP. 149*

Sectton XII.— Description of the Moon : his chariot, horses,
and course, fed by the Sun ; drained periodically of ambrosia by
the progenitors and gods. The chariots and horses of the planets ;
kept in their orbits by aerial chains attached to Dhruva* Tropical
members of the planetary porpoise. Vasudeva alone real.— P. 151.

Section XIII.— Legend of Bharata. Bharata abdicates his throne
aed becomes an ascetic ; cherishes a fawn, and becomes so mtich
attached ;to it as to neglect his devotions : he dies ; his successti^
births ; works in the fields and is pressed as a palanktD*bearer for the
]^|a of Sauvira ; rebuked for his awkwardness ; his reply ; dialogue
^areen him and the king.— P. 155.

^ Section XI V .—Dialogue continued, Bharata expounds the nature
l^^sience, the end gf life, and the identification ot individual aritb


V


Section XV.— Bharata relates the story of Ribhu and Nidagha,
the latter, the pupil of the former, becomes a prince, and is visited h}
his preceptor, who explains to him the principles unity and
departs. — P. 165.

Section |XVI.— Ribhu returns to his disciple, and perfects him
in divine knowledge. The same recommended to the Rajah by
Bharata, who thereupon obtains final liberation. Consequences of
bearing this legend.— P. 167.


PART III.

Section I.— Accounts of the several Manus and Manwantaras
Shwarochisha the second Manu : the divinites, the Indra, the seven
Kishis of his period and his sons. Similar details of Auttami, Tamasa,
Eatvaita, Chakshusha, and Vaivaswata. The forms of Vishnu, as the
preserver, in each Manwantara. The meaning of Vishnu. — P. 171.

Section II. — Of the seven future Manus and Manwantaras.
Story of Sanjna and Chhaya, wives of the Sun. Savarni son of Chhaya
the eighth Manu. His successors, with divinities, Ac of their respec-
tive periods. Appearance of Vishnu in each of the four Yugas. — P. 174^

Section III. — Division of the Vedas into four portions, by a
Vyasa in every Dwapara age. List of the |twenty-eight Vyasas of the
present Manwantara. Meaning of the word Bramha.— P. 178.

Section IV.— Division of the Veda, in the last Dwapara age,
by the Vyasa Krishna Dwaipayana. Paila made reader of the Rich ;
Vaisampayana of the Yajush ; Jaimani of the Saman and Sumantu of
the Atharvan. Suta appointed to teach the historical poems. Origin
of the four parts of the Veda. Sanhitas of the Rig Veda. — P. 180.

Section V.— Division of the Yajur-veda. Story of Yajnawalkya
forced to give up what he has learned, picked up by others, forming
the Taittiriya-yajush. Yajnawalkya worships the Sun who communi-
cates to him the Vajasaneyi-yajush.— P. 182.

Section VI.— Divisions of the Sama-veda : of the Atharva*veda.
Four Pauranik Sanhitas. Names of the eighteen Puranas. Branches
of knowledge. Classes of Rishis. — P. 184.

Section VIL— By what means men are exempted from the
athprity of Yama, as narratted by Bhisma to Nakula. Dialogue
between Yama and one of his attendants. Worshippers of Vishnu
not subject to Yama. How they are to be known. — P. 187.

Section VIIL— How Vishnu is to be worshipped as related by
Aurva to Sagara. Duties of the four castes, severally and in common ;
^SQ in time of distress.— P. 191.

s ;- PitMcN !X. — Duties of the religious student, householder, ^rniit
abd tne Jlicant.'-P. 194.


vi


Section X.— Ceremonies to be observed at the birth and namingt
«of a child. Of marrying or leading a religious life. Choice (4 A
wife. Different modes of marrying. — P. 196.

Section XL— Of the Sadacharas ore perpetual obligation! of a
householder. Daily purifications, ablutions, libations, apd oblations :
hospitality • obsequial rites ; ceremonies to be observed at meals,
morning and evening worship, and on going to rest.— P. 198.

Section XII.— Miscellaneous obligations— purificatory, ceremo-
nial and moral.— P. 208.

Section XIII.— Of Sraddhas, or rites in honour of ancestors, to
be performeii*<>n occasions of rejoicing. Obsequial ceremonies. Of
^ the Ekoddishta or monthly Sraddha, and the Sapindana or annual
one. By whom to be performed. — P. 212. (

Section XIV.— Of occasional Sraddhas, or obsequial ceremonies I
when most efficacious, and at what places. — P, 215.

Section XV. What Brahmans are to be entertained at Sraddha! '
Different prayers to be recited. Offerings of food to be presented to
deceased ancestor.— P. 218.

Section XVI. — Things proper to be offered as food to deceased
ancestors ; prohibited things. Circumstances vetiating a Sraddha ;
how to be avoided. Song of the Pitris or progenitors, heard by
. Ikshwdku— P. 223.

Section XVII. — Of heretics, or those who rejects the authority of
the Vedas ; their origin, as described by the Vasistha to Bhishma [ the
gods, defeated by the Daityas, praise Vishnu; an illusory being or
Buddha, produced from his body.— P- 225.

Section XVIII.— Buddha goes to the earth and teaches the
Daityas to contempt the Vedas ; his septical doctrines ; his prohibition
of animal sacrifices. Meaning of the term Bauddha. Tainas and
Bauddhas, their tenets. The Daityas loose their power ana are over-
come by the gods. Meaning of the term Nagna. Consequences of
neglect of Duty. Story of Satadbanu and his wife Saivya Communlbn
with heretics to be shuni eJ.— P. 228.


PART IV.

Section I. — Dynasties of kings. Origin of the Solar dynasty
from Brahma. Sons of the Manu Vaivaswata. Transformation ' bf
Itta or Sudynrnna. Descendants of the sons of Vaivas\^ata : tho^e
ofNedishta. Greatnes.s of Marmha, kings of Vaisali, Descendants
ofSaryati. Legend of Raivata: his daughter Revati married to
B^ram,— P. 237. . ,

Section II. — Dispersion of Revata's descendants:

: those of Nwbhaga. Birth of Ikshwaku, (he son of


vii


j hid song Line of Vikukshi. Legend of Kakutstha ; of Dhundlmmara ]
I of Yuvanaswa; of Mandhatri : his daughter married to Sauvari . —

i p. 241.

Section® III. — Shaubhri and his wives adopt an asectic life,
descendant of Mandhatri. Legend of Narmada and Purukutsa. Le-
gend of Trisanku, Bahu driven from his kingdom by the Haihayas
and Talajanghas. Birth of Sagara l he conquers the barbarians, im-
poses upon them distinguishing usage, and excludes them from offerings
to fire and the study of Vedas. — P. 250.

Section IV. — The progeny of Sagara : their wickecfness; he per-
forms an Aswamedha ; the horse stolen by Kapila ; found by Sagara's
sonsf who are all destroyed by the sage : the horse recovered by
Ansumat ; his descendants. Legend the Mitrasaha or Kalmashapada
the son of Sudasa. Legend of Khatwanga. Birth of Rama and other
sons of Dasaratha. Epitome of the history of Rama ; his descendant
and those of his brothers. Line of Kusha. Vrihadbala, the last, killed
in the great war.— P. 254.

Section V. — Kings of Mithila. Legend of Nimi, the son of
Ikshwaku. Birth of Janaka. Sacrifice of Siradhwaja. Origin of Sita.
Descendant of Kusadhwaja. Krita the last of Maithila princes. —
P. 261.

Section VI.— Kings of the lunar dynasty. Origin of Soma or
the tnoon : he cries off Tara, the wife Vrihaspati : war between
the gods and Asuras in consequence: appeared by Bramha, Birth of
Budha : marred to Ilia, daughter of Vaivaswata. Legend of his son
PuFuravas, and the nymph Urvashi : the former institutes offerings with
fire : ascends to the sphere of the Gandharbas.— P. 263.

Section VII.— Sons of Pururavas. Descendants of Amavasu.
Indro born as Gadhi. Legend of Richika and Satyavati ; Birth of
Jatnadagna and Viswamitra. Parasurama the son of the former. Sunah-
leplas and others the sons of Viswamitra forming the Kausika
race.— P 268.

Section VIII. — Sons of Ayus. Line of Kshatravriddha, or Kings
of Kashi. Former birth ot Dhawntari. Various names of Pratarddana.
Greatness of Alarka.— P. 270.

Sbction IX — Descendants of Raji, son of Ayas, Indra resigns
his throne to him : claimed after his death by his sons, who appostatise
from the religion of the Vedas, and are destroyed by the Indra.
&esc<eifldant8 of Pratikshatra, son of Kshatravriddha. — P. 272.

SijctiON X.— The sons of Nahusha. The sons of Yayati : he is
corsed hf Sokra : wishes his sons exchange their vigour for hts
Puru alone consents. Yayati restores him his youth :
ih# eirth amongst his sons under the supremacy of
P. 375.


«. Section XL— The Jadava race, or descendants of Yadu. Kartfa^
virja obtains a boon from Dattatreya ; takes Ravana prisoner; is killedf
by Parasurama ; his descendant. — P.275. ^

Section XIL— Descendants of Kroshtri : Jyamaghas connubiaf
affection for his wife Saivya, their descendants kings of Vidharbb®
and Chedi.— P. 277-

Section XIII —Sons of Satawata. Bhoja princes of Mrittikttvati.
Surja the friend of Satrajit : appears to him in a bodily from ; gives
him the Syamantaka gem ; its brilliance and marvellous properties.
Satrajit givesj^o Prasena, who is killed by a lion; the lion killed
by the bear Jambavat. Krishna suspects of killing Prasena, goes to
look for him in the forests ; traces the bear to his cave, fights with him
for the jewel; the contest prolonged, supposed .by his companions
to be slain ; he overthrows Jambavat, tl’o marries his daughter Jambavati
returns with her and the jewel to Dwaraka and restores the jewel
to Satrajit, and marries his da»:ghter Satyabhama. Satrajit murdered
by Sataddhan wan : avenged by Krishna. Quarrel between Krishna
and Balarkma. Akrura possessed of the jewel * leaves Dwdrakd'.
Public calamities. Meeting of the Yddavas. Story of .\krura’s birth : is
invited to return • accused by Krishna of having the Syamantaka : jewel
produces it in full assembly ; it remains in his chage ^ Krishna acquitted
of having purloined it — P. 291.

Section XIV.— Descendants of Sini, of Anamitra, of Swaphalka
and Chittra, of Andhaka. The children of Devaka, and Ugrasena
The descendants of Bhajamana. Children of Sura : his son Vasudeva ;
his daughter Pritha married to Pandu; her children, Yudhishthira and
his brothers ; also Kama by Aditya,, The sons of Pandu by madri.
Husbands and children of Sura's other daughter. Previous births of
Sisupala.— P. 290,

Section XV.— Explanation of the reason why Sisupal in his
previous births as Hiranyakasipu and Ravana was not identified with
Vishnu on being slain by him, and was so identified when killed as
Sisupaja. The wives of Vasudeva : his children : Balarama and
Krishna his sons by Devaki both apparently of Rohini and Yasoda.
The wives and children of Krishna, Multitude of the descendants
of Yadu. — P. 292.

Section XVI.— Descendants of Turvasu.—P. 296

Section XVII,— Descendants of Drubyu— P. 296.

Section XVIIL— Descendants of Anu. Countries and towns named
after some of them, as Anga, Banga and others.— P. 297.

Section XIX.— Descendants of Puru. Birth of Bbarata» the son
of Dusbyanta : his sons killed : adopts Bharadwaja or Vitatha. Hastin,
founder of Hastinapur. Sons of Ajamidha, and the races derived
^mthem, as Pancbalas* etc. Kripa and Kripi found by . Sautantt.'
Dl^ndants of Ritsha, the son of Ajamidha, Kurukshetri' n^<t
ilpm Kttiru. Jarasandba and other kings of Magadha.^P. 298.


IX


SitCTXOK, XX. — Descendants ol Kuru. Devapi abdicates the
throne : assumed by Santanu: he is confirmed by the Brahmans:
Bhisma his son by Ganga : his other sons. Birth of Dhritarashtra,
Pandtt and Vidura. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. The five
sons of Pandin: married to Draupadi : their prosperity. Parikshit^
the grandson of Arjuna» the reigning king.— P. 301.

Section XXL— Future Kings. Descendants of Parikshit, ending
with Kshemaka,— P. 304.

Section XXII.— Future kings of the family of Ikshwaku, ending
with Sumitra.— P. 305,

Section XXIIL— Future kings of Magadha, De^icendants of
Vrihadratha.— P. 306.

SjCTioN XXIV. — Future kings of Magadha. Five Princes of
thefllne of Pradyota. Ten Saisunagas. NHne Nandas. Ten Mauryas.
Ten Sungas. Four Kanwas. Thirty Andhrabhrityas. Kings of various
tribes and castes, and periods of their rule. Ascendancy of barbarians.
Different races in different regions. Period of universal iniquity, and
decay. Coming of Vishnu as Kalki, Destruction of the wicked
and restoration of the practices of the Vedas. End of the Kali, and
return of the Krita age. Duration of the Kali. Verses chanted by
earth, and communicated by Asita to Tanaka. ^ End of the fourth
book.— P- 307.

PART V:

Section L— The death of Kansa announced. Earth, oppressed
by the Daityas, applies to the gods. They accompany her to Vishnu
who promises to give her relief. Kansa imprisons Vasudeva and
Devakl. Vishnu’s instructions to Yoganidra. — P. 317.

Section II. — The conception of Devaki : her appearance; she is
praised by the gods.— P- 323.

Section III.— Birth of Krishna, conveyed by Vasudeva to Mathura
and exchanged with the new>born daughter of Yasoda. Kansa at*
tempts to destroy the latter, who becomes Yoganidra.— P. 325.

Section IV, — Kansa addresses his friends, announces their danger
a^d orders male children to be put to death.— P, 327.

Section V.— Nanda returns with the infants Krishna and Bala-
rama to Gokula. Putaua killed by the former. Prayers of Nanda
and Yasoda P.— 329,

Section VI.— Krishna overturns a waggon : casts down two trees.
The ,Gopi8 departs to Vrindabana. Sports of the boys. Description
of the season of the rains.— P. 330.

. Section Vtl.— Krishna combats the serpent Kaliya : alarm of
. his, and companions: he overcomes the serpent, and is pro*
by kirn : commands him to depart from the Yamuna river to
334.

; vuL— -The Demon Dhenuka destroyed by Rama.

S|;)oru of ths boys in the forest. Frsttttbs the*
Am <#pf(;s iyvongst them : is desuoyed by Rtmsr et the ofiiemaad


X


Section X.— Description of autumn. Krishna dissuades Nanda
^from worshipping Indra : recommends him and the Gopas to worship
cattle and the mountains.— P. 344- «...

Section XL— Indra offended by the fbss of his offerings causes
heavy rains to deluge Gokula. Krishna holds up, the mountain
Gobardhana to shelter the cowherds and their cattle.— P. 348.

. Section XIL— Indra comes to Gokula: praises Krishna and
makes him piince over the cattle. Krishna promises ,to befriend

Ariuna.— P. 350. . ^ , 1 j v

Section XIII.— Krishna praised by the cowherds: his sports
with Gopisiv^heir imitation and love of him, The Rasa dance.
— P. 352

Section XIV.— Krishna kills the demon Arishta, in the form of
a bull.-P. 356.

Section XV.— Kansa informed by Narada of the existence of
Krishna and Balarama : he sends Kesin to destroy them and Akrura
to bring them to Mathura. — P. 357.

Section XVI.— Kesin in the form of a horse, slain by Krishna :


he is praised by Narada. — P. 359.

Section XVTI. — Akrura's meditation to Krishna, his arrival at
Gokula: his delight at seeing Krishna and his brother, — P. 361.

Section XVIIL— Grief of the Gopis on the departure of Krishna
and Balarama with Akrura : their leaving Gokula. Akrura bathes in
the Yamuna ; beholds the divine form of the two youths, and praises


Vishnu.— P. 363.

Section XJX.— Akrura conveys Krishna and Rama near to
Mathura, leaves them : they enter the town. Insolence of Kansa’s
washerman : Krishna kills him. Civility ot a flower-seller : Krishna
gives him his benediction. — P. 367.

Section XX. — Krishna and Balarama meets Kubja : she is made
straight by the former : they proceed to the palace. Krishna breaks a
bow intended for a trial of arms. Kansa’s orders to his servants.
Public games. Krishna and his brother enter the arena : the former
wrestles with Chanura, the latter with Muslitika, the king's wrestlers ;
who are both killed. Krishna attacks and slays Kansa : he and
Balarama do homage to Vasudeva, and Devaki : the former praises
Krishna.— P. 370.

Section XXI —Krishna encourages his parents ; places Ugra-
sena on the throne ; becomes the pupil of the Sandipani, whose son
he recovers from the sea, he kills the marine demon, Panchajana. and
makes a horn of his .shell. — P. 376.

Section XXII.— Jarasandha besieges Mathura; is defeated,


but repeatedly renews the attack.— P. 379.

Section XXIIL— Birth of Kalayavana : he advarifres against
Mathura, Krishna builds Dwaraka and sends thilhert he Yadava
be leads Kalayavana into the cave of Muchukunda • the^^tter
awakeSf consumes the Yavana king, and praises Krishna.— P* : 386; \
$- Section XXDL»^Mucbukunda,goc8 to perform penanCe,,,fciisblia
^^ea^jifbe army and treasures of Kalayavana, and repairs .yrith them
Balarama visits Vraia : inouires its inhabitantA after


xi


SlCTroN XXV.—Balarama finds wine in the hollow of a tree
become inebriated; commands the Yamuna to come to him. and on
her refusal drags her out. of her course; Lakshmi gives him orna-
ments and a dress: he returns to Dwaraka and marries Revati.— P. 385.

SscTtON XXVI. — Krishna carries off Rukmini : the princes who
come to rescue her repulsed by Balarama. Rukmin overthrown but
spared by Krishna, found Bhojakata. Pradyumna bom of Rukmini.

-p. 387-

Section XXVII. — Pradyumna stolen by Sambara; thrown into
the sea, and swallowed by a fish; found by Mayadevi ; he kills
Sambara, marries Mayadev, and returns with her to D^faraka. Joy of
Rukmini and Krishna.—P. 388.

SECTION XXVIII. — Wives of Krishna, Pradyumna’s son Anirudha;
nuptials of the latter. Balarama beat at dice, becomes incensed, and
slays Rukmin and others. — P. 390.

Section XXIV. — Ind^a comes to Dwaraka, and reports to Krishna
the tyranny of Naraka. Krishna goes to his city, and puts him to
death. Earth gives the earrings of Adili to Krishna and praises him,
He liberates the princesses made captive by Naraka, sends them to
Dwaraka, and goes to Swarga with Satyabhama. — P. 392.

Section XXX. — Krishna restores her earrings to Aditi, and is
praised by her; he visits the garden of Indra and tat the desire 0}
Satyabhama carries off the Parijata tree. Sachi excites Indra to its
rescue. Conflict between the gods and Krishna, who defeats them.
Satyabhama derides them. They praise Krishna.—P. 395.

SECTion XXXI. — Krishna with Indra’s consent, take*? the Paiijata
tree to Dwaraka ; marries the princesses rescued from Naraka.— P. 401

Section XXXII.— Children of Krishna. Usha the daughter
of Bana, sees Aniruddha in a dream, and becomes enamomed of
him.— P. 402.

Section XXXIII. — Bana solicits Siva?for war ; finds Aiiiruddha
in the palace, and makes him prisoner. Krishna, Balarama, and
Pradyumna come to his rescue. Siva and Skandha aid Bam; the
former is disabled ; the latter put to flight, Bana encounter Krislma
who cuts off all his arms, and is about to put him to deatij. Siva
intercedes and Krishna spares his life. Vishnu and Siva aie the
same. — P. 404.

Section XXXIV. — Paundraka, a Vasudeva, assumes the in.'iignia
and style of Krishna, supported by the king of Kasi. Krishna man lies
against and destroys them. The son of the king sends a mauical deing
against Krihna : destroyed oy his discus, which alo sets bemues on
fire, and consumes it and itsinhabitants.— P. 408.

Section XXxV.— S amba carries off the daughter of Duiyodhana
but U, taken prisoner. Balarama comes to Hastinapur, and demands
his liberation: it is refused: in his wrath he drags the city tuwards
blnii to throw it into the river. The Kuru chiefs give up Samba and
bis wife, 41 1.

XXXYI.-The
Sslarama.*^?.


XU


Section XXXVIL— Destruction nf Yadavas. Samba and others
deceive and ridicule the Rishis. The tormer bears an iron pestle, it is
broken, and thrown into the sea. 'i'lie Ya^avas go to Prabhasa by
desire of Krishna : they quarrel and tight and all perish. The great
serpent Sesha issues from the mouth of Rama. Krishdh is shot by a
hunter, and again becomes one with universal spirit. — P. 415.

Section XXXVIIL-—Arjuna comes to Dwaraka, and burns the
deads and takes away the surviving inhabitants. Commencement of the
Kail age. Shepherds and thieves attack Arjuna and carry off the women
and wealth. Arjuna regrets the loss of his prowess toVyasa; who
consoles h^m^ and tells him the story of Ashtavakra’s cursing the
Apsaras. Arjuna and his brothers place Pcriskhit on the throne, and
go to the forests. End of the fifth book.—P. 420.

PAET VL

Section I.— Of the dissolution of the world; the four ages;
the decline of all things, and deterioration of mankind, in the
Kali age.~P. 427.

Section II.— Redeeming properties of the Kaliage. Devotion
to Vishnu, sufficient to salvation in that age for all castes and
persons.— P. 431.

Section III. — Three different kinds of dissolution. Duration
of a Parardha. The Clepsydra, or vessel for measuring time. The
dissolution that occurs at the end of a day of Brahma. — P. 434.

Section IV.— Continuation of the account of the first kind bf
dissolution. Of the second kind, or elemental dissolution; of all
being resolved into piimary spirit. — P. 437.

Section V.— The third kind of dissolution, or final liberation from
existence. Evils of worldly life. Sufferings of infancy, manhood,
old age. Pains of hell. Inperfect felicity of heaven. Exemption
from birth desirable by the wise. The nature of spirit or god.
Meaning of the terms Bhagavat and Vasudeva.— P. 440.

Section VI. — Means of attaining liberation. Bnecnotes of
Kbandikya and Kesidhwaja. The former instructs the latter how to
atone for permitting the death of a cow. Kesidhwaja offers him a
requital, and he desires to be instructed in spiritual knowfedge.
— P. 447*

Section VII.— Keshidwaja describes the nature of ignorance, and '
the benefits of the Yoga or contemplative devotion. Of the novjce
and the adept in the performance of the Yoga. How it is performed,,
*nie first stage, pritficiency in acts of restraints and moral duty ) the;
second particular mode of getting ; the third, PranayamSi modes <4
breathing; the fourth, Pratyahara, restraint of thought ; the fifth, appre*
bension of spirit : tiie sixth retention of the idea. Meditation Op the
individual and universal forms of Vishnu. Acquirement of kn0!v^ted|e
Final liberation.— P.> 450. ^ ;;

i Section VIIL— Conclusion of the dialogue between Paraiita

Maftreya. Recapitulation of the contents of the Vithnupqrana;
bating it; bow banded down, fiesides of Vishnu. » Coidiiiii*
459v


VISHNDPURANAM.


PART I.


SECTION I.


Omi* Salutation unto Vasudevai f 0 Pundarikasha,t
victory unto thee i I bow unto thee, 0 origin of the universe |
0 Hrishikesha,§ 0 great Purusha, 0 thou the first born I
That VishnuJI who is eternal, indecayable one, who is
Brahma, the Isvara and the Purusha,— who causeth the
creation, the sustentation and the dissolution (of the
world) consequent on the qualities! being agitated,—

* This mystic monosyllable plays a prominent part in Sanskrit scriptural
literature. Composed, according to some, of the letters a, m, and ma. signify-
ing BrahmSi, Creator ; Vishnu, Preserver ; and Siva, Destroyer ;~it expresses
the three in One ; and is said to possess great power spiritually.— T.

t In this translation, such epithets as, although compounded of general
terms, have through usuage come to mean some particular individual, have
been retained untranslated, their renderings being only appended in foot-
notes.— is son, an appellation of Krishna ; which, again,

although the name of the most celebrated incarnation of Vishnu, means—
darkMue or brovtnj^T.

I Pundarika-aksha^hdiVing eyes resembling the pale lotus.
b Hrtshika^TgBLti of sense, and iVa— lord. sovereign of the

senses,—!, e, the cause of their action and abstention.— T.
n Vishuu means all-pervading.’^T.

If The three cardinal qualities— goodness, passion and darkness.— T.


2


VISHNUPURANAM.


ftnd from whom hath sprung the cosmos with PradhRnai^
Buddhi, eU .; — may he confer on us excellent understanding
wealthf and emancipation { Bowing down unto Vishnu, lord
of the universe, and saluting Brahm^ and the rest, and
paying reverence unto my preceptor, I will rehearse the
Pur&na that is equal to the Vedas. Saluting and paying*homage
unto that best of ascetics, Paracara— son unto Vasistha's
son — versed annals and the Puranas, J accomplished in the

Vedas and the branches thereof, and learned in the mysteries
of the scriptures, — who had finished his first daily devotiods. ®
— Maitreya asked him, saying, — ^‘0 preceptor, I have one
by one studied near thee all the scriptures as well as the
Vedas and their branches. It is owing to thy grace that, 0
foremost of ascetics, almost all of those that are even our
enemies, confess that I have studied all the branches of
knowledge. 0 thou cognisant of righteousness, I am desirous
of hearing from thee how this universe came into being, and
how, 0 virtuous one, it shall be in the future 5 in what, 0
BrShmana, the cos mos consists ; wherefrom sprang this sys-
tem of mobile and immobile objects ; where it lay at first and
where it shall dissolve itself ; as to the objects that have mani-
fested themselves ; the genesis of the gods ; the establishment
of seas and mountains and the earth, and that of the sun,
eU.} and the dimensions thereof; the genealogies of the
deities,— all about the Manus, and the Manwantaras,§ and

* Unformed Nature is designated by several epithets — Pradhana, Prakriti,
Avyakta (unmanifested), e/c.— T.

t Wealth is of eight kinds, vie., animh, laghimh, prhpti, prdkamya, mahimd,
ifitwa, Dagitva, and kdmdvafdyith. — Anima is the power of reducing one’s self
to the minutest proportions ; laghimh is that of rendering one’s self exceedingly
V\%\iXt—prapH is the power of obtaining anything that is wished ; prakamya is
irresistibility of the Will ; is supremacy ; vasitvia is the power of bringing
all under sway ; and Kamavosayita is the power of suppressing desire.— T.

I A Purina treats of these five subjects, vtx., (i) the creation, (a) destruc-
tion and renovation of the world, (3) royal dynasties, (4) reigns of the
Manus, and (5) genes logics.— T.

I The reigns of Manus.


VISHNUPURANAM.


3


Kalpas^and Vikalpas of Kalpas composed of the fourfold divi-
sion into Yugas ; the character of the close of Kalpas ; and th^
entire tendencies of the Yugas; and, 0 mighty ascetic, the
history of^Devarshisf and inonarchs ; the proper division by
Vytsa of the Vedas into different parts ; and the morality
concerning BrAlimanas and others, as well as that of house-
holders.* 0 son of Vasishtha, I wish to hear all this related
by thee. 0 Brahmana, incline thy mind favourably unto
me, so that, 0 mighty anchoret, I may know all' this through
th^ grace.'^

* Par3l9ara said, —Excellent well; 0 Maitreya, 0 thou that
art conversant with righteousness. Thou bringest into my
recollection what of old my grandsire, the reverend Vasishtha,
had said of old. When I heard that my sire had been devour-
ed by the Rtkshasa sent by Viewamitra, I was wrought up
with an exceeding rage. Then I set about disturbing the
sacrifice of the Rakshas ; and in that sacrifice reduced to
ashes night-rangers by hundreds. On the Rakshas under-
going extermination, the eminently pious Vasishtha, my grand-
father, said unto me, — ^Do not indulge in excessive wrath,
0 child, control this passion of thine. Albeit the Rakshasas
did thus unto thy sire, yet have they not transgressed. This
ire springeth up in fools ; but where is the anger of the wise ?
Who, my child, destroyeth whom ? Person st but reap their
acts. 0 child, anger heweth away the great and immense
asceticism and fame acquired with extreme toil by men.
The prime saints ever banish anger, which retardeth heaven
and emancipation. Therefore, my child, do not thou come
under its sway. No need of burning the night-rangers, who
have not wronged. Stop this sacrifice of thine. Pious
people are composed of forgiveness.* Thus exhorted by my


• A kalpa is a day and night of Brahmd, consisting of 4,320,000,000 solar
■ydereal years, or years of mortals, measuring the duration of the world,—!.

t An order of saints.
i The text has male beings.— T.


4


VISHNITURANAM.


htgh-souled grandsire, I, for the sake of the dignity of his
speech, stopped the sacrifice. Thereat, that foremost of
ascetics, the reverend Vasishtha was gratified. And it came
to pass that there appeared then Pulastya, son unto BrahmS.
And when my grandfather had offered him arghya^ when
he had taken his seat, 0 Maitreya, the exceedingly righteous
elder brother of Pulaha addressed me, saying, — *As, albeit a
mighty enmity existeth (between thyself and the Rdksh.isas),
thou hast resorted to forgiveness at the words of thy
superior, thou shall master all the branches of knowledge. •
And as, ^although highly enraged, thou hast not cut otf my
sons, I, 0 pious one, shr.ll confer on thee a mighty boon.
Thou shalt be the author of the Purana and Samhita,t and thou
shalt attain a consummate knowledge of the celestials. And
through my grace, 0 child, thy intelligence shall be clear
and unobstructed as concerns the Present and the Past.'
Then my grandsire, the reverend Vasishtha, said, — What
Pulastya hath uttered to thee, must be so/ At thy question
I remember me in full of all that formerly had been said unto
me by Vasishtha and the intelligent Pulastya. And, O
Maitreya, as thou hast asked me, Pshall at length relate unto
thee adequately the Purina SamhitS. — Do thou understand
that properly. This universe hath sprung from Vishnu,—
and in Him it is established. He is the cause of the creation,
maintenance and destruction thereof, and He is the
universe.*'

* An oblation of various ingredients offered by way of respect. — T.

t An arrangeinent of the text of the Vedas into short sentences ; ora
compilation.— T.


3ilCTI0N II.


ParaSARA said “ I bow unto Him that is holy and
eternal— the supreme Soul who is ever uniform, — even Vishnu,
the Lord of all. I bow unto Hiranyagarbha, unto Hara and
Sankara, unto Vasudeva the saviour, even him who bringeth
alJoul creation, maintenance and destruction to everything.

I bow unto him that is uniform yet hath a multiplicity of
forms ; who is both subtle and gross ; — who is manifested
and unmanifested ; unto Vishnu, the cause of salvation. 1 bow
unto Vishnu, the supreme Soul, who pervadetli the universe,
and who is the fundamental cause of the creation, sustenance
and extinction of everything. And bowing down unto Him,
who is the stay of the universe, — who is minuter than the
minutest monad, — who resides in every being — unto the un-
deteriorating foremost Purusha, who is extremely pure,
and constitutes knowledge of the highest kind, — who in
consequence of the erroneous sight (of people) seemeth to be
endowed with a shape ; unto the Vishnu who can compass the
creation, maintenance and destruction of the universe,—
saluting the Lord of the world, un-born, unchangeable and un-V
deteriorating,— I shall relate what formerly, asked by Paksha
and other great ascetics, the reverend lotus sprung Great-sire
said unto them, and what they rehearsed unto king Purukutsa
on the banks of the NarmadS; and what he, in his turn,
related to SAraswata,— and the last unto me. He who is
Prime and Greater than the greatest, who is the supreme
Soul resident in himself,— who cannot be differentiated by
by form, color, etc,^ who is without deterioration or destruc-
tion, and without birth, growth and dissolution ; who can only
be asserted as existing, — is called by the learned VUsudeva,
in consequence of his existing everywhere and in all


6


VISHNUPURANAM.


objects.* That Brahma is prime and eternal, -^without birth,
change or deterioration. He is uniform, and pure in conse-
quence of the absence of the ignoble. «He is all this (that is) —
he is Manifested and Unmanifestedf ; and he exists as the
Primal Purusha and Time. 0 twice-born one, the first form of
the Primoeval Brahma is a Male Being. His other forms are
Manifested and Unmanifested, Time and the rest.t The wise
see that sacred state of Vishnu, which is superior to Pradhlna
Purusha, § Manifest and Time. The forms of Vishnu, first
consisting of PradhSlna, Purusha, Manifest and Timef a^e
the causes and expressions|| of creation, sustenance, and
destruction. Do thou understand that Vyakta?^ Vishnu,
Avyakta^ Purusha and Time are the exertions of Him,
resembling those of a child sporting. That which is the
Unmanifested Cause, is called subtle Nature by the foremost
saints, — external, and instinct with cause and effect. It is
indestructible, supportless, immeasurable, undeteriorating, real
devoid of sound or touch, and without form, etc. It hath
three several modes and is the mother of the Universe,
without beginning and is the end of all. Formerly after the

* Vasudeva is named from his residing in all objects and his endowing
them with splendour.” Moksha Dhatmar-^.

t Vyahia and Avyakta^iYit names respectively of formed and unformed
matter.— T.

X According to the Sankhya system, which the author follows in his cos-
mogony, prior to creation, the Universe existed in Nature like a mangoe tree
existing latent in a mangoe-stone ; and in the fulness of time, favored by the
Primeval male and Time, the evolution of all was brought about.— T.

I Male being.— T.

n Followers of the Sankhya Philosophy hold that the equilibrium of the
three principles or modes, is Prakriti — Primal nature.— T.

% " Here^et us remind our readers of the argument by which we are led to
conclude that the visible system {vydkta) is not the whole universe, and that
there must be an invisible order of things {Avyahta which will remain and
possess energy when the present system has passed away. It is, moreover,
very closely connected with the present system, inasmuch as this may be
looked upon as come into being through its means.** The italics are mine.
VmiiH Universe, p. lyi.


VISHNUPURANAM.


7


universal dissolution, everything was permeated by it. 0
Brihmana, those versed in the language of the Veda,— »
exercising self-control and meditating the Deity, read the
sense expressive of PradhRna, thus. Day was not, nor night,
nor sky, nor earth. And there was neither darkness nor yet
light. And there existed then Pradh&na, Brahma and the
Purusha,— 'incapable of being apprehended by ear and the
other organs, or the intellect. As 0 Vipra, the prime
Vishnu hath two forms, PradhSna and Purusha, so, 0
twicR-born one, he hath another, which is joined to
him (on the occasion of creation) and severed from him
during the universal dissolution ; and this is called KSila.
(Time). During the past dissolution, in consequence of
the Vyakta remaining nascent in Prakriti, this circum-
stance in popular parlance is called KSlla. 0 twice-born
one, the revered KSlla hath no beginning and hath no
end ; and in it genesis, stability and dissolution are un-
interrupted. On the occasion of the universal dissolution,
when Prakriti and Purusha remain separate, 0*Maitreya,
there exists the form of Vishnu termed KSla. Then at the
time of creation, the supreme Brahma, the Prime spirit
pervading the universe, reaching everywhere — the lord of all
beings, and the soul of all — the foremost Lord, Hari, entering
into PradhSlna and Purusha, agitated them. And as odour,
simply by reason of its proximity, and without any act,
stirreth the mind, even so did the Supreme Lord. That best
of males, 0 BrAhmana, is he that stirreth, and He it is that is
stirred ; he possessing in himself the three modes alike when
in equilibrium and when not, entereth into Pradhana. And
that Lord of lords, Vishnu, manifests himself in gross ele-
ments in subtle objects, and in such forms as BrahmSl and
others. And, 0 best of twice-born ones, on the occasion of
creation, from the equipoise of the principles presided
over by Kshetrajna,* springs up that which manifests the


Emanation of Dirinity.


8


VlSHNUPURAf^AM.


principles.^ And then Pradli^n^ overspread Mahat ; and the
three kinds of Mahat pertaining respectively to goodness#
passion and foulness, were enveloped* by Pradhana, even as
the rind envelopeth the seed. And from the three kinds of
Mahat sprang three kinds of ahankdra;\ (consciousness,)
viz.i vaikdrika^ taijasa and bhutddi.X And, 0 mighty
ascetic, as Pradhdna had enveloped Mahat, that cause
of the elements and the senses, akankdra^ from

its containing the three principles, was in its turn, enve-
loped by Mahat. Then the bhutddi,^ etc.^ being wrought,
produced the rudiments of sound, and from the latter came
into being ether, having the property of sound. And (anon)
the hhutddi overspread the rudiments of sound as well
as the ether; and, ether being wrought, produced the
rudiments of touch; and then sprang the powerful air,
whose property is known to be touch. And ether furnished
with nascent audibility, covered air, endowed with tan-
gibility. And then the air, wrought up, brought forth the
rudiments of form. Light came from the air, and its
property is said to be form. And the rudimental air en-
dowed with touch, enveloped the rudimental tangibility.
And light, being agitated, caused the taste ; and therefrom
sprang water, the residence of taste. And the rudiments of
form overspread the rudiments of taste. And water, stirred,
developed the rudiments of odour; therefrom sprang hardness
endued with the property of odour. The subtle condition of
a property existing in diverse objects is called TanmStra. In
consequence of the Tanm&tras not being differentiated, they

* Or Uuddhi-~the Intellect. This is alto called Mahat— the Great one.
It is the substance or essence by which the soul obtains a knowledge ol
external things.— T.

t Ahankara is the substance or ens connected with thought Buddhi, in
which consciousness inheres. It is the Mid*stui! o! Prof. Clifford, assumed
as the original ground of our being i.e. of all formal being.— T.

X Connected successively with goodness, passion and foulness.— T.

i Ahankara relating to foulness.


VISHNUPURANAM.


9


are undistin^uishable : they are not agreeable or unpleasant
of cause dullness,— and they are not marked by any
distinguishing feature. ’ From the consciousness related to
darkness.sprang the five rudiments and the five elements ;
from the conciousneSs relating to light sprang the organs of
sense ^ and from the consciousness relating to goodness
sprang the ten deities.* The mind is the eleventh (organ).t
The deities are known to have sprung from the principle of
goodness. 0 twice-born one, the touch, the eye, the nose, the
Wngue, and the ear for the fifth, are designed for the percep-
tion of sound, etc.^ and are backed by intellect. The other
organs are the anus, the organs of generation, the hands, the
feet, and the vocal organs for the fifth ; and the functions of
these are excretion, articulation, motion, and mechanic labor.
Ether, air, light, water, and earth, 0 Brahmana, are respective-
ly furnished with the properties of sound etc\ and in
consequence of their being agreeable or otherwise, or bringing
on delusion, — they are known as Vtcesha.

And endowed with distinct energies, they without
combining, and being all of them interfused, could not create
objects. And then, coming together, and each supporting
the others, they attained firmness and harmony and a
uniform appearance. And in consequence of their being
presided over by the Purasha, and favored by Pradhana,
(who was ripe for it), those, commencing from Mahat and
ending in Vishesha, brought forth an egg. And that egg
resembling a watery bubble, fostered by the elements,

* Cardinal Point, Wint^, Sun, Pracheta [regent of water], Acwini Kumara,
Fire, Indra, Upendra Krishna, Mitra, and Prajapati.— T.

t “ Mind ” says Maudesley in Physiology of mind “ used in the sense of
substance or essence, and brain used in the sense of organ of mental function,
are, at bottom, names of the same substance.” In the system of Kapila, which
the author follows, everything connected in function with sensuous objects,
is as material as the objects themselves, being equally an emanation from
Bvahntl^T,

t Specific.


2


JO


VISHNUPURANAM.


attained dimensions. 0 • thou of exceeding intelligence ; and
that egg formed by Prakriti, resting on water, became the
body of Vishnu wearing the form of Brahma, — And there
Vishnu — lord of the universe — who is incapable of being
perceived, — becoming manifest, remained in the form of
Brahma* And Meru became the bellows-like inner covering
of that exceedingly high-souled one, and the other mountains
became his outer covering; and the seas served for his water
in the womb. And, 0 Vipra, in that egg sprang mountains
and islands, and seas, light, and numbers of worlds, *^and
deities, Asuras and human beings. And that egg was
environed ten times successively with water, fire, air, ether,
and bhutddi and the bhutddi was surrounded in
the same way by mahat. And mahat along with
all those was also covered by avyakta. As the internal
cocoanut fruit is covered by the external rind, etc,, even so
was the egg surrounded by the natural coverings. Then the
lord of the universe, inspiring the principle of passion,} and
becoming Brahma, became engaged on creation. And until
the expiry of Kalpa,|| the worshipful Vishnu of
immeasurable power, instinct with the principle of goodness,
sustaineth creation. And at the end of a Kalpa, 0 Maitreya,
Janarddana,1I surcharged with the principle of foulness,
wearing a fierce form and becoming terrific swalloweth up

* As Hiranyagarbha.— T.

t Lit. the Great one—so consciousness or egoism is styled.— T.

t Vide ante. — T.

$ The three generally translated qualities,— but more ' properly

modes or principles— have a physical as well as a moral significance in the
sacred literature of the Hindus. “They are not mere accidents of nature,
but are of its essence and enter into its composition.” Davis’ Hindu
Philosophy.— 'V.

|{ Vide ante. — T.

f This is an appellation of Vishnu, meaning, he who is worshipped. This
Parana as the locus classicus of the Vaishnavas, recognises Vishnu as in one
the Greater and the Destroyer, without assigning the function of destruetloft
to Siva.— T.


VISHNUPURANAM.


II


All. And having swallowed up all beings, anon the cosmos
becoming one ocean, the supreme Lord licth down on the
couch* (formed by) the serpent. And walking, he, wearing
the form of BrahmS, again addresseth himself to creation.
And in consequence of his creating, sustaining and dissolving
verily one JanSrddana acquireth the appellations of BrahmS,
Vishnu and Siva. As creator, Vishnu createth himself, and,
as sustainer, he sustaineth himself, and, finally, becoming the
destroyer, the Lord himself destroyeth everything. And as
earU, water, light, air and ether, all the organs of sense
and the heart go by the name Purusha^ (Vishnu as being
the Primal male, is the author of all these.) And, as he is the
lord of all beings, and, as, knowing no decay, he hath the
universe for his form, even he is the creator of all, and his
also are the ends attained by beings.’'t


SECTION III.


]M[a1TREYA said : — *‘How can Brahma, who is devoid of
quality and confineless and pure and unblamed of soul,
possibly engage in creation, etc, T* Thereat Para 9 ara said,—
^'As the powers of many an object are incomprehensible and
incapable of being construed to sense, the powers of creation
e/tf, possessed by Brahma, like the heat of fire, are also so.
O foremost of ascetics, hearken how the Professor of the
eight kinds of wealth becomes engaged in creation. 0 wise
one, in consequence of the eternal reverend Vishnu coming
into being from objects, as Brahma the Grand-father, he is


The hundred-hooded serpent, Sesha or Ananta, also conceived as a form
Vishnu himself.— T.

t The acts of human beings, tic., are also his property.


12


VISHNUPURANAM,.


designated as produced. According to the measure set by him
human life is known as consisting of an hundred years. This
(age) is called />ara, and the half thereof Parardha. 0 sinless
one, do thou listen to me as I mention unto thee the divisions
of that which I have named unto thee as the Time-form of
Vishnu,— in relation to Him as well as other creat-ures, and
mobile and immobile objects, and the seas and all other
things, 0 best of men. 0 chief of ascetics, a kdsthd is
composed of fifteen nimeshas\* thirty kdsthds make up a
kald ; and thirty kalds a muhurta ; and as many muhurtcti
make up a day and a night unto human beings. many
days and nights form a month ; and a month consists of two
fortnights. Six months form an ayana ; and a year is
composed of two ayanas, one northern, the other southern.
The southern ayatta is the night of the celestials, as the
northern is their day. The period of twelve thousand yenrs
of the deities constitute the four Yugas, vis,^ Krita, TretS,
and the others. f Do thou understand that.J Chronologists
say that four, three, two, and one thousand divine years
successively compose Krita and the other Yugas. An
hundred divine years are said to constitute the first twlight,
as another hundred years the last, of the Yuga. The space
that intervenes between these twilights goeth by the name
of Yuga, embracing Krita, Treta and the rest. And 0
anchoret, a thousand of the four Yugas, Krita, Treta, Dwipara
and Kali, constitute one day of Brahma. One day of Brahma
0 Brahmana, compriseth four and ten reigns of the Manus.§
Listen to the chronology thereof! The seven saints, the
celestials, Sakra, Manu, and his sons — kings all of them— are
created at the same time and, as formerly, || are destroyed

* A nimesha is the twinkling of an eye.

t »>. DwSlpara and Kali. J The division of the Yugas.

$ A generic name of the Progenitors of mankind.

11 I fail to perceive the sense of this, unless it meant as thty have bent
created aforiime.-^T.


VISHNUPURANAM.


13


at the same time. 0 excellent one, a little over seventy-one
four Yugas constitute a Manwantara — the period of Manu
as well as the gods. ' Manwantara takes up over eight
lakshas^ arul fifty-two thousand years j and, 0 twice-born
one, full thirty t kotts. above sixty-seven J niyutas and about
twenty thousand human years. Ten and fourteen such
periods^ form one day of Brahma. Then comes on his sleepH
and at the end thereof, the universal dissolution. And then
all the trinue world, comprising Bhur, Bhuva and the rest, are
i«»c5nflagration, and the dwellers of the regions of Maha.
exercised with the heat, resort to the regions of Jana, On
the three regions being reduced to one sheet of sea, that
deity, the lotus-sprung Brahma instinct with Narayana, con-
templated by the of Janasthana, — with the intention

of swallowing up the three worlds, — lieth down on the be^
(formed by) the serpent. And having spent the might measur-
ing that period, § at the end thereof he begins anew the work
of creation. This is the year of Brahma and thus is
the space of his hundred years; and the life of that high-
souled one is an hundred (such) years. 0 thou without sin,
one half of Brahmans life is spent. On the expiration thereof
passeth away a Mahakalpa — which is called Padma. 0
twice-born one, this is the Kalpa distinguished as Vatrab^
belonging to the second Pardddha, which is present.^'

'* Lacs.

t One million.

;}: Ten millions.

$ Manwantaras.

II Extending over as many Manwantaras.

IT Persons practising a certain process entitled Yoga.

' I The time of creation.


SECTION IV.


Maitreya said:— “0 mi«hty ascetic, relate unto me
how the reverend BralimS who.se name is NSrSyana, created
all beings at the commencement of the Kalpa.” (Thereat)
Para 9 ara said, — “Hear as to how that god, the lord of
PrajSpati,* the reverend Brahma instinct with NarSyanc,
created beings. On the expiration of the past Kalpa, that
Master, BrahmS, surcharged with the energy of righteousness,
awaking from his slumbers, saw the universe — void of all.
And the supreme, incomprehensible Narayana—the lord of
the greatest— as the worshipful Brahma, became engaged
in creation. This sloka is used with reference to the divine
NSrSyana, the creator of the universe, in the form of BramS.
Apa is named ndra, having been created by Nara ;t and in
days of yore, (water) having been the abode of him, he hath
hence been called NarJlyana. — And on the universe becoming
one ocean, the creator of all beings, the Lord resting on
water, inferring that the Earth was thus placed, set his heart
on delivering her. And as he, on former occasions, had
assumed the forms of a fish, a Tortoise, etc.y he now assumed
the form of a Boar. And for sustaining the entire uni-
verse, the lord of creatures, impregnated with the Veda
and sacrifices, of serene soul and the soul of all,— the
Supreme spirit— stay of soul, and the prop of the Earth,—
hymned by the Siddhas inhabiting the region of Jana,-^
Sauaka and others,— then entered water. — And seeing him
enter the nether regions, that exalted one, the Earth, bowing
low in humility and reverence, began to praise him. And
the Earth said,—' I bow unto thee, who art all being ; I bow

♦ A divine personage sprung from Brahma.— T.

I A name of Vishnu.— T.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


15


unto thee, holding the conch and the mace. Do thou rescue
me from here, now, as, thou hadst formerly done. I had
formerly been delivered by thee. O Janlrddana, I as well as
other things, such as the sky, etc.^ are permeated by thee.
Reverence unto thee, 0 prime spirit, 0 male soul, I bow unto
thee^. I bow unto thee, who art pradhana and vaykta^ and
who art Time. Thou, wearing the forms of Brahma, Vishnu
and Rudra, art the creator of all beings, and thou art the
maintainer as well as the destroyer thereof. Having
destroyed everything, thou, 0 Govinda,* on the universe
having become one Ocean, — contemplated by the pious,
reposest (on the serpent-couch). None knoweth the high
mystery encompassing thee ; and the deities do but adore
that form in which thou incarnatest thyself. 0 supreme
Brahma, adoring thee, those desirous of emancipation, attain
the same. Who, not worshipping Vasudeva, obtaineth
liberation ? Thy entire form comprehends ail that may be
secured by the mind, all that may be perceived by sight and
the other senses, all that may be discriminated by thought.
And I am supported, and created, and maintained by thee.
And for this it is that people call me Madhavi.t Victory
to thee, 0 thou that art all knowledge j Victory to thee, who
art gross and undeteriorating j Victory to thee, 0 thou that
art infinite I Victory to thee, thou that art the Nascent |
Victory to thee, thou that art Manifest. Thou, 0 lord ! 0
prime of prime souls i 0 soul of the Universe! Victory to
thee, 0 master of sacrifice, thou, who art sinless j Thou art
Sacrifice, and VaskatkdraX and thou, Omkarda § and thou,

• This term, a common appellation of Krishna, is derived variously. Go —
language ^ [the language of the Vedas] and vinda — toho knows ; or go — heaven
or a cow, and vid-^to obtain, — by whom heaven is obtained, or who obtains
felicity by protecting ki«o. — T.

t Madhava being one of the names of Krishna, Uadhavi means related to
hfadhava . — T

t Oblation into Are with the utterence of Vashata, — T.

f The ntterence of Ow.— T,


VISHNUPURANAM.


I6

Fire. Thou art the Vedas, and thou the branches thereof,
and thou Hari,* art the person presiding; over sacrifice.
Thou art the Sun, etc.^ and the planets and stars, and thou
the entire universe. And 0 foremost god, thou art all that
is formless and that is formed, and that is hard and, 0 best
of male beings, all that I have mentioned and also all that
I have left un mentioned. I bow down unto unto thee. I
bow unto thee again and again/''

PakaSARA said : — “Thus eulogised by Earth, that grace-
ful one, the holder thereof, began to roar in SSmat accents.
Then heaving up the Earth with his razors from the deep,
the mighty Boar, having eyes resembling blown lotuses,—
and himself like unto loiiis-leaves, — rose up like a gigantic
dark-blue mountain. And as he emerged, the troubled water
dashed by the wind forced out from his mouth, surging up,
spla.shed the highly resplendent and sinless ascetics, Sananda
and others, dwellers of the regions of Jana. And on the
nether regions being broken up by the hoof-impacts (of the
boar), the water began to run down with roars; and the
Siddhas constantly inhabiting the regions of Jana, were
moved about by the air of his breath. And the ascetics,
placed in the tactual pores of the mighty bore as he rose up
holding the Earth in his abdominal cavity and kept shaking
his Veda-impregnnted person, — experienced the highest
bliss. And yo^h dwelling in the regions of Jana^ Sananda
and others, with delighted hearts, and with heads bent in
humility, hymned the holder of the Earth, remaining moveless,
with his eyes expanded, — saying, — “Victory unto thee, 0
foremost God of gods, — 0 Kc 9 ava,J 0 weilder of the conch,


* Another appellation of Krishna, from the root, hri — to take Of seize.
Hari possibly means he that takes men’s hearts

t i. e. belonging to the Sama Veda, which used to be sung.— T.

X An appellation of Krishna, derived from Ka — Brahma^ and Siv»
md va who goes’— \. e. one that goes before Brahma and Siva, or from K^sa—
hair, and va—mho possesses-^ir -haired , — ^T.


VISHNUPURANAM.


*7


imace, sword and discus j The cause of creation, destruction
and sustentation, save thee, supreme state there is none
whatever. The Vedas are thy feet, and the yupa^* thy larger
tooth, and iJacrifice, thy smaller ; the place of the (sacrificial
fire) is thy mouth, and the fire itself thy tongue; and darva
is thy dowji. 0 Lord, thou art the person presiding over
Sacrifice. 0 mighty soul, day and night are thy eyes ; and
that refuge of all — the state of Brahma, himself — is thy head ;
the entire complement of Suktas^ composeth thy matted
tecBs ; and thy tongue is the sacrificial offerings, 0 god.
0 thou having the (sacrificial) ladle for thy face j 0 thou
who hast the solemn accents of Sama for thy voice, 0 thou
that hast the front-part of the saciificial ground, for thy
body ! 0 thou who hast all the sacrifices for thy joints i
0 god, thou hast for thy ears the morality of the Smritis
as well as the Srutis.X Be thou propitiated ! 0 undeteriorat-
ing one, 0 thou that hast the Universe for thy form, we
know thee as having covered the Earth with thy paces, and
that thou art the cause and stay thereof. Thou art the
foremost Lord of the cosmos. Be thou gracious ! Thou art
the master of the mobile and the immobile. Raised on thy
razor-ends, all this Earth, 0 Lord, seemeth like a lotus-leaf
besmeared with mud on the tusk of an elephant that hath
plunged into a pool of lotuses. 0 thou of unparalleled
power, all the space between heaven and earth hath been
covered with thy body. 0 thou, the universe hath been
enveloped with whose splendour, 0 Lord, prove thou of profit
to the universe. Thou art the sole highest reality, — there
is none other, sovereign of the universe. And this glory in
which the mobile and the immobile are enfolded, — is thine.


* Sacrificial stake,
t Hymns ot the Rig Veda.— T.

t Hindu scriptures arc broadly divided into (i) audition ; and (2)

reminiscence. The former corresponds to ih Christian BfvslaHsn,


l8 VISHNUPURANAM.

0 thou that art knowledge, unspiritual people, through
ignorance, look upon this form of thine displayed in the
world. Foolish persons, regarding this entire universe
impregnated with knowledge, as real, fall into a sea of
delusion. But 0 supreme lord, those that are versed in
knowledge and are of pure spirit, look on this entire
universe as thy form replete with knowledge. 0 Sarva, 0
soul of all ! Be thou gracious | For the good of this world
do thou, 0 thou of immeasurable soul, raise the Earth up.
0 lotus-eyed one, confer on us what is good. Thou, 0
reverend one, art surcharged with the virtue of goodness.
0 Govinda, for the bei’.iftt (of all), 0 lord, raise up this
Earth. 0 lotus-eyed one, confer on us what is good. Mayst
thou incline thy mind to creation fraught with profit to the
universe i We bow unto thee. 0 lotus-eyed one, confer
on us what is good.'^

ParacarA said,— ^‘Thus liymned by the divinities, that
supreme soul, the holder of Earth, at once lifted her up, and
set her on the mighty sea. And, resting on the- sea like a
giant bark, Earth did not sink in consequence of the
flatness of her frame. Then leveling the Earth, the wor-
shipful supreme Lord without beginning, placed mountains
on her in proper order. And by his infallible power,
that one of truthful purposes created on the Earth all the
mountains that had been burnt on the occasion of the burn-
ing of the foregone creation. And then; properly dividing
the land containing seven islands, he, as formerly, created
the four regions, viz,, Bhuva and the rest. And then,
possessed with the principle of passion, the reverend Deity,
Hari, wearing the form of Brahma and assuming four faces,
set about creation, But in the matter of creation, he was
an instrument merely ; as the force resident in the things
created, was the principal Cause. Being ripe for deve-
lopment, (objects at the time of creation) desiderate
nothing more. 0 foremost of those practising austerities,


VISHNUPURANAM.


19


Objects attain their objectivity by virtue of their inherent
force”*


SECTION V.


AITRRYA said : — ” 0 twice-born one, tell thou me trulv
how the Deity created celestials, and saints, and Pitris,t
Detnavas, and men, and beasts, and trees, and those inhabit-
ing land and water and air ; as wel! as concerning (the
respective) qualities and characters and natures (of the
creatures) dwelling in Earth, — which Brahma had created at
the commencement of creation/'

Thereat PaRASARA said -‘‘O Maitreya, listen thou
heedfully 1 I shall tell thee how the f,ord God created all, —
deities and the rest. As he was contemplating creation as
in former Kalpa®, through lack of vigilance was generated
Illusion, formed of F'oulness. — Five are the kinds of Illusion
which spring from this high-soiiled one, vis., fairtas, moha^
mahamoha, tamisra and andhaitimi^ra.\ And as (Brahma)


* This approaches wonderfully the theory of Spont.aneons creation, which is
accepted by the out-and-out apostles of Modern Science — The most uncompro-
misinef advocates of Evolution could not outdo the Hindu sa^e of yore, in
formulating their faith in (to give a Spencerian turn to the expression) the
unknowable force, which, nnintellif^ent itself, brings about this wonderful
system of things instinc/ with infinite wi‘;dom and love I Queer, however,
would the classification read, — Parasara, Darwin, Spencer, Huxley, Heckel,
Tyndall, e^r.— T.
t Ancestral manes.

X Tantas brings about love of one’s own person, etc., moha produces a sense
of authority over offspring, etc. mohamoha generates desire of sensual gratifi-
cation, tamisra causes anger on any impediment coming in the way of enjoy
ment. and through andhatamhra one is led to conserve health and the good


things of life.— T.


20


VISHNUPURANAM,


contemplated, were created five kinds of things, trees,
having no sense, undeveloped internally as well as externally,
and of pent-up selves. As these, trees etc were the first
objects of creation, they are designated the principal creation.
But finding these incapable of answering the end, he thought
of again creating other things. And as he was revolving
creation, sprang up the Tiryyaksrotas.* Those that live in
Tiryyaksrotas. They are beasts, &c, — composed mainly of
foulness, and deviod of liberal curiosity. Leading unrestrain-
ed lives, these, albeit devoid of knowledge, deem themsel\^9
Bs possessing the same. Proud, and considering vastly of
themselves, they are subject to eight and twenty kinds of
ills.t And although developed internally, they cannot
express themselves to eaeh other. And finding even these
as insufficient for his purpose, (Brahma) bethought him of
other ways ; and there came into being the third class of
objects, named UrddhasrotasX io wliom the principle of
goodness predominates. They have great capacity for
pleasure and happiness ; and being developed alike
externally and internally and, in consequence, more fitted
to express themselves on both sides, have been designated
Urddhasrotas. This third creation, that of the deities— is
called Tuihtatman,% And great was the pleasure of BrahmS
on the consummation of this creation. But, deeming these
main creations as not fulfiling his purpose, he revolved within
himself another excellent creation, capable of bringing about
his end. As that one of true resolve was thus meditating, there


* Lit. the stream of beings living aocording to nature,— T.
t Some of these are physical, such as leprosy, deafness, blindness, inertia,
dumbness, smellessness, impotence ; some are mental and moral. U is,
however, difficult for us of these times to see how beasts, &c. are more subject
to these evils than human beings. T/ie author may possibly have a meaning of
nie own, which, in the absence of a Jeqi&te .commentary, we fail to arrive
X The stream of being, tending upwards. — T.

$ Lit. soul-satisfying.— T.


VISHNUPURANAM.


21


came forth from avyakta the arvvydksrotas competent to
accomplish his purpose. And as these eat by swallowing
down, they are called arvvydksrotas. The are bountifully
developed • and, albeit possessing a share of foulness, have
passion in a larger measure. And it is for this that in them
unhappiness preponderates, and that they act continually.'**'
They are developed internally and externally, -^they are
human beings fulfiling the purpose (of the Creator). Thus,
0 foremost of ascetics, have I narrated unto thee the genesis
of tJe six orders of creation. BrahmS first created Mahata^
next he created TanmdtraSy which reckon as the second
class, and are comprehended under the designation of
Bhutasar^a.^ The third creation is Vaikdrikay and is
known as aindriya\ Thus hath been the creation of Buddhi
and the others, which is called Prd,krita.\ And the main
creation counts as the fourth, and includes the immobile
objects. By the name of Tiryyaksrotas is meant, beasts, &c.
And the sixth creation is Urddhasrotasy which is known as
Devasar^a.\ And the .seventh is ArvvdVsrotas which is man
The eighth is the creation of Anu^rahas^ composed of
goodness and passion. Five are the VaiVrita% acts of
creation ; and three are PrdVrUa.-^kwd. they together
constitute PrdVrita and VaiVrita. And the ninth is known
as Kaum&ra. Thus have I described unto thee the nine acts
of creation of the Lord of creatures. The Prdkrita and the
Vai\irita are the radical causes of the world. What wouldst
thou further hear of the Lord of the universe, engaged in
creation ?”

* The first circumstance, remarks the commentator, is owing to the
presence, the next, to that of passion.— -T.
t Lit. the creation of the elements,
t i. e. pertaining to the organ of sense.

i From Prakriii — nature.

H Creation of the gods,
f An order ot deities.

I 1. 1. relating to the excited condition of anything.


TM£ aAMAKWSMflA ii&Qi J

IHkTiTuU ♦F ^U.TWHI 1

lahAay |


VISHNUPURANAM.


2M


MaITREYA said — 0 ascetics, thou hast narrated unto me
In brief the origin of gods 8cc. But, 0 best of > the
foremost ancliorets, I wish to hear this at length.” ParS^ara'
said, — “0 Braliinana, on Brahma being engaged in creation,
from his mind issued the four orders of beings commencing
with celestials and concluding with the immobile, — and
although these are destroyed at the time of universal
dissolution, they are never bereft of the mental tendencies
they acquire in existence, consequent on their acts; or of
the good or bad fortune resulting respectively from their* f!tir
or foul actions.* Then desirous of creating deities, Asuras^
ancestors and men, all going under the name of ambha,
Brahma began to contemplate. And as the lord of beings
concentrated his soul, passion overspread him ; and first
from fortli his hips came out Asuras. And then (Brahmi)
renounced his person surcharged with darkness ; and, 0
Maitreya, on being renounced by him, Foulness was converted
into Night. t And having assumed another body, be (again)
became desirous of creating, and from the face of the pleased
Brahma, came forth, 0 twice-born one, celestials surcharged
with the viitue of goodness. And that I ody also having
been resigned, the qmdiiy of righteousness was turned into
Day. And therefore it is that Asuras are powerful by night
and dieties by day. And he tlien assumed a person, fraught
with goodness ; and, he being honored as a sire, out of him
.sprang the ancestors, And having created the ancestors,
the Lord renounced that form also. And on being renounced,
the same became Twilight, remaining between day and
night. And then he assumed a person filled with the
principle of pa.ssion ; and, 0 foremost of the twice-born ones,
thereat sprang men fierce, with passion entering into their


* This passage is very obscure. It is not clear how acts, whether fair or
foul or indifferent, ;an apply to immobile objects, the very statement of whose
name carries with it a negation of movement. — T.

+ In Sanskrit tamas means darknest, along with the principle of foulneta.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


^3


composition. And the lord of creatures speedily resigned
that form also, — And it became Moonlight, which is termed
prdksandhyd.^ And therefore it is, 0 Maitreya, man and the
PitriSi become powerful in Moonlight and Twilight. Moon-
light, Night, Day, and Twilight, — these four, are the bodies
of BrahmA, endowed with the three principles. And then
he assumed another body filled with the principle of passion,
and thereat sprung Hunger from Brahma, and from Hunger,
wrath* Then the reverend one in the dark created beings
frightful and bearded, and always exercised with hunger. And
(as soon as these) were created, they rushed at the Lord. And
of those that cried, — ‘Ho i don’t do tliis, — save him,’ — are
Rakshas ; fai^d others that said, — ‘We shall eat him up,’— are
Yakshas, from YakshanaX eating. Seeing them mischievous,
the hair of the Deity fell off, — and having fallen off from bis
head, it again rose to his head. And from their movement
{sarpana)y the hair became sarpas ^\ — and from their having
fallen off, they are known as ahis.\[ Then the creator of the
universe, waxing wroth, generated some beings of wrathful
souls. Twenty-hued, they are beings subsisting on flesh.
And then came forth from him Gandliarbas, whose office is
music. 0 regenerate one, as these came into being, drinking
in strains (of music), they are called Gandharbas, All these
beings created the reverend Brahma, directed by inherent
force resident in these (respectively). Then he at his
pleasure created another order of being? — fowls of the air.
And he created sheep from his breast, and goats from his
mouth. And the lord of creatures created kine from his
womb and flanks. And he created from his feet horses,


* Meaning, going before tmligkt.
t From Ra\Lsha — protect,
t From the verb ha leave,
i Serpents,
li Serpents.


24


VISHNUPURANAM.


tiephants, sarabhas^{a) gavayas\h) deer, camels, mules,
Hyankus(c) and other species. And from his down sprang
medicinal herbs furnished with fruits and roots. And, 0

I

twice-born one, at the commencement of the Tretd-Yu^a
and on the eve of the Kalpa, Brahma, having created the
beasts and the drugs, then set them apart respectively for
sacrifice. Fair complexioned males, sheep, horses, mules,
and asses, were called Grdmydid) animals. And know also
those that are wild. (These are) beasts of prey, the cloven-
boofed, elephants, monkeys, and, fifthly, birds, and, sixtWy,
acquatic animals, and, seventhly, reptiles. Then form his first
mouth he generated the 'Gdyatri^{e) the Richas^(f) the
Trivatstoma(g) the Ratkantara^ik) and tlie Agnishtoma{t)
among sacrifices. Then from his southern mouth he created
the YajuSfij) the Trishutva metre^ the fifteenth Sloma„(k)
the Vrihat Sdman^^l) and the UJdha.im) And from his
western mouth, he created the Sdmas and the Fagati metre,
the seventeenth Stoma^ the Vairupa(n) and the AtircUra.fo)
And from his northern mouth he brought forth the twenty-
first Stoma^ the Atharva Veda, the Aptorydma, {p) the

a A fabulous animal, having eight legs, inhabiting the snowy mountainous
fegions.— T.
b Bos Gavus,
c A species of deer.
d i. e. belonging to village.— T.

e The most sacred hymn in all the Vedas, in praise of the Sun, as
^representing the Supreme Sun of the spiritual Universe.J-T.

/ Hymns of the Rig-Veda,
g A kind of sacrifice.
k A division of the Sama Veda, so named.
i A sacrifice.

J A division of the Vedas.
h Song of the Sama Veda.

I A part of the Sama Ved Vrihat means great,
m A metre of the Sama Veda.
n Songs of the Sama Veda.

0 A kind of Spcriflce.
f A kind of Sacrifiee.


ViSHNUPURAKAM,


^5

Anishtubha metre, and the Vairdyya SAma. Thus from his
person came forth noble and ignoble. And having created
gods, AsuraSy Pitrisy and men, that lord of beings, the
great-sire, ‘at the commencement of the Kalpa, created
Yakshas, PigSchas,* Gandharvas, and numbers of Apsaras;
and that jord, the reverend Brahmd, the first Cause, created
Naras.t Kinnaras,t RAkshasas, birds. Leasts, deer, serpents,
and mobile and immobile objects lasting or other-wise. And
in successive creations, verily each creature is born into
tbpsie acts which it used to perform in its former existence. §
Some are cruel and some kind, some mild and some harsh,
some virtuous and some vicious, some truthful and some
false,— in consequence of their inheriting their respective
natures as developed in previous births ; and it is also for
tliis that each affects a particular course of conduct (in
preference to others). || The Diety is the lord of all objects
of enjoyment, of all creatures, and all bodies ; and it is the
Deity who hath personally divided and differentiated them.
And at the beginning from the Vedlc Vocabulary he assigned
names unto creatures, celestials and other, as well as unto
sacrifices; and also fixed forms and shapes thereof. And
from the auditory Veda, he assigned appellations unto the
sages,— and appointed them to their respective functions.
And as the signs of the seasons successively manifest them-
selves, the characteristics, of the Yugas are seen in due order.
And instinct with energy arising from a desire of creation,
He, actuated by the creative impulse, thus again and agaiu
hringeth about creation at the commencement of Kalpas."

* Inferior spectres reveling in the morally foul and the physically filthy. — T.
tHorse-hipped beings.
tHorse*faced beings.

f A profound view, in imaginative vesture, of Heredity. The Author
imparts a comprehensiveness and sublimity to the doctrine which is unsur-
passed — T.

1 ] A little liberty has been indulged in translating this sentence, at the
construction of the original is involved and complicated.^T.

4


SECTION VI.


MaitreyA said, — ^‘Tliou hast called man by the term
Arvvdksrotas. But 0 Br^hmana, tell 'me at length how
Brahmd created him. And tell me also how he created the
orders,— .and, 0 mighty ascetic, of their qualities ; and the
offices assigned to Vipras and the rest.^’

ParS^ara said,— “ 0 foremost of twice-born ones,
Brahmd of true intents was inspired with the desire of
creating the kasmas from his mouth, 0 formost of twice-
born ones, came out creatures surcharged with the principle
of goodness ; and from the breast of Brahmd creatures
surcharged with the principle of passion ; and from his
thighs came out beings surcharged with both goodness
and foulness ; and, 0 best of regenerate ones, from his
feet Brahma created other beings, who were impreg-
nated with the principle of dullness. This is the ■ fore-
fold division into orders. And, 0 excellent Brdhmana,
Brihmanas, Kshatriyas, Vai^yas and Sudras, came from the
feet, the thighs, the chest and the mouth of Bram^. 0
exalted one, BrahinSi brought into being these four orders
capable of satisfactorily performing sariftces, in order to the
successful celebration of them. 0 thou cognisant of righteous-
ness, the cel^*stials, gratified with sacrifices, in turn gratify
creatures, — and tlierefore sacrifices conduce to welfare. It
is men engaged in observing their proper morality, of
pure ways, and good, and walking the path of righteous-
ness, — who perform sacrifices. It is by virtue of hav-
ing been born as human beings that men, 0 ascetic, can
obtain lieaven and emancipation ; and, 0 twice-born one,
that they can go to the wished-for regions. 0 foremost of
ascetics, men (at the beginning) having been divided into
four orders, were reverent and of excellent ways. Then


VISHNUPURANAM.


2 /


Oiey lived wherever they liked, — without any let. And they
were pure in heart, — unpolluted; and cleansed in conse-
quence of their observing all rites. And their minds being
pure and the Pure Hari residing in their heart, they perceived
that state w'hich goeth after the name of Vishnu, and which
is genuine knowledge. Then that portion of Hari which is
fraught with Fatality, spread sin (amongst men), causing
slight pleasure and an overmeasure of woe. 0 Maitreya, this,
composed of anger, &c, springs from the seed of unrighteous-
nfss and begets delusion and covetonsnes, — and stands in the
way of the atttainment (of \.\\q summum honuni). And men
anon could not (any more) completely attain the eight kinds
of success, Rasa, IJllasa, &c. And on sin progressing, and
those becoming exceedingly feeble, creatures became subject
to physical changes {a) and to all the miseries consequent
thereon. Then they constructed forts composed of trees, or
rocks, or water; and artificial forts; and cities; and towns.
And, 0 mighty ascetic, they only made houses in those towns,
for shelter from cold, the sun, and other (physical
discomforts). Having thus provided against cold, etc^ men
then betook themselves to tasks capable of being performed
with the hands, for subsistence. And Vrihi, [b] barley, wheat,
small seeds, sessame,^f'/((7«^«, (c)uddra, kodravay[d)chiniika^{e)
mhhaf^f) mudgaXg) masura,smbi,(k) kulatkthaka,[i) draki,{j)


а, subject to daulity, i e. came uuder the Law of Rela-
tivity, in the sence of Professor Bain. See Senses and Intellect.

б. Rice of vav jus kinds ; of which eight only arc enumerated by the,
authorities.

r. A medicinal plant, and perfume, Panicum Italicum.

d. A species of grain eaten by the lower people Paspalum Kora.

e. A sort of panic, P. miliaceum.

f. A sort of kidney.bean :--phaseolus radiaius.

g. Pkasedlus ntungo.

h. A sort of pulse or lentil— Ilirsutum ; cassia alata.

i. Dalichos bijtorus.

j. CyiiHS cajan.


VISHNUPIPRANAM.


oats, and hemp,— these seventeen kinds, 0 ascetic, were among
the rural plants grown. And fourteen sorts are the plants
intended to be used in sacrifice, divided into grdmya (a)
and dranya[b) Vrihi^ barley, masha^ wheat, small seeds,
prijangu, sessame, kiilaththaka, these eight belong to vil-
lages. And Sydmdka,(c) nirdba,[d) jartilaXd) ^avedhuka^
benuyava, and markataka,(^)---[ihtst), 0 ascetic, (are the
plants growing wild in the woods). These fourteen species
of plants, grdmya and aranya, are intended for the cele-
bration of sacrifices, and they are very useful for that pur-
pose. All these plants together with sacrifices are the
causes of the increase o^ population ^ and it is for this
those versed in the highest significance of things celebrate
sacrifices. By performing sacrifices day after day, one, 0
foremost of ascetics, reapeth great good, and hath one's sins,
committed, shorn of their rancour. 0 mighty-minded one,
it is those only in whose minds the drop of sin attaineth pro-
portions, that set their face against sacrifices. These, repro-
bating the ordinance of the Veda and the divinities presiding
over sacrifices, endeavour to stand in the way of sacrifices.
And wicked wights of evil ways and crooked aims, running
the Vedas down, lay the axe at the root of courses leading
to progress. Having created men, the Lord, on their means
of subsistence according with their respective qualities,
having been settled, placed them duly in consonance with
dignity; and, 0 best of those practising righteousness,
ordained the codes of duty in respect of the orders ; and their
modes of life; and the regions attainable by them; concern-
ing all the castes, observing the rules of their respective
orders. And the sphere assigned to Brdhmanas observing

a. ISrOTCigrdma — village.

b. Prom at any a — wood.

c. Panicum manlaciwn. Also P. coloumn,

d. W%ld sessanum.

i. Coixbarhata.

/. A fruit,


VISHNUPURANAM.


^9


the rules of their order, is that of the Creator himself. And
the sphere assigned to Kshatriyas, not turning away from
fight, is that of Indra. And Vai^yas, following the laws of their
order, attain the regions of Marut.* And those belong-
ing to the Sudra caste that spend their lives in serving
(the other orders), attain the regions of the Gandharbas.
Those practising the Brahmacharyya injunctions attain the
regions of Marut belonging to the eight and eighty thousand
asceljcs that have drawn up their vital fluid. And those
living in the forest reap the place of the seven sages ; house-
holders repair to the regions of the Creator ; and mendicants,
to the sphere named Brahma. The sphere of the yogis is
Amritat — which is the supreme state of Vishnu himself.
Those yogis that contemplate Brahma with a single soul, —
of these is that supreme state which is seen by the celestials.
The sun, the moon, and the other planets, going to this
region again and again, return therefrom again and again, —
but to this day those that contemplate the twelve-lettered
(Mantra),! do not have to return therefrom. Tamisra,
AndhatSmisra, MahSraurava, Raurava, Asipatravan^, Ghora,
and the waveless Kalasutra, — these are appointed the regions
of those that revile the Vedas, — that obstruct sacrifices ; and
that abandon their own religion.”

* i.e. the Wind-god.

t Ambrosia.

$ A formula, embodying the name of Vdsudeva.


SECTION VII.


Parasara said> — “Then came forth unto him the mind-
spurng beings, embodying causes and consequences arising
from his own person. And out of the body of that intelligent
one came out the souls. And thus were generated all those
mobile and immobile objects beginning with the deities alid
concluding with the immovable, — which are established in
the three several spheres, — and of which I have told thee
before. And when these beings of that intelligent one
did not multiply, then he created other mind-begotten sons,
resembling himself, — Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Angiras, Marichi, Daksha, Atri, and the mind-sprung
Vasishtha. The Purana saith that these nine resemble
Brahmil himself. Those who formerly had been created by
Vedas, being bereft of love and hate, ahd possessed of the
highest knowledge, did not take to the world, or produce
offspring. And these being indifferent to the increase of
people, a mighty wrath took possession of BrahmS, capable
of consuming the three worlds. And, 0 anchoret, the entire
triune universe was then illuminated with the flame flowing
from the ire of Brahma. And then from his furrowed
forehead inflamed with wrath sprang Rudra, resembling the
mii-day Sun ; having a body, half-female, — terrific ; and of
a prodigious person. And saying unto him,— Divide thou
thyself.” — BrahmSi then vanished. Thus directed, he divided
himself into a male and a female. And then he divided the male
into one and ten parts ; and the Lord God also divided the
female into Saumya,(^) Asaumya,(f) Santa,(flf) As5nta,(^) Sita(/)
Asita,(^) and many other parts rese mbli^ Then the

faj the upper, middle, and nether regions, ('bj Mildness CO Insolence*

" fdj Meek, ffj Wild,/ White. / Dark.


VIS^INUPURANAM.


31


Lord appointed the Self-create Manu, formerly sprung from
Brahma’s self, and resembling himself, to rule creatures.
And that lord, the divine Self-create Manu, took to wife
the female Skarupa, (i) purged of all sin through asceti-
cism. And to that person Satarupa bore Priyavrata and
Uttanapada ; and two daughters, named Prasuti and Akuti, —
endowed, 0 thou cognisant of righteousness, with the
perfections of beauty, and nobility. And the Lord of
creatures of old conferred Prasuti on Daksha, and Akuti on
Rijpha. And unto this wedded couple were born, 0
exceedingly righteous one, Yajna and Dakshina ; and these
were then united in mairiage. And ten sons were borne to
Yajna(2) by Dakshina. (3) At the time of the Self-create Manu,
these went by the designations of Deva and Yama. And
on Prasuti, Daksha begat four and twenty daughters, — whose
names do thou hear, Sraddha,(4) Lakshmi,(5) Dhriti,(6) Tushti
(7) Pushti,(8) Medha,(9) Kriya(io) Buddhi, (ii) I^jja,(i2) Vapu
(13) Santi, Siddhi,(i4) and Kriti. (15) These thirteen daughters
of Daksha were wedded by the Lord Dharma.(i6) The daughters
remaining after these elder ones, were eleven, furnished with
fair eyes, — Khyati,(i7) Sati, (i8}Sambhuti,(i9) Smriti,(20) Priti
(21) Kshama,(22) Sannati,(23) Anasuya,(24) Urjja,(25) Swaha,
(26) and Swadha. Bhrigu, Bhava, Marichi, Angiras, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, Vasishtha, Vanhi,and the pitris^ espoused
respectively the daughters, Khyati and the rest, 0 foremost of
ascetics. And then SradhS brought forth Kama ; (27) and;
Chal&,(28) Darpa ;(29) and Dhriti, Niyama(3o) as her son ; and


(i) Having an hundred forms. (2) Sacrifice. (3) Gift in sacrifice to
Brahmanas. (4) Veneration (5) The goddes of wealth. (6) Patience. 7
Satisfaction. 8 Nourishment. 9 Intelligence. 10 Act. ii Intellect. 12
Bashfulness. 13 Body. 14 Success. 15 Fame. 16 Righteousness. 17
Renown. 18 Chaste. 19 Birth. 20 Memory. 21 Gratification. 22 Forgive-
ness. 33 Reverence. 24 Good-natured, 25 Energy. 26 This and the bst
are words uttered while one is offering oblations. 27 Sexual desire. 28
Lakshmi. 29 Pride. 30 Restraint.


3 ^


VISMNXTL'RAN'AM.


Tushti,(i) Santosha, ;(2) and Pushti,(3) Lobha.4^ And Medhaf^)
brought forth Srutam ; (6) and Kriya,(7) Dandam,(8) Naya, (g)
and Vinaya ;(io) and Buddhi,(ii)Bodha;(i2) and Lajja,Vinayaj
and Vapu,(i3; Vyavasaya (14) as her son ; and Santi brought
forth KshamS ; and Siddhi, Sukha ; (15) and Kirti, Yagas (16)
These are the offspring of Dharma. Nanda bore unto Kama,
Harshafiy) — grandson unto Dharma. Hinsa(i8) was the wife of
Adharma;,i9) and from her were born Anrita,(2o) and adaughter
— Nikriti.(2i). And from these came forth Bhaya (22) and
Naraka;(23) and two daughters — Maya 24 and Vedana. 25^ And
Maya and Bhaya gave birth to Mrityu 26 — that allayer
of the three kinds of heat, 27 And Vedana bore unto Rauraba,
a son named Duhkha. 28 And from Mrityu sprang Vyadhi 29
Jwara,30 Soka,3i Trishna,32 and Krodha.33 These ultimately
lead to misery ; and all have marks of unrighteousness. They
have no wives, being all of vital fluid drawn up. 34 And, 0 son
of the Prime ascetic, these are the terrific forms of Vishnu ;
and they ever bring on the universal dissolution. And, 0
exalted one, Daksha, Marichi, Bhrigu, and others — lords of
creatures — are always the causes of the creation of the
universe. And the Manus and their sons and kings possessed


I Satisfaction. 2 Contentment. 3 Nourishment. 4 Greed. 5 Intellect.
6 Knowledge 7 Action. 8 Punishment. 9 Justice. 10 Humility. 1 1 In-
tellect. 12 Apprehension. 13 Body. 14 Exertion. 15 Felicity. 16 Fame.
17 Cheerfulness. 18 Malice. 19 Unrighteousness. 20 Falsehood 21
Wickedness. 22 Fear. 23 Hell. 24. Illusion. 2$ Pain. 26 Death. 27
Tapa — Hi. heat — here means the three kinds of pain, — natural, supernatural and
that coming from spirits. The word tapa for pain refers to the physical phc*
nomenon accopanying all pain-- namely, heat in the part affected. And physical
pain in any part of the body is invariably found to be accompanied with heat
at that iocality. — T aS Misery. 29 Disease. 30 Decrepitude. 31 Grief.
33 Thirst. 33 Anger. 34 The reader will readily percieve that ail this is
allegorical, although the allegory is by no means on all fours. The entire
fabric, it may truly be said, of Hinduisim is upreared upon an allegorical
foundation } but the rltegory having been missed, it has degenerated itself into
a syttem of degrading superstition.*-?.


VISHNUPURANAM.


33


of wealth and prowess, and ever abiding by the way of
righteousness,— and heroic,— are the causes of the mainte-
nance of the posmos.”

Maitreya said,— “0 Brahmana, thou hast alluded to cons-
tant creation, constant sustenance and constant dissolution.
Do thou destribe unto me the characteristics of them.”

(Thereat) Parasara said, — “That one of incomprehensible
soul, — the reverend destroyer of Madhu — the Lord assuming
respective shapes, cffecteth the creation, maintenance, and
destruction (of the Universe). The dissolution (of beings) is
of four kinds, vis.^ 0 twice-born one, Naimittika, Prakritika
Atyantika, and Nitya. When, on the expiry of his Day,
Brahma — the lord of the Universe — lieth down, takes- place
the dissolution called Naimittika, When the mundane egg
dissolveth itself away in Primaival Nature, takes place the
Prakrita dissolution. The fusion of the Yo^is into the
iSupreme Soul through knowledge, is the Atyantika dissolu-
tion. And ihe constant dissolution of things taking place
day and night, goeth by the name of Nitya, The creation
which comes of Primaeval matter, is known as Prakriti ; that
which takes place at the end of a minor dissolution, is known
as Datnandini ; and, 0 foremost of anchorets, the constant
diiily creation of beings, is called Nitya by the wise versed
in the import of the Puranas, Thus that origin of all beings,
Vishnu, remaining in the bodies of all things, bringeth about
creation, maintenance and destruction. 0 Maitreya, the
energies of Vishnu relative to creation, sustenance, and
destruction, remaining in the bodies of all beings, are ever
coursing on day and night. 0 Brahmana, he that, compounded
of these mighty powers, overruleth the three principles,
attaineth the Supreme state (of Vishnu), and hath not to come
back to this scene.”


5


SECTION VIII


Parasara said , — ^ 0 mighty ascetic, I have narrated
unto thee the creation of Brahma connected with the princi-
ple of dullness. Now I shall unfold unto thee the creation'
called Rudra. Do thou hearken as 1 proceed ! At the outsk^f
a Kalpa, as the Lord was rapt in thoughts about a son resem-
bling himself, on his ^ap appeared one hued red-blue.
And, 0 best of regenerate persons, crying in sweet tones, he
went about. And as he was crying, Brahma asked him, —
*Why dost thou w'eep?’ And thereon, he said unto the
Lord of creatures, — i.et me have a name.’ And (the Lord
said), — ‘0 divine one, thou art named Rudra.* Do not cry.
Have patience.’ Thus accosted, he again cried for seven
times. And thereat the Lord gave him seven other names ;
and assigned six receipients thereof, as well as the six wives
and sons of the latter. Bhava, Sarva, fsana, Pasupati, Bhima,
Ugra, and Mahadeva, — these seven names were mentioned
by the Great-father, And the holders thereof were respect-
ively the Sun, water, earth, fire, air, ether, the initiated
Brahmana, and Soma. And Suvarchala, Uma, Sukesi, Siva,
Dik, Dikshd, and Rohini, — are, O best of men, the wives of
the Rudras, named the Sun, efc. And L«.aiken (unto me)
reciting the names of their offspring, whose sons and
grandsons have filled the universe. Sanaischara, Suka,
Lohitanga, Manojava, Skanda, Swarga, Santana and Budha,
— these are respectively the sons (of the Eight Forms.) Rudra.
formed thus, took to his wife Sati, And through Daksha^s
ire, Sati renounced her person. And then, 0 best of the
born ones, she became the daughter of Himavat by name Umi
Then the reverend Bhava again marriad Um4, who was his


ViSHNUPURANAM.


35


solely. And Bhrigu’s wife, Khyati, brought forth the gods
— Dhata and Vidhata ; as well as Sri, who is Narayana’s
spouse.”

MaitreVa said ; — We have heard that Sri arose from
the Ocean of milk on the occasion of the churning of the
deep. But why dost thou say that she was begot by Bhrigu
on Khyati ?”

Thereat ParAS/vra said;— “That mother of the Uni-
verse — Vishuu’s energy — is enduring and undeteriorating,
O^fpremost of the twice-born ones^ even as Vishnu is omni-
present, so this one also. Vishnu is the sense and she is the
word; she is morality, Vishnu is justice; Vishnu is percep-
tion, and she the power thereof ; he is merit, and she the act
of piety. — Vishnu is the creator, and she the creation ; Sri is
earth, — and Hari, the supporter thereof. The reverend one
is contentment, and, O Maitreya, Lakshmi is permanent
peace ; Sri is desire, and the worshipful one is Kama ; he
is sacrifice, and she the dahhina ; the goddess is the first
libation, and Janarddana is Purodiisa ;* 0 ascetic, Lakshmi
is patuisdld,^ and Madhusndana is the prdkvansa J (of a
sacrifice); Lakshmi is the chitti\ and Hari is the yupa\\
Lakshmi is sacrificial fuel, and the reverend one is Ku^a ;
The reverend one is Saman, the Lotus-dwelling Sri is
Udgiti;1f Lakshmi is Swaha, that Lord of the Universe, —
VSsudeva — is fire, the worshippful Sauri is Sankara, (the
mistress of) Wealth is, 0 best of the twice-born one,
Gauri. 0 Maitreya, Kesava is the Sun, the Lotus-seated one
is the splendour thereof; Vishnu are the paternal manes,
and the Lotus-throned one is Swadha, ever conferring

* Clarified butter as offered in oblations to fire with cakes of j;round barley
meal that have been well steeped in it.— T.

t The room opposite to that which contains the materials for an oblation
and in which the family and friends of the sacrifice assemble.—

X An ablong with quadrangular sides.

II A sacrificial stake.

If The hymns of the Sama Veda.


3 ^


VISHNUPURANAM.


gratification ; Sri is the city of the celestials, that soul of all
— Vishnu — is the exceedingly spacious sky ; the support of
Sri is the Moon, and Sri is the constant resplendence
thereof ; Lakshmi is Fortitude and Exertion ; Hari is the air-
coursing everywhere. 0 twice-born one, Govinda is the
Ocean ; and, 0 magnanimous Vipra, Sri is the shore thereof.
Lakshmi is like the spouse of Indra, and the Destroyer of
Madhu is the InJra of the immortals ; the holder of the discus
is Yama himself, and the Lotus-presiding one is Dhumorna.*
Sri is Prosperity, that god — the supporter of Sri— is the Lqfd
himself of riches. Lakshmi is , the highly exalted Gauri and
Kesava is Varnna himself. Sri is the celestial host, 0
foremost of Vipras, and Hari is the lord thereof. The
mace-handed one is Avashtambha, and, 0 best of the
regenerate, Lakshmi is Energy. Lakshmi is Kastha.t and he
is Nimesha.J He is muhurta, and she is kala ; Lakshmi is
the light, and flari, or Sarva — lord of all— -is the lamp.
The Mother of the universe is the plant, and Vishnu— the
spouse of Sri— is the tree established. Sri is Night, and that
deity — the holder of the discus and mace — is Day. The
boon-bestowing Vishnu is the bridegroom, and she dwelling
in the lotus-grove is the Bride. The reverend One is like a
male river. Fundarikaksha is the (banner), and the
Lotus-seated Sri is the Ensign. Lakshmi is Thirst, and that
master of the Universe, the Great Narayana, is Desire. And,
0 thou cognisant of righteousness, Lakshmi and Govinda are
respectively Attachment and Love. What is the use of
dilating? I tell thee this in brief,— the Reverend Hari
compriseth gods, men, beasts and other creatures that are
termed male ; and, 0 Maitreya, Lahsmi compriseth all that are
termed female. There exists naught that is beyond these.”


* A division of time. f Wife of Yama.

t Time taken up by the twinkling of an eye.


SECTION IX.


P ARASARA said : — “ 0 Maitreya, listen to what I say
anent thy,, question about Sri, as I had heard from Marichi.
That Emanation of Sankara — Durvasa — was ranging this
Earth. And it came to pass that the sage saw in the hand
of a Vidyadhari a celestial garland, — perfumed by which,
CWBrahmana, that entire forest of Santanakas* had become
surpassingly charming to the rangers of woods. And it came
to pass that on seeing that graceful garland, that mad Vipra
practising the vows, asked for the same of that bride of a
Vidyadhara. And solicited by him, that slender-framed and
large-eyed spouse of a Vidyadhara, saluting him with regard
made it over unto him. And thereat, laying the wreath on
his head, that Vipra wearing the form of a maniac proceeded
to roam about the earth. And then he saw that deity — Sachi’s
lord — sovereign of the three region.s — mounted on the mad
Airavata, — approaching along with the celestials. And the
ascetic, resembling a mad man, taking from his head that
garland, whose odour was maddening six-footed (black-bees),
threw it on the sovereign of the celestials. And thereon
the king of the immortals, taking the wreath, placed it over
the head of Airavata; and thus placed, the same appeared
like the Jahnavi on the peak of Kailasa. And it came to
pass that the elephant with his eyes blinded by the temporal
exudation, — on being sssailed by the odour, smelt the per-
fume with his trunk (raised), — and then cast the same
away to the earth. Then was wroth ihe reverend Durvasa,
best of anchorets ; and, O Maitreya, being enraged, he spoke
unto the sovereign of the celestials, saying, — ‘0 thou in-
toxicated with wealth \ 0 wicked of soul ! 0 Vasava !


* A kind of celestial tree.


38


VISHNUPURANAM.


how art thou puffed up ! But inasmuch as thou dost not
regard this wreath, which is the abode of Auspiciousness, —
and as, bowing down the head, thou hast not, said, — ^Thy
favour! — nor, with thy cheeks beaming with delight, hast
thou placed it on thy head, — as, in (brief), thou dost not pay
high homage to this garland given by me, — 0 fool,, thy celes-
tial prosperity shall depart from thee. Surely, 0 Sakra,
me thou deemest like other twice-born ones ; and therefore,
thou thinking immensely of thyself, hast thus slighted me^
And as thou hast cast away the wreath given by me tO the
earth, therefore thy Triune world shall be reft of Auspicious-
ness. Me whom when vToth the mobile and the immobile
fear,— thou, 0 monarch of the immortals, hast insulted from
thy excess of arrogance.”

Parasara said ; — “ Thereat the great Indra, swiftly alight-
ing from the back of his elephant, propitiated the sinless
Durvasa. And propitiated by him with his head humbled,,
that best of ascetics — Durvasa- — answered the thousand-eyed
(Deity),— saying,— ‘ I am not kind of heart ; nor doth for-
giveness find, a place in me. They, 0 Sakra, are other
ascetics ; but know me as Durvasa. Gautama and others
have for nothing fostered thy pride. But me thou must know
as Durvasa, who is nothing if not unforgiving. And having
heen hymned aloud by Vasistha and others, — overflowing
with clemency, thou hast grown haughty,— and it is for this
reason that thou insultest even me in this way. Who is
there in all these three regions that beholding the frowning
face of mine furnished with flaming matted locks,— can keej^
off fear ; forgive I will not. What then is the use, 0 thoir
of an hundred sacrifices, of thy expending much speech.
Thou again and again puttest thyself to useless trouble in
thus beseeching me.”

Paracara said Having said this, the Vipra went
away. And, 0 Brahmana, the monarch of the immortals also,,
mounting Airavata, went to Amaravati. 0 Maitreya, from


VISHNUPURANAM.


39


that time the three worlds with Sakra became shorn of
Auspiciousness, and the glory thereof faded ; and sacrifices
and medicinal herbs grew feebler. And no sacrifices are
performed, and none practiseth asceticism ; and none taketh
any delight in good works, such as charity. And all men,
void of power, came under the masterdom of the senses ; and
0 prime of the regenerate ones, they could not restrain their
hearts even in things intrinsically small. Where strength is,
there is Prosperity, and strength ever followeth Prosperity.
W4i^re is the strength of the inauspicious ? And without
strength, where are virtues ? And without virtues, persons
cannot have power, affluence, etc. And those divorced by
power and wealth, are; overriden by all. And, when, overruled
a person albeit possessed of l.ime, loseth his sense. On the
three worlds, shorn of Auspiciousness, being bereft of strength
Daityas and Danavas began to u.se force against the
celestials. And the Daityas, shorn of Auspiciousness and
devoid of strength, being overmastered by covetousness,
entered upon hostilities with the celestials, having neither
Auspiciousness nor strength. And the cele.stials, Indra
and the rest, on being vanquished by the Daityas, — ^with
the god of Fire at their head, — sought the protection of
the exceedingly exalted Great-father. And, having been
addressed duly by the deities, Brahma, then spoke unto the
celestials. And Brahma said, — ‘ Do ye seek the protection
of the Supreme of supreme deities, that Lord, the Destroyer
of Asuras, the cause of all, — as well as of creation, protection
and destruction, the Lord of the lord of creatures — Vishnu ;
Infinite ; the unvanquished ; the cause of the unborn
Pradhana and Purusha ripe for creation ; Him that taketh
off the misery of the humble ; even Vishnu. He will provide
for your welfare.’ Having spoken thus unto the assembled
celestials, Brahma — Great father of all — went along with
them to the Northern shore of the Milky Ocean. And re-
pairing thither surrounded by all the celestials, the Great-


40


VISHNUPURANAM.


father, with excellent speech eulogized the prime' of prime
and the master — Hari. And Brahml said, — " We bow unto
thee, who art All and the Lord of all, — who ^art infinite,
unborn and unspent : who art the stay of the worlds, and
the prop of the Earth ; who art unmanifested and without
difference ; Narayana, — who art the subtlest of all subtile
objects : and who art the weightiest of all things weighty on
earth ; He in whom and from whom are all things that have
sprung into existence, commencing with Sat : who surpassest
the Prime person ; and art the Embodiment of the Supreme
Spirit ; who are contemplated in order to emancipation by
Yops desirous of deliverence ; in whom are not Goodness and
the rest, — nor the attributes inhereing in Prakriti. May that
one pure beyond all things pure — that primaeval Male be
propitious (to us)! May that pure Hari, whose power is
not tethered to kala^ kdshthii, nimesha^ etc., prove propitious
(to us) I May He that is styled the Supreme Lord, who is
free from all things,— that Vishnu who is the Soul of
embodied thin-s,— be propitious (to as) i May that Hari, who
is cause as well as effect, who is the cause even of the cause,
— who again is, the effect of the elTect, — prove propitious to
me! We bow down unto Him who is the effect of the elTect
of the effect,*— and who also is Himself the effect of
that effect,t~-and who is the effect of the effect thereof.f
We bow unto thee who art the foremost of the celestials,—
who art the cause of even the cause,— and the cause of the-
cause of that cause, — and the origin of all these causes
combined. We bow down unto that Supreme State which
is the creator as well as the created, — and which is at once
cause and consequence. We bow unto that Prime State of
Vishnu which is pure cognition, which is constant, causeless,
undeteriorating and unspent; and which is the unmanifestQd
and unmodified. We bow down unto that Prime and ever
pure state of Vishnu, which is not gross and yet not subtile ;
which cannot be differentiated. We bow unto that undeteri-


VISHNUPURANAM.


4«

orating one who is the Supreme BrahmS,— and in one ot
whoie Ayuta* of Ayuta portions is this cosmic energy
established. We bow unto that Prime State of Vishnu — that
Supreme D^ity — which is not known either to the deities,
or the ascetics, or me, or Sankara himself. We bow unto
that Suprenje incomprehensible and indestructible State of
Vishnu, which, on the exhaustion of their merits and
demirits, the Yogis^ ever perserving, view, grounded in
the Pranava.t We bow to the Prime State of that God
Viihflu, who is without equal, and whose energy is Brahma,
Vishnu and Siva. 0 Lord of all i 0 soul of all beings j 0
thou that art all i 0 refuge of all i 0 thou that never fallest
offi 0 Vishnu, be thou propitious! Come thou within the
ken of us who are thy devotees Hearing this invoka-
tion of Brahmd, and then the deities, bowing down, said,—
*‘Be propitious ! Come thou within the range of our vision?
0 thou that art in every thing 1 0 thou that never fallest off j
0 support of the Universe! we bow unto that Prime State
which even the reverend Brahma doth not know.^^ When
the deities as well as Brahma had ended thus, the Devarshis,J
headed by Vrihaspaii,§ said,— We bow downlunto him— the
creator of the cosmos devoid of difference— who is primaeval,
who is the Sacrificial Person, who is worthy of being extolled,
and who is prior in birth to everything. 0 Worshipful one t
0 thou that art the Lord of Past and Future ! 0 thou who
hast the Universe for thy form i 0 undeteriorating one f
Be propitious; and manifest thyself unto us who humble
ourselves. This is Brahmcl; and this is Trilochona in|(
Company with the Rudras. And this is the Sun along with
the Adityas and this is the God of Fire with Agni. And

* Ten thousand.

t A designation of Om^ for whfeh see before.

X saints^^n order of saints.

4 The pnceptor of the deities.

8 Lit name of Siva.

If Shuts keeping company with the Sun proper, who presides over them,

6


42


VISHNUPURANAM.


thelse are the two Afwinas and the Vasus ; and these are the
Maruts. And these are the Sidhyas, and these the Vi^was ;
and these the deities,— and this the Lord Indra of the
celestials. 0 Lord, all the hosts of the celesflals, having
been routed by the forces of the Daityas, seek shelter at
thy hands, standing in humble guise."

ParAsARA said : — 0 Maitreya, thus hymned (by the
deities), that reverend one — the holder of the conch and
discus— that Supreme Lord— rendered himself visible unto
them. And seeing then that holder of the conch, discgs,
and mace, that abode of wonderful grace,— a very mass of
energy, — the deities, with the Great-father at their head,
bowing down in humble guise, with their eyes quivering with
agitation, began to hymn Pundarikaksha. And ihe celestials
said, — “ Salutation I Salutation unto thee j 0 thou that art
without difference i Thou art BrahmSi, and thou art the
holder of PinSka.* Thou art Indra, and Agni and Pavana,*
and Varuna, and the Sun, and Yama. And the Vasus, and the
Maruts, and the Sidhyas, and the Vi^wa gods thou. And, 0
god, those deities that have come unto thee are even thyself,
who art the creator of the Universe, — ^since thou art in every-
thing. Thou art sacrifice, and thou VashatkAra, and thou
PrajSpati. And, 0 soul of all, thou art knowable and un-
knowable ; and this entire universe is permeated with thee-.
0 Vishnu, worsted by the Daityas, we seek refuge of thee.
0 Soul of all, be propitious unto us ; and do thou favour us
by vouchsafing us thy energy. So long affliction lasts, so long
the desire of defeating the foe agitates the heart, as long doth
stupor last and so long is misery experienced, — as one doth
not throw one's self on thy protection, 0 thou that destroyesi
all sins. Therefore, 0 thou of complacent soul, ’do thou
extend thy grace unto us. 0 master of all energy, do thou
favour us with thy own po)ver.^^


* 'f he bow, or the Trident of Sivs,
t The Wind-god.


VISHNUPURANAM.


43


PARASARA said 'Thus eulogised by the immortals, that
creator of the cosmos — the worshipful Hari — casting a
complacent glance, spoke (as follows). And the auspicious
reverend One said,— ‘Ye gods, I shall increase your power.
Let the deities do as I say. Bring in company with the
Daityas all the medicinal plants to the shore of the Ocean
of milk, and making MandSra the churning-stick and VSsuki
the cord, let the deities churn (the Ocean) for ambrosia, I
assisting them. And concluding peace w'ith the progeny of
thffDaitya’s, ye should enlist their services in this task; and
tell them, — Ye shall in common wn'tli us reap the fruit of this
undertaking. And on the sea being churned, ye should by
drinking the nectar that will come up, attain access of
strength and be immortal to boot. And, ye gods, I shall so
order that the enemies of the celestials shall not get
ambrosia, — but shall only undergo all the trouble.”

PARASARA said Thus addressed by the god of gods,
all the celestials, concluding peace with the Asuras, set about
churning for ambrosia. And'procuring various medicinal herbs,
the deities, the offspring of the Daityas, and the Danavas,—
throwing the same into the waters of the ocean of milk,
resembling autumnal clouds,— and 0 Maitreya, making
MandRra the churning-stick and Vasuki the twine, — at once
addressed themselves to churning for ambrosia. And
instructed by Krishna, the gods in a body held that (part of
VisukPs body) where the tail was, and the Daityas held by
the fore.part of his body. And, 0 thou of measureless
Splendour, the Asuras, smitten with the fire sprung from the
breath of V&suki's hood, became enfeebled. And clouds
scattered by the breath issuing from VSsuki^s mouth, shower-
ing. down at bis tail, the deities were enlivened. And, 0
mighty ascetic, remaining in the midst of the Milky sea in the
shap^ of ji tprtoise, the revered Hari himself became the
support . of the churning-stick. And the holder of the
discttft and mace, remaining in one form in the midst of the


44


VISHNUPURANAM.


immortals, and in another, in the midst of the Daityaa,— «
began to pull the king of serpents. And, 0 Maitreya, in
another gigantic form, Ke 9 ava pulled the mountain upwards,
— which form was seen neither of the celestials nor the
Asuras. And Hari obliged with energy the king of serpents }
and the Lord invigorated the immortals with another energy.
And on the milky-sea being churned by the celestials and
the Asuras, first came into existence Surabhi, wot shipped of
the celestials, — home of clarified butter. And thereat both
the deities and the DSnavas experienced very great defight,
0 great ascetic j and with their minds attracted, they steadily
gazed at her. And as the Siddhas were questioning within
themselves, — ‘What is this ?’ — out came the exalted VAruni,
with her eyes rolling in consqence of intoxication. And
then perfuming the universe with odur, from forth a whirl-
pool of the Milky-sea arose Parijata — the tree in which the
celestial females delight. And then, 0 Maitreya, from the
Milky-occan arose numbers of ApsarAs, wonderful exceed-
ingly, and furnished with grace and nobility. And then sprang
the Mild-rayed one;* and Mahe^wara appropriated himi
And the serpents appropriated the poison that sprang from
the Milky-sea. And then arose the divine Dhan wan tari;t
clad in white raiment, bearing a Kamandalu X blled with
nectar. And thereat, 0 Maitreya, all the Daityas^ sons and
the DSnavas, along with the ascetics, felt delighted. And
then from the water arose the exalted Sri, endowed with
excellent grace, — seated on a blown lotus, and carrying zhh
a lotus in her hand. And filled with delight, her hymned
the mighty saints with the Srt Sukta ;§ and the Gandharw,
headed by VifwAvasu, began to chaunt before her. And, 0
Brahmana, bevies of Apsarls—Ghritachi and otbers—'began


• Himansu— name of the Moon,
t The Escttlapius of the Hindus.
\ A vessel so named.

( A h mu of the Rig Veda.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


45


to dance, and the rivers —GangS and the rest — came with
water, for bathing her. And an elephant of one of the
cardinal points, taking water out of the golden vessels, bathed
that goddess— the mighty Mistress of all the worlds. And
he Milky-sca, assuming a form, presented her with a wreath
of unfading- lotuses ; and Viswakarma decked her person
with ornaments. And wearing divine garlands and attire,
bathed and adorned with ornament, she in the sight of all
the celestials sought the bosom of Hari, And on b**ing
gaaeti at by the goddess Lakshmi remaining in Hari’s bosom,
the celestials, 0 Maitreya, suddenly attained excess of delight.
And, 0 exceedingly pious one, on being overlooked by
Lakshmi, the Daityas, ever disregarding Vishnu — headed by
Viprachitti— were wrought up with extreme anxiety. And
then, 0 twice-born one, the Daityas, endowed with great
prowess, possessed themselves of the Kamandalu that was in
the hand of Dhanwantari, and which contained the ambrosia.
And then Vishnu, assuming a female form, and thereby
exciting their desire, secured the same, and then the Lord
made it over unto the celestials. And then the immortals, —
Sakra and the rest — quaffed off the ambrosia ; and thereat
the Daityas rushed against them with upraised weapons and
Nistrinsas.* And having drunk ambrosia, the invigorated
gods beat the Daitya-hosts, and these flew in all directions
and entered the nether regions. Then the deities, bowing
down unto the bearer of the conch, discus and mace,, as
formerly, begnn to govern the celestial regions. And then
the glad-rayed Sun began to course in his own path ; and, 0
best of ascetics, the luminaries also gyrated in their own
orbits. And then the reverend Fire, crowned with a fair
splendour, began to burn brightly. And, all creatures felt a
regard for righteousness. And, 0 foremost of anchorets, the
trk^e >lw)rW was furnished with grace ; and that chief of the
celestials — Sakra — s^ain waxed graceful. And Sakra, seated


* A scimitar— a sacrificial knife.


46


vishnupuranam;


on his throne, receiving back the celestial regions, and
established in his celestial sovereignty, began to hymn the
Goddess holding a lotus in her hand. And Indra said,—** I
salute the Lotus-sprung mother of all beings — unto Sri having
lotus-like eyes, and reposing in the bosom of Vishnu. Thou
art Siddhi, and thou art nectar, and thou Swaha and Swadha,
O purifier of the worlds. And thou art twilight and light
and lustre, and affluence, and intelligence, and veneration,
and Saraswati. Thou art the learning of sacrifice ; thou art
the worship of the Universe-form (of the Most High) ; "ttiou
art the Occult Learning, 0 beauteous one; and thou art
the knowledge of Brahma, 0 goddess, — and thou art the
bestower of the fruit of emancipation. And thou art the
Science of Dialectics ; and thou art the Three (Vedas) ; and
thou art the V dr it a ; and thou art the knowledge of chastise-
ment, etc. 0 goddess, this universe is filled with thy gentle
and terrific forms. And, 0 goddess, who, save thee, can
dwell in the person of that god of gods, the bearer of the
mace, who is contemplated by the yogis. 0 goddess, the
triple world, having been renounced by thee, had come to the
verge of destruction ; and, through thee hath it again
recovered its position. And, 0 exalted one, men come by
wives and sons, and houses, and friends, and corn, and
wealth through thy kind look. And, 0 goddess, freedom
from bodily ailments, riches, destruction of foes, and felicity,
are not difficult of attainment for those people that view thy
glances. Thou art the mother of all creatures, as that god
of gods— Hari— is their father. And this universe consisting
of mobile and immobile, was primaevally permeated by thee dm
well as Vishnu. And, 0 thou that purifiest everything, if tiiOtt
forsakest (us), neither our treasures, nor our cattle, no^r ottr
houses, nor our attires, nor our bodies, nor our wives, are
secure unto us. 0 thou that residest in the bosom of that god,
Vishnu, if thou forsakest me, neither sons, nor friends, npr
ornaments are secure unto me, 0 stainless one, he that is


VISHNUPURANAlif.


47


forsaken by thee, is also forsaken by goodness, truth, purity
character, and other virtues. And, those that are glanced at
by thee, — albeit devoid of any good quality, ever attain note,
on account of character and other virtues, as well as lineage,
and wealth. And, 0 goddess, he that is looked at by thee,
is praiseworthy and accomplished and blessed and intelligent
and high-born and heroic and possessed of prowess. And,

0 nurse of the Universe, 0 beloved of Vishnu, all virtues,
character, etc.y are instantly prevented in him from whom
tho»ttirnest away thy countenance. But the tongue even of
the Deity is incapable of celebrating thy perfections. 0
lotus-eyed one, prove auspicious! Me mayest thou never
'renounce.”’

Parasara said,— “ Thus eulogised to the height, the god-
dess Sri resident in all beings spoke unto Satakratu* in the
hearing of all the gods. And Sri said, — “ 0 chief of the
celestials, 0 Hari, pleased am I with thy hymn. Do thou
mention the boon thou desirest. I have come hither to confer
the same on thee.’ Thereat Indra said, — ‘0 goddess, if
thou wouldst confer a boon on me, if I am worthy of one, let
this be the great boon, that this triple world thou wouldst not
forsake. And let this be the second boon that him also thou
woudst not forsake, who, 0 ocean-sprung One, shall propi-
tiate thee with this hymn.’ Thereat Sri said, — ‘ 0 foremost
of the celestials, 0 VAsava, this triple world will I not leave.

1 confer upon thee this boon, being pleased with thy hymn
Rnd prayer. And I shall never be displeased with him
whoever shall chaunt this hymn.’”

Parasara said,—” 0 Maitreya, formerly the great goddess,
Srvbeiog pleased with the hymn and prayer, conferred this
boon on the lord of the celestials. In the days of yore, Sri
was ^begot of Bhrigu on Khyatu And she again came
Out , the Ocean when it was churned by the celestials.

* ptrformdr of an hundred sacrifice!. It is a name of Indra.


48


VISHNUPURANAM.


As the great god JanJrddana,* the lord of the Universe,
goes through incarnations, so does Sri to help Him. When
Hari assumed the form of a dwsrf, she took birth as a lotus,
and when He descended on earth as Parasur&ma, she ap-
peared as the Earth. At time of the incarnation of Rdma, she
became Sit5, and when He was born as Krishna, » she became
Rukshmini. And thus in all the incarnations, she assisted
Vishnu. When he had a celestial shape, she assumed the
shape of a celestial, and when he assumed a human form,
she took a human shape. She changed her body (htanan
or celestial) according as Vishnu did. Sri does not re-
nounce the abode of him for [three generations, who reads
or hears of this story of her birth. 0 sage, never can quarrel-
some Alakshmi^i dwell in that house where this hymn of
Sri is chaunted. 0 BrShmana, I have related unto thee
everything of what thou didst ask me for — how Sri formerly
was born as the daughter of Bhrigu and how she afterwards
came out of the Ocean of milk. This eulogy of Lakshtni,
the source of all wealth, came out of the mouth of the lord of
celestials. Poverty can never infest those persons on earth,
who chaunt this hymn every day.*'


SECTION X,


MAiTREYA'said,—^‘0 great sage, thou hast related unto
me all I had asked thee for. Do thou now give me again aft'
account of the family of Bhrigu from Bhrigu downwards.^'
ParasAra said,— “ Laksmi.was bom of Bhrigu and Kjbyatf
and became the spouse of Vbhnu. And two more sons were


* Another name of Vishnu.
I *#2; * of ill-luck,

’ ^ f 'K


VISIINUPURANAM.


49


born of Bhrigu and Kyati namely Dhati and Bidhita. Two
daughters, by name Ayati and Niyati were born of the high*
souled Meru. And Dhata and Bidhata took them as their
wives. The)^ gave birth to two sons named PrAna and
Mirkandu. Of Mirkandu again was born a son named
Markandeya. And hear then again, a son was born of Prana
by name Veda^ira. Of the other sons of Prana one was
named Kritiman and the other Rajavan. And in this way
did spread the family of the great Bhrigu. Maricha^s spouse
Sat]jl)huti gave birth to a son named Paurnamasam. And
of him were born two sons named Biraja and Sarvaga. And
their sons 1 shall mention, 0 twice-born one, when I shall
relate the lineage at leisure^. And Angira’s wife Smriti gave
birth to four daughters, named Sinibali, Kuhoo, Raka and
Anumati. And by Atri, Anasuya gave birth to three sons
untouched by sin named Soma, Durbasa and the sage
Dattatreyo. And Pulastya’s wife Preeti gave birth to a child
named Dattoli, who in his former birth or in the Sayambhava
Manwantara was known as the sage Agastya. Kshaml, the
wife of the Patriarch Pulaha was the mother of three sons;
Kardama, Avarian and Sahishnu. The wife of Kratu,
Sannati, brought forth the sixty thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy
sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious,
resplendent as the rays of the Sun. Vasishtha had seven
sons by his wife Urjja, Rajas, Gatra, Urdhabhahu, Basana,
Anagha, Sutapas and Sukra, the seven pure sages. The
Agni, named Abhimani, who is the eldest born of Brahm§,
had, by Swahi, three sons of surpassing brilliancy .Pavaka,
Pavamana and Suchi who drinks up water. They had forty-
five sons who (with the son of Brahma, the Agni named
Abhimani and his three descendants) constitute the forty-nine
Fires. I have mentioned the progenitors (Pritras) who were
created by BrahmS. Of those by Agnishwattas and Varhishads
the former being devoid and the latter, possessed of Fires'*^


• According to the commentator this distinction is derived from the


VISHNUPURANAN^.


50

Swadim had two daughters Mena and Baidharini. They wefef
both, 0 twice-born one, acquainted with theological truth
and given up to religious meditation, accomplished in perfect
vyisdom and adorned with all estimble qualities, *Thus I have
narrated the progeny of the daughters of Daksha. He who
hears it with reverencey shall never want offspring.


SECTION XL


P ARASARA said : — I mentioned unto you that the Menu
Swayambhava had two heroic and pious sons Priyavrata and
and Uttanpada. 0 these two, 0 Brahman, Uttanpada, had,
by his favourite wife Suruchi, a son, Uttama, whom he dearly
loved. 0 twice-born one, the king had another queen by
name Suniti, to whom he was less attached. By her he had
another son Dhruva. Beholding his brother Uttama on the
lap of his father as he was seated upon his throne, Dhruva
was desirous of ascending to the same place. But as
Suruchi was present the king could not receive his son,
approaching there delightedly and desiring to be taken on
bis father^s knee. Beholding the child of her sapatni^ thus
anxious to be placed on his father’s lap and her own sou
already seated there Suruchi said, — “ 0 child, why do you
vainly cherish such a presumptuous desire born as thou art
from a different mother and art no son of mine. Thou art
inconsiderate enough to aspire to a station which is fit for
excellent Uttama. It is true thou art the son of the king
but I have not given thee birth. This regal throne, the


Vedas. The first class or Agnishwattas consists of those householders who
when alive, did not offer burnt sacrifices ; the scond of those who presented
oblations with fire. * The other wife of the king.


VISHNUPURANAM.


5 *


seat of the king of kings is suited to my son only ; why
shouldst thou trouble thyself for it. Why dos thou idly
cherish such an ambition as if thou wert my son ? Dost
thou not know that thou art the offspring of Suniti ?
ParSsara said ; — 0 twice-born one, hearing the words of
his step-mjother, and qutting his father, the boy repaired
in a passion to the apartmeut of his own mother. Beholding
him angry and his lips trembling, Suniti took him upon her
lap and said, — '' 0 child, who is the cause of your anger?
Wlip» hath not welcomed thee ? Who doth not know, that
by 'behaving ill towards thee he hath offended thy father?”
Being thus addressed Dhruva repeated to his mother all
that the arrogant Suruchi had said to him in the presence of
the king. Her son having related all these sighing, she
was greatly distressed. And Suniti, rendered poorly, with
her eyes dimmed, sighed and said, — “ Suruchi has rightly
spoken ; thine, child, is as an unfortunate fate : tliose who are
born to fortune are not liable to the insults of their step-
mothers, Yet be not afflicted, my child, for who shall efface
what thou hast formerly done, or shall assign to thee what
thou hast left undone. The regal throne, the umbrella of
royalty, excellent horses and elephants are his whose virtues
have deserved them ; remember this my son and be consoled.
That the king favours Suruchi is the reward of iier merits
in la former birth. The name of wife alone belongs to
such as I, who have not equal merit. Her son is the
progeny of accumulated piety and is born as Ultama and
mine son art thou, 0 Dhruva, of inferior merit. It does not
behove thee, 0 my child, to be sorry on this account ; a
wise man will be satisfied with the degree which appertains
to him. If thou art greatly hurt at the words of Suruchi,
do you try to amass piety which bestows all good. Be
thou good-natured, virtuous-souled, friendly and engaged
in doing good to all living creatures ; for prosperity descends
upon worthy persons as water flows towards low ground,”


52


VISHNUPURANAM.


Dhruva said ; — 0 mother, what tliou hast said to console me
doth not find place in my heart which has been rent asunder
by harsh words. I shall so exert that I may attain to the
most exalted rank adored by the whole world. I am not
born of Suruchi who is the favourite wife of the king. Do thou
behold my prowess, 0 mother, who am born of .and reared
by thee. Let Uttama, my brother, who is not born of thee,
receive the regal throne, conferred on him by my father.

1 do not wish io have that, which is given by others, 0 mother
I shall by my actions acquire such a position which had«ot
been enjoyed even by my father.” Parasara said : — “ Having
addressed his mother thus, Dhruva issued out of his
mother’s dwelling. And quitting the city, he repaired to
a neighbouring thicket. He beheld there seven ascetics,
who had repaired there before, sitting upon the hides of the
black antelope, which they had taken from off their persons,
and spread over the holy ktisa grass. Saluting them
respectfully and bowing unto them humbly the prince said,
“ Do ye kuow me, 0 great ascetics, as the son of Uttanpada,
born of Suniti. Being 'dissatisfied with the world, I have
appeared before you. The Rishis replied : — ” 0 prince, thou
art only a boy and but four or five years of age- There
can be no reason why you should be dissatisfied with life.
You connot be disgusted with anxiety since tby father reigns;
we cannot imagine, 0 boy, that you suffer the pain of
separation tfrom the object of your affections. Nor do we
see any sign of disease on your person. What is the
cause of your dissatisfaction? Tell us if it is known to you.
Parasara said, — Thereupon he repeated unto them what
Suruchi had spoken to him. And having heard that they
said to one another, — “ Oh j How wonderful is the vehemence
of Ksliatryia nature? He is a mere boy and still he
cannot stoop to indignities and he has not been able to
remove from his mind what his step-mother had said, 0 son
of Kshatrya, if it pleases thee, tell us what thou desirest


VISHNUPURANAM.


53


to do through your dissatisfaction with the world. 0 thou
of immeasufable prowess, tell us in what thou wishest
to have our help? Speak freely: for we perceive that
thou desires't to have something from us.” Dhfuva said, —
*^Oye foremost of twice-born ones, I wish not for riches,
neither do, I long for a kingdom. I aspire to a station
which hath never been acquired by any before. 0 excel-
lent sages, tell me how I may effect this and attain to
that station which is the most elevated in this world.”
Maychi said — “ 0 Prince, none can attain to that best of
stations who does not propitiate Govinda. Do thou there-
fore worship the undecaying.” Attri said — “ He with whom
is pleased the first of spirits Janardana, gets at this im-
perishable dignity — I mention unto you the truth.” Angira
said, — ” If thou desirest for an exalted station do thou
worship Govinda in whom immutable and undecaying, all
that is, exists.” Pulastya said, — ^‘Worshipping the divine
Hari, the Supreme Soul, the Supreme Stay and Supreme
Brahma thou mayst attain to eternal liberation, what of
reaching that most exalted station.” Kratu said, — “ nothing
is difficult to attain if Janardana is pleased, who is the soul
of sacrifice in sacrifices and supreme spirit in abstract con-
templation.” Pulaha said,-— Do thou adore, 0 pious boy,
that Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice, and Universe, worship-
ping whom Indra obtained the dignity of a king of the
celestials.” Vasishtha observed : — ” Anything, that a man
desires, may be obtained in this world by adoring Vishnu
what of that exalted position.” Dhruva said : — ” You have
told me, humbly bowing before, what is the deity to be
adored : do ye now inform me of the prayer which is to
be meditated by me to propitiate him. May the great
ascetics, delightedly inform me of the prayer by which I
may propitiate the God,” The Rishis said,-—‘‘0 Prince,
•hear, we shall relate unto thee, how those, who are devoted
.unto Vishnu, shall worship Him. They shall first withdraw


VISHNUPURANAM.


Ihcir minds from all exterior objects and then fix it steadily
on that being in whom the world exists. 0 Prince, hear
from us the prayer that is to be recited by him, who has thus
concentratffd his thoughts on one only object, whose heart is
filled with his spirit, and who has controlled himself. ^ Om,
salutation to Vasudeva, who is manifest as Brahma, Vishnu
and Siva, and whose form is inscrutable. This pray was
offered in olden times by your grandsire, the Manu Swayam*
bhuva, and propitiated by which, Janardana conferred upon
him prosperity, which he desired, unequalled in three wojlds.
Do thou therefore try to propitiate Govinda by reciting this
prayer continually.”


SECTION XII.


P ARASARA said : — ” O Maitreya, hearing these words from
beginning to end, that Piinco, saluting these sages, issued out
of that thicket. x\nd confiding in the accomplishment of his
object, 0 twice-born one, he repaired to the holy place on
the banks of the Yamuna called Madhuvana, or the grove of
Madhu, called after the name of a demon of that name who
resided there and was known thus on the earth. Slaying the
highly powerful son of the Rakshasa, Madhu — Lavana,
Satrughna (the youngest son of Da^aratha,) founded a city at
that spot which was named Mathura. And Dhruva engaged
in performing penance at that holy shrine the purifier of all
sin, where was Mahadeva, the god of Gods meditating upon
Hari. In accordance with instruction given by Marichi and
others, he began ter contemplate, Vishnu the sovereign* of
the gods, seated in himself. 0 twice-born one^ Dhruva-
thus contemplating him, having his mind perfectly with-


ViSHNUPURANAM.


55


drawn from all oilier thoughts, the Great Hari, ever existing
in all creatures and natures, took possession of his heart.
0 Maitreya, Vishnu thus occupying the heart of that one
engaged in* his meditation, the earth, the supporter of
elemental life, could not sustain his height. When he used
to stand uppn his left foot (for praying) one half of the earth
bent beneath him and when he used to stand upon his right
foot the other half of the earth sank down. And when he
used to stand touching the earth with his toes, the whole
earjj^ shook with its mountains and rivers, 0 twic-born one.
The rivers and seas were greatly agitated thereby and even
the celestials called YAmas, being greatly alarmed, in
consultation with Indra began to concert measures for
interrupting the devout exercises of Dhruva. And, 0 great
ascetics, the Kushmandas in company with Indra, assuming,
various shapes actively engaged in obstructing his meditations.
One assuming, by virtue of illusion, the shape of his mother
Suniti, stood before him, with tears in his eyes, and saying
in tender accents— “My son, desist from this penance, that is
destroying thy health. I have after many troubles gained thee
and have formed many hopes in thee. 0 child, it does not be-
hove thee to forsake me, at the words of my rival, helpless,
alone and unprotected Thou art my only refuge. Thou art a
boy of five years old. Such a hard pinance doth not become
thee. Desist therefore from sueh fearful practices which are
not productive of any beneficial result. For thee this is the
time of youthful pastime, then comes the season for study,
then the period of worldly enjoyment and lastly tliat of
austere devotion. 0 my boy, thou art but a child, this is the
season of thy play — why hast thou thcMi engaged in ascetic-
ism to destroy thyself? Thy chief duty consists in thy
devotion to me now. Do thou engage in such works as
become thy age and circumstances. Be not guided by
bewildering error and desist from such unrighteous actions,
ff thou dost not renounce to-day these devout austeries I


56


VISHNUPURANAM.


shall terminate my life before tliee.'^ ParSsara said:— But
Dhruva being wholly intent upon seeing Vishnu did not
behold his mother weeping, with her eyes bleared with tears.
** 0 child I 0 child 1 fly, the hideous RSikshas&s, with up<*
lifted weapons are qoming this side of the forest/^ Saying
this (the illusion) disappeared. Instantly crowded there the
Rakshasas uplifting terrible arms and with countenances
emitting fiery flame. They began to emit hideous cries
before that prince and whirl and toss their threatening
weapons. Hundreds of jackals, from whose mouths gv.shed
out flame, while they expanded them, yelled horrible cries
to appal the boy wholly engrossed by meditation. Those
night-rangers cried out: *‘Kill him, kill him, tear him to
pieces j eat him up, eat him up.” And those goblins having
faces of lions, and camels, and crocodiles, howled about to
strike terror into the heart of the prince. All these (illusions
of) Rakshasas and jackals, their cries and weapons made
no impression upon his senses whose mind was completely
given up to the meditation of Govinda. The son of the lord
of earth, entirely taken up by one idea, beheld continualy.
Vishnu only seated in himself and saw no other objeclt
All these illusions being thus baffled the celestials were
greatly disturbed. Being terrified at this discomfiture and
afflicted by the devout austerities of the boy the celestials
assembled and repaired in a body for help to Hari, who is
the creator of the universe, and without beginning or end.
The celestials said:—“0 lord of the celestials i 0 lord of
the world i 0 great god j 0 supreme spirit j being afflicted
by the devout austerities of Dhruva, we have come to thee
to seek thy refuge. As the moon increases in his orb day
by day, so, 0 lord, (this boy) by his devotion is approaching
incessantly superhuman power. 0 Janardana, we have
been greatly alarmed by the devout austerities of the son of
Uttanpada and have taken thy refuge : do thou desist him
from his devout exercises. We do not know whdse position,


VlSHNOPURANAM.


57


he aspireth to— whether the throne of Sakra, of the sun,
of the lord of wealth or that of Varuna the lord of water.

0 lord, be propitiated with ns, remove this mace of affliction
from our breast and desist the son of Uttanpada from his
devout exercises.** The Great God (Vishnu) replied He
aspireth not to the throne of Indra, nor to the sovereignty of
the solar orb or the deep, nor to the rank of the lord of riches.

1 shall soon confer on him, 0 celestials, what he desireth
to have. Removed of your anxiety do you all proceed *to
your**respeetive quarters— I shall soon desist that boy,
whose mind is wholly engrossed with devout meditation.**

ParASARA * said : — Being thus addressed by Vishnu the
celestials headed by the performer of hundred sacrifices, salut-
ing him, repaired to their respective habitations. And that
Great God, who is all things, being pleased with Dhruva’s
whole-minded devotedness to him, assuming his shape with
four arms, approched him and said, — “May good betide
thee, 0 son of Uttanapada! I am pleased with thy devout
exercises. I have come here to confer boons on thee — do
thou beg one, 0 thou of firm vows. Withdrawing thy mind
from external objects while thou hast dedicated it to me
alone — I am greatly pleased with thee ; do thou therefore beg
of me an excellent boon.*’ ParSsara said—“ Hearing the
words of that great God, the boy opened his eyes and beheld
before him that Hari whom he had seen in his meditation.
And beholding him with the conch, the discus, the mace, the
b^ and the scimitar in hand and crowned with a diadem,
he bowed his head down to the earth. With his hair
standing erect and being greatly stricken with fear, Dhruva
addressed himself for worshipping that great God. Reflect-
ing how he could offer thanks unto him, and what he could
say in his praise, he was greatly perplexed with anxiety and
then at last had recourse to that deity. Dhruva said, — “ 0 great
God if jthou art greatly pleased with my devout exercise, do’
thou confer upon me this boon, that I may praise thee


58


VISHNUPURANAM.


whenever I wish. 0 god, I am a boy, how shall I be abl6 to
sing thy glory, whom even the great sages like Brahm§, con*
versant with Vedas, have not been able to knoy sufficiently.
My heart is filled with devotion to thee, 0 lord, do tjitsu
grant me the understanding of placing my praises thy
feet.” Parasara said, — “0 foremost of twicd-born ones^
the lord of the earth Govinda touched with the tip of his
conch, the son of Uttanapada standing with jollied palms.
And greatly pleased, that prince, bending low his head,
praised that undecaying protector of living beings.” Dftruva
said, — “ I bow unto Him whose forms are earth, water, fire,
air, ether, mind, intellect, the first element, primaeval nature,
and the pure, subtle-all, pervading soul that excels nature.
Salutation unto that Purusha who is devoid of qualities,
pure, subtle, extending all over the earth, and who is separate
from Prakriti ; who is supreme over all elements, all objects
of sense, intellect and who is separate even from Purusha.
I seek refuge unto him, who is one with BrahmS, who is the
soul of the whole universe, pure, and who is the foremost of
all gods. Salutation unto that form of thine, 0 thou the
soul of all things, which is designated as BrahmS by virtue of
his pervading and maintaining the whole Universe, which
is unchangeable and meditated upon by the sages. Thou
art the great god pervading the whole universe with a
thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet and who
passes ten inches beyond its contact* Thou art that
excellent Purusha— whatever has been and whatever is to
be. Thou art the progenitor of Virat, t Swarat, J Samrit $
and Adipurusha. The lower and upper and middle parts of
the earth are not without thee — the whole universe is from
thee— whatever has been and whatever shall be. The whole
universe is thy form and exists in thee. From thee is sacrifice

* Contact with the universe — meaning who is not restricted bjr its
boundaries.

t The material universe. t Brahm4 the creator. 5 Manu.


VISIINUPURANAM,


5 ^

derived, and all oblations and curds and ghee and animals of
either class (domestic or wild). From thee the Rig Veda,
the ShAma Veda, the metres of the Vedas and the Yajur
Veda have sprung. Horses and cows having teeth in one
jaw only have been created by thee and as well as goats,
sheep and ,deer. Brahmanas originated from thy mouth ;
warriors from thy arms ; Vaisyas from thy thighs and Sudras
from thy feet. From thine eyes came the Sun, from thy
mind the moon, from thy central veins the Vital breath,
from«#thy mouth the lire, from thy navel the sky, from thy
head the heavens, from thy ears the regions and from thy feet
the earth. And from thee the whole world was derived. As
the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian fig-tree) exists (before
it grows up into a tree) in a small seed, so at the time of
dissolution, the whole world^exists in thee as its germ. As
the Nyagrodha, originating from its seed, spread gradually
. into a huge tree, so the creation originating from thee
expands itself into the universe. 0 lord, as nothing is
visible of a plantain tree, except its bark and leaves, so
nothing is seen in thee except the whole universe. The
faculties of intellect that are the source of pleasure and pain
exist in thee as one with all existence. But the sources of
pleasure and pain, singly or blended, do not exist in thee
freed as thou art from all qualities. Saluation to thee, who
art the subtile rudiment, who art single when a cause, but
manifold in actions. Salutation to thee, who art the
proximate cause of life and action and identical with the
great elements. Thou art manifest in spiritual knowledge,
thou art the great Purusha, Brahmana, BrahmA and Manu.
Thou art beheld by mental contemplation and imperishable.
Thou abidest in all, art element of all ; thou assumest all
forms ; all elements are from thee and thou art the soul of
all— glory unto thee as thou art the soul of all, lord of all
thingS'*^the origin of all things. What shall I speak unto
thee, as thou knowest every thing, being seated in all hearts ?


6o


VISHNUPURANAM.


0 thou the soul of all thing, the sovereign lord of all
ereations-the source "3 all elements, thou knowest all
creatures and their desires. 0 lord, do thou satisfy my desire.
O lord of earth, my devout exercises have been crowned with
success to-day since I have beheld thee. The Lord said
‘‘Thy devotion hath been crowned with success since thou
hast beheld me, 0 Dhruva. The sight of me, never goes
without any result, 0 prince. Do thou ask of me a boon,
whatever thou wishest for ; whenever 1 appear before men
all their desires are satisfied.” Dhruva said 0 lord.! 0
sovereign of all creatures, thou dost exist in the hearts of all.
How can that be unknown to thee, 0 lord what I am
cherishing in my mind? Yet 0 lord of celestials, I shall
mention unto thee, the object hard to attain, which my
presumptuous mind panteth after. But what can there be
which cannot be got at, if thou art pleased, 0 creator of the
universe ; for it is by thy favour, that Indra enjoyed the
sovereignty of three worlds. ‘‘This regal throne is not
for thee, since thou art not born of me.” These haughty
words my step-mother addressed loudly untome. By thy
favour I beg of thee, 0 lord, an exilted station, which
surpasses all others, which is the support of the universe and
shall last for ever.” The Lord said Forsooth shalt thou
attain to the station thou art soliciting for ; for, 0 boy even
in thy former birth, thou didst satisfy me (with thy austere
devotion). Thou wast, in thy previous existence, a Brahmin,
devoted with all thy heart unto me, ever dutiful to thy
parents and always satisfying thy duties. In course of time,
a prince became thy friend, who in his youth indulged in
all sensual pleasures, who was of a beautiful appearance
and bright form. While in his company and beholding his
riches, hard to acquire, thou didst desire that you might be
born as the son of a king. It is by virtue of that desire,
thou art born as a prince in the mansion of UttSnp&da, 0
Dhruva, which cannot be easily obtained. The birth, in the


VISHNUPURANAM.


6l


race of Swambhuva, is considered by others, as a great boon,
and for this 1 was propitiated by thee, 0 boy ; but now thou
art not valuing it so much. The man, who worships me,
obtains in no time, liberation from life : what is the abode
of celestials to one, whose mind is centered in me, 0 boy !
Thou shalt,.by my favour, O Dhruva, attain to a station
which is above the three worlds and become the stay of stars
and planets : there is not the least doubt about it. I do
confer upon thee, 0 Dhruva, a station, which is above those
of tbe Snn, the Moon, stars. Mercury, Venus, Saturn and
all other constellations ; above the regions of the seven
Rishis and the divinities who traverse the atmosphere.
Some of the celestials live for four ages ; some for the
reign of a Manu ; but thou shalt live the duration of a Kalpa.
Thy mother, Sunoti too, metamorphosed into a clear star,
shall exist by thee in the welkin for the same period. People
singing thy glory, with concentrated minds, morning and
evening, shall attain to an accession of piety.” ParSsara
said ” 0 thou of a great mind, obtaining this boon, from
Janardana, the sovereign of the celestials and the lord of
earth, Dhurva attained to this excellent station. Beholding
the increase of his honor and glory, the preceptor of the
celestials and Asuras, Usanas, repeated these verses. ”Oh
how great is the strength ot his austere devotion, and how
mightly is the success thereof, since the seven Rishis^ are
preceded by him. This too is Dhruva’s mother Suniti, who
is otherwise named Sunrita. Who on this earth, can recount
her glory? Giving birth to Dhruva, she hath got at a
station which is the refuge of the three worlds, and which is
a station eminent above all. He, who shall celebrate the
translation of Dhruva into the abode of the celestials, shall
be released from his sins, and be adored in heaven. He shall
not lose his station, either in this world, or in heaven (after
death) and shall live long, possessed of every blessing.’’


SECTION XIIL


ParASARA said, — '‘By Dhriiva the abode of all blessings,
his spouse Shambhu gave birth to two sons, Shisti and Vabya.
Suchaya, the wife of Sishti gave l)irth to five sons, freed from
sin, by name, Ripu, Ripunjaya, Sipra, Vrikala, and Vrika^gjas
Of these Ripu begat upon Vrihatee, a highly effulgent son
named Chakshusa, who again begot the Manu Chakshusa on
Pushkarini of the race of Varuna, who was the daughter of
the high-souled patriarch Aranya. 0 great sage, the prtriarch
Vairaja had a daughter named Nadbala, on whom Manu begot
ten highly effulgent sons— Uru, Pooru, Satadumnya, Tapa-
sher, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Sudyumnya and
Abhimanyu. Uru begot on his wife Agneyi six highly effuU
gent sons — Anga, Sumanas, Svati, Kratu, Angiras and Siva.
And Anga begot on Suneetha one son named Vena. 0 great
sages, with a view to multiply his progeny, the Rishis rubbed
his right hand. And from his arm sprang a famous king
named Vainya, who was celebrated as Prithu for milking the
earth for the advantage of his subjects. Maitreya said, — “0
foremost of ascetics, do thou tell me why the right hand of
Vena was rubbed by the great Rishis, in consequence of
which the mighty and powerful Prithu was born. Parasara
said, — “Originally a daughter was born of Mritya named
Suneetha. Anga, married her. And she gave birth to Vena.

’ 0 Maitieya, being born from the daughter of Mrityu, he in-
herited the evil propensities of his grand father. When he
was inaugurated by the great Rishis, Vena caused it to be
proclaimed everywhere that he was the lord of the earth. No
one would undertake any sacrifice, offer any oblation or make
any gift. “I am the king the lord of sacrifice, no one is enti*


VISHNLTURANAM.


63


tied to oblations except myself.” Thereupon the Rishis as-
sembled there and worshipping the lord of earth, addressed
him, 0 Maifreya, with sweet words. The Rishis said, — ”0
’king, 0 lord, do thou hear, what we speak unto thee, for then
thy health as well as the interest of thy subjects shall be se-
cure. We purpose to worship, for thy welfare, with protract-
ed rites, Hari, the lord of the celestials and sacrifices. And
thou shalt also be entitled to a share in it. If, 0 king, with
our sacrifices, the lord of sacrifices is propitiated, he shall also
satijjty all thy desires. In whose kingdom, 0 king, Hari, the
lord of sacrifices is worshipped with sacrifices, he confers on
him, the satisfaction of all his desires. Vena said — “Who is
there above me that, I even, shall have to worship him. Who
is that person, who is known as Hari and whom ye do all con-
sider as the lord of sacrifices ? Brahma, Janardana, Sambhu,
Indra, Vayu, Jama, the Sun, Fire, Varuna, Dhata, Pusha, (the
sun) Bhumi (earth) and the lord of earth (the moon) — these
and all others who are capable of imprecating curses and con-
ferring boons (on mankind) do all exist in the person of a king
for the essence of a sovereign is all that is divine. 0 twice
born ones, understanding this full well, do ye all obey my
commands — ^you should not make gifts or offer oblations unto
any one (but me) and should not worship any body else. As
to serve her own husband is the prime duty of a female, so
it is incumbent upon you, 0 twice-born ones, to satisfy my
behests only.” The Rishis said, — “Give us command, 0
great king, to undertake sacrifices, so that piety may not suf-
fer decrease. All this world is but the outcome of oblations,”*
Parasara said,— “Being thus addressed by the great Rishis
and requested by them often and often, Vena did not give
them. Thereupon all the ascetics, being stricken with exces-
sive ire, cried out “kill him !— kill this vicious weight 1 He,


* R«cetAlng oblations Indra pours rains by which harrest grows and upon
which tha world lives.— T.


64


VISHNUPURANAM.


who vilifies our lord the sovereign of sacrifices, without begins
ning or end, is not worthy of the sovereignty of the earth ”
Saying this, the ascetics, slew that king, with the blades of
Kusa grass, consecrated by prayer, who had already been,
destroyed by his impiety towards God. Thereupon those
ascetics beheld dust on all sides and said to the ^people who
w'ere nigh, '’What is this ?'i To which the people replied-—
“The kingdom is without a king and hence the robbers and
thieves have engaged in their dishonest work of encroaching
upon the property of others. And 0 great asceties, thisf^ust
has been raised by those robbers hastening to seize other's
property.” Thereupon consulting with each other those
ascetics, intent upon creating a prince, began to rub the
thigh of that childless monarch. The thigh being thus
rubbed, there arose a being of the conplexion of a charred
stake, with flattened features and of a dwarfish stature. And
he speedly addressed all the ascetics there saying, *What
shall I do ?” Whereto they replied — “Sit down” (Nishada)
and thence his name was Nishada. 0 foremost of ascetics,
from this person, sprang a race callep Nishadas who inhabit
the Vindya mountain and are characterised by the exterior
tokens of depravity. By this means the wickedness of the
king (Vena)was extracted and the Nishadas was thus born
destroying Vena’s son’s. Thereupon those twice-born ones
began to rub the right hand of Vena from which sprang the
highly powerful son of Vena named Pritfiu resplendent in
person and burning like the fire itself. Thereupon from the
welkin fell down the original bow of Hara named Pinaka,
and the celestisl arrow and the celestial armour. Prithu
thus born, all the beings around were greatly delighted.
And at the birth of that pious son. Vena too attained to the
region of celestials and was delivered by that high-soulcd
one from the hell named Pat. Thereupon the seas and
rivers from all sides ceme there with holy water and pearls
and gems of diverse kinds, for his inauguration on the throne;


VISMNUPURANAM.


65


The great parent of all, BrahmS, with the celestials and the
descendants of Angiras (the fires) and with all things, ani-
mate or inai\iraate, came there and performed the ceremony
of consecrating the lord of people— -the son of king of Vena.
And beholding in his right .hand the mark of the discus of
Vishnu and* recognising a portion of that deity in Prithu the
great parent attained to an excess of delight. For all those
who become the sovereign kings of the earth, have always
the mark of the discus of Vishnu in their hands. The highly
po#^rfuI Prithu, the son of Vena, being thus invested with a
mighty dominion, his power was unimpeded even in the region
of the celestials. That highly effulgent one, being installed
according to due rites, by these who were skilled in religious
rites, those subjects even, who were disaffected in his father’s
regeme, became fully attached unto him. And in consequence
of his attachment unto his subjects he was known all over as
**the king.” The waters became solid when he traversed
the deep; the mountains opened him a way and his banners
were unbroken even when he passed through the forests.
(In his time) the earth yeilded crops without cultivation ;
people got their food without any thought— the king gave
milk at any time and honey was stored in every flower. At
the auspecious sacrifice which was performed at the birth of
Prithu and which was headed by the great parent — the


highly intelligent Suta was produced from the juice of the
moon plant. And in that great sacrifice the highly intelligent
Migadha was also born. Thereupon the Rishis accosted
Suta and MSigadha saying “Do you sing the glory of this
powerful king Prithu, the son of Vena. This is your
special function and he is tlie fit object of your praise.
Thereupon both of them, with folded hands, spoke unto
the twice-born ones saying-“This king is born to-day
—his works or merits we are not cognizant of; nor


his lame has spread
base our praise?”
9


abroad— tell us on what subject shall we


66


VISHNUPURANAM.


mentioning the woiks he shall perform, becoming the emperor
efthe earth and the merits he shall be crowned with."
Parlsara said,— “Hearinor these words the king, was highly
gratified and reflected, saying— '‘Person.s (in this world) are
eulogised for their various actions. And surely my virtuous
actions shall be the theme of these bards. And whatever
merits, they will relate in their panegyric, I will acquire
with all my attention. And whatever faults they shall
recommend to be avoided I shall alwavs shun."' The
king resolved thus. Thereupon Suta and MSgadha, ‘^ith
sweet-voiced discourses, sang the future virtues of the
intelligent Prithu, the son of Vena. — “He shall be truthful,
charitable, observer of his promises, the lord of people, wise, '
benevolent, patient, valient and the supresser of the wicked ;
pious, grateful, kind, sweet-spoken; shall always respect the
venerable, perform sacrifices, respect the BrShmins and i
shall be alwavs recognised by the pious. He shall cherish
t-he good and in administering justice shall be indifferent to
friend or foe. He cherished in his mind the virtues thus
celebrated by Suta and MSgadha and practised them in hts
life. Thereupon that king governed the earth and performed
Bnfany sacrifices accompanied with liberal donations. One
day the subjects stricken with hunger approached the king
for. the edible plants had perished during the season of
anarchy. And when asked by him the cause of thus coming
they said — ‘0 foremost of kings, during the period of
anarchy all vegetable products were withheld and^ 0 lord
efimen, many are now perishing for want of food. Thoit
hast been appointed (by the Providence) as our lord and
su«tain«r-— grant us vegetable — ^the support of our Hvea
ttdio* a readying with hunger.” ParSsara said, — “Hearing thiii,
tjfe/king^. inflamed with wrath, took up his bow Pinika and
hisjCQkstial arrows and issued forth to assail the Earth.
An dl the Earth too, assuming the shape of a cow, Instantly
fled awayf. From his fear she traversed the Brahmft, and all


ViSHNUPURANAM.


67


other regions — and wherever she, the supporter of elements,
went, she beheld the son of Vena, with uplifted weapons.
At last trembling with terror, the earth, desirous to escape
his arrows, addressed Prithu, the hero of resistless prowess,
—‘.‘0 lord of men, do thou not know that there is a great sin
hanging upon the destruction of females — why dost thou
then try to slay me ?" Prithu said, — “0 thou the perpetrator
of vicious deeds, when by the destruction of one malignant
being the happiness of many is secured — that destruction
is 0 <fnsidered as an act of virtue/' Tlie Earth said, — “If
dost thou, for the behoof of thy subjects, slay me, who shall
support them, 0 foremost of kings ?” Prithu said, — “0
Earth,, slaying thee with my arrows, who art beyond my
control, I shall support my own men, by virtue of my own
devotion." PaiSsara said, — Tliereupon the eartli, overcome
with fear, trembled and bowing unto him, addressed that
king again, saying, — “All undertakings prove successful
whenever suitable means, to accomplish them are employed.
I shall now suggest thee a means, which, .if pleases thee,
thou mayst accept. 0 lord of men, the edible plants, which
I had devoured before, I may return thee, if thou likest, in
the shape of milk. 0 thou the foremost of the pious, for
the behoof of thy subjects, give me a calf by which I may
be able to secrete milk. 0 hero, make also all pla9es level,
so that I may produce, equally around, milk which is the
source of all vegitation." Parlsara said, — Tiiereupon the
son of Vena with his bow and, uprooted mountains by
hundreds and thousands and thenceforth ail the hills are lying
scattered ail around.* Before this the surface of the earth
was irregular, and there was no boundaries of villages and
cities. There was no cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture,
no high way for mercliants ; all these originated, 0 Maitreya,


* Another text reads Vival^dhita^ meaning.— And they were thenceforth
piled upon one onother.


68


VISHNUPURANAM.


in the reign of the son of Vena. Whatever there was^
level ground, the king made habitations for the subjects.
Before his time, the fruits and roots, which were the staple
food of the subjects, were procured with great difficulty for
all vegitables were destroyed. Thereupon having made,
the Swaymbhuva, Manu, the calf, that lord of men, Prithu,
milked the earth with his own hands. He desiring the
benefit of his subjects, corns and vegitables of all kinds
were produced upon which the people even now and
perpetually subsist. By conferring life on her, Prithu becSShe
the father of the Earth and thence she got the patronymic
Prithivi (the daughter of Prithu). Thereupon the celestials
the ascetics, the demons, the Rakshasas, the mountains, the
Gandharbas, the Uragas, the Yakshas, the Pitris, and the
trees, with their respective vessels, milked the earth, as much
O Manu, as they required. And the milker and the
calf were both peculiar to their own species. The Earth,
the mother, the nurse, the supporter and the nourisher of
all creations was produced from the sole of the foot of
Vishnu. And Prithu, the son of Vena, became so very
powerful, that by virtue of his pleasing the subjects he was
the first man who was styled the lord of the earth. He who
shall relate the story of the birth of the son of Vena shall
never suffer any retribution for his iniquitous deeds. And
he who shall hear of the birth and virtues of Prithu shall be
relieved from the affliction of evil dreams.


SECTION XIV.


F ROM Prithu were born two highly powerful sons
named Antafdhana and Pali. And Antardhana begot on
Shiknandini a son named Habirdhana. And Habirdhina again
begot on Dhishana six sons — named, Prachinberhis, Sukra
Gaya, Krishna, Braja and Ajina. Prachinverhis was a
mi ght/* prince and patriarch by whom mankind was
multiplied after the death of Havirdhana. He was called
FrSichinverhis on account of his placii>g upon the earth (at the
time of his prayer) the sacred grass pointing to the east.
After a protracted devotion that lord of earth married the
daughter of the Ocean named Savarana. And Prachinverhis,
begot on SavarnS, the daughter of the Ocean ten sons, who
were all called Prachetas and were all well-skilled in archery.
They all parctised the same religious austerities and remained
immersed in the bed of the deep for ten thousand years.
Maitreya said, — Do thou, 0 great ascetic, tell me, why
those high-souled Prachetas practised austerities being
immersed in the deep. Para.sara said, — Welcoming the high-
souled Prachinverhis, the Patriarch requc.sted him to multiply
race. And he accordingly addressed his sons, saying, —
‘0 my sons, I have been commanded by Bramha, the god
of gods to multiply mankind. And I too had promised obe-
dience. Do ye therefore, my sons, diligently promote the
increase of mankind. You shall all with reverence obey the
commands of the Patriach. Par3sara said,— Hearing the
'vords of their father those princes said, “So be it’' and
repeatedly addressed him, 0 Muni, saying,— “By what, 0
toer, we shall be able to multiply mankind ? It behoveth
l^ee to mention this unto me.” The father said,— “There is
10 doubt that people shall meet 5with an accomplishment of
dl their desires, if they worship Vishnu, the conferrer of


;70 VISHNUPURANAM.

Iboons. There is no other alternative. What future can I
‘tellyou? If you wish to succeed, do you adore Govinda
who is Hari, the lord of all beings, in order to lying about the
increase of mankind. The excellent Purusha, without
beginning, should be worshipped by him who wishes for
virtue, wealth, enjoyment or liberation. Adore' him, who is
imperishable and propitiating whom the great Patriarch
Brahma succeeded in creating the universe. Parisara said, —
Being thus addressed by their father the ten Prachetas
plunged into the deep and with concentrated minds, elfj^ged
in devotion. 0 foremost of ascetics, with their minds
wholly devoted to NArayana, the refuge of all creatures and
the lord of the universe, and withdrawing their thoughts
from all other exterior objects, they remained (in the state of
<icvotion) for ten thousand years. And remaining there
they worshipped with concentrated minds that great God
Hari, who, when propitiated, confers, on all those who
praise him, whatever they desire. Maitreya said, — “0
foremost of ascetics, the praises addressed to Vishnu, by
those Prachatas, lying plunged in the depths of the ocean
are sacred and it behoveth thee to relate them unto me.
ParAsara said— Do thou hear — (I shall recount) the praises
addressed, of old, to Govinda by the Prachetas as they stood
in the waters of the deep. Prachetas said, — ^‘We bow unto
him who is the eternal theme of all speech, who is the
beginning of the boundless universe and the lord of it ; who
is the primeval light — who has not the like of him ; indivisible
and infinite ; who is the creator of all things, mobile and im-
mobile — salutation unto him, who is one with time, who is
without form — and whose first form is the day and the
second and third form are the evening and night. Salutation
unto him,w'ho is the same with the moon who is the life of
all living beings, and who is the receptacle of ambrosia,
drunk daily by the celestials and progenitors. Salutation
unto him, who;is one with the sun, who with his fierce rays*


VISHNUPURANAM.


7»


dispcHs darkness from the sky and who is the creator of the
seasons— the summer, the winter and the rains. Salutation
unto him, who.is one with the earth — who, being solid, is
supporting the whole universe and is the asylum of smell
and all other objects of sense. We bow, to that form of
Hari, whieh is water, which is the seed of all living beings
and the womb of the world. Salutation unto Vishnu, who
is one with Fire, who is the mouth of the celestials being the
eater of the Havya and who is the mouth of the progenitors
being tlie eater of the Kavya. Salutation unto him who is
at one with the air, which exists as five vital airs in the body
causing constant vital action and is the origin of ether.
Salutation unto him, who is at one with the atmosphere, who
is pure, whose form and end cannot be perceived, who is
shapeless and limitless and who gives sepcrate existence to
all creatures. Salutation unto Krishna, who is the creator, is
perceived in the form of sensible objects and is the direction
of the faculties of sense. We bow unto Hari, who is one with
senses both subtle and substantial, who receives the impres-
sion of the senses, and who is the source of all knowledge.
Salutation unto that universal soul, who as intellect carries the
impressions received by the senses to the soul — Salutation
unto him who is Prakriti— who has created the Universe,
who is maintaining it and in whom it shall perish. We bow
unto that excellent Pursha, who albeit freed from all and
devoid of all qualities, appears, to the creatures labouring
Under mistakes, as enveloved with all qualities. Salutation
untoi that Brahma, who is the ultimate condition of Vishnu,
who is unchangeable, without birth, pure, void of qualitiea
aad free from accidents ; who is neither high nor low
*i«ither massive nor thin, has neither shape, nor colour, nor
shadaw, nor substance nor affection nor body ; who is neither
ethereal nor capable of being touched ; who is neither smell
ta«te ; who has no eyes, cars, or motion or speech, breath
mind ; who is without name, gottst, countenance or lustre ;


72


VISHNUPURANAW.


who is without fear or mistake ; without blame, deseatSe 6f
death ; who is free from passion, without sins, imperdjptible,
inactive, independent of place and time, separated from all in-
vesting properties, but exercising irresistible might, and
who is at one with all beings and dependant upon none.
Salutation to that nature of Vishnu which tOngue cannot
describe nor eye hath seen. Parasara said — Thus glorifying
Vishnu the Prachetas performed austerities for ten thousand
years in the depths of the sea. Thereupon Hari, having
the complexion of the full-blown lotus leaf, being ^ased,
appeared before them even in the midst of waters. And
beholding him mounted on Garuda, the Prachetas bending low
their heads with revermee, saluted him. Thereupon Vishnu
addressed them, saying, — “Do you ask of me a boon. Being
pleased with you I have come here to confer boons on you."
Bowing unto that giver of boons, the Prachetas — asked of
him the multiplication of mankind as ordered by their
parents. And granting them the wishedfor boon Vishnu
disappeared instantly and Prachetas too came out of the sea.


SECTION XIIL


Parasara said, — ^Whenthe Prachetas were thus engaged
in devout exercises the earth was covered with huge trees
and the subjects suffered decease. The welkin being
obstructed with the branches of trees, the wind did not blow
for ten thousand years and the mankind did not labour. And
when the Prachetas came out of the water they were greatly
inflamed with ire beholding the earth, and wind and flatn^
issued out of their mouths. The wind uprooted all the trees
^nd left thej^ sear and dry and the fierce fire consumed and


VISHNUPURANAI^


73


thus the earth was cleared off the forests. Beholding all the
trees thus destroyed and only few left, their king Soma
approached those princes and said, — “Renounce your ire,
0 princes, and hear what I say; I shall bring about peace
between you and the trees. This precious and beautiful
maiden, sprung from the trees, has been nourished by me with
* my rays who am cognizant of futurity. Her name is MarishS
and she has sprung from the trees. That lucky damsel shall
be your wife and the multiplier of the family of Dhruva.
From^ half of your lustre and half of mine, the learned
and the great Patriarch Daksha shall be begotten on her ;
your lustre as well as mine being conjoined in him he shall be
effulgent like fire and multiply the human race. There lived
in the days of yore an ascetic named Kandu — the foremost of
those conversant with the Vedas. He engaged in an austere
devotion on the picturesque bank of the river Gomati.
To obstruct his devotion a highly beautiful hymph named,
Pramlocha was despatched by the king of the celestials.
And being thus engaged, the sweet-smiling nymph diverted
the sage from the practice of his pious austerities. Being
thus diverted he lived with her for a hundred and fifty years
at the valley of the mount Mandira, his mind being wholly
given up to worldly enjoyment. Once on a time the damsel
said to the liigh-souled Rishi, — “ 0 Brahman, I desire to go
to the abode of the celestials — do thou, with a delighted
countenance, grant me the permission.*^ Being thus addressed
by her, the ascetic, solely attached to her, replied, — “0
fair lady, do thou stay a few days more with me.” Being
thus requested by him that damsel of a slender person,
enjoyed earthly pleasures in the company of that high-souled
ascetic, for more than a hundred years. And being again
accosted by her with “ 0 lord ! allow me to return to the
Abode of the celestials” he again requested her to stay a few
more with him. After the expiration of another hundred
years the beautiful damsel, with a smile of love, again said,-—


74


VISHNUPURANAM.


“ 1 shall now go to the abode of the celestials, 0 Brahman/*
Being thus addressed the ascetic, detaining the fair-eyed
damsel, said, — “ Stay a little more, thou shalt depart for a long ,
time”. Afraid of incurring an imprecation the graceful nymph
lived with the ascetic for nearly two hundred years more.
The high-souled sage was repeatedly asked by the nymph to
allow her to repair to the abode of the lord of the celestials
and she was as often desired by him to remain. Afraid of
his curse, excelling in amiable manners and knowing full
well the pain consequent upon the separation from an •object
of love she did not quit the ascetic, who, enjoying in her
company day and night and having his mind possessed by
fupid, became fully attached unto her. Once while he was
speedily issuing out of the cottage the nymph said to him.
“ Where are you going ?” Whereto he replied, “ 0 damsel,
the day is fast approaching its close, I must perform my
evening ablutions or else I shall neglect a duty.” Thereupon
smiling, she, delightedly, said to the sage,' — “ O thou conversant
with all religions, why dost thou talk of to-day approaching
its close ? Is thy day, 0 Brahman, the aggregate of many
hundred years ? Shall it not create astonishment in
.other? Do thou tell me.” The ascetic said, — “0 fair
damsel, you came to the riverside this morning — I saw you
there and brought you to my hermitage. The day has passed
and the evening has well-nigh arrived. Tell me in sooth what
the truth is”. The (nymph) Pramlocha said, — “True it is, 0
Brahman, that I came here at dawn. It is not false — ^but after
that hundreds of years have flown away.” Thereupon, the sage,
stricken with fear, asked that nymph, having expansive eyes,
saying, — “Tell me how many years I have spent in
enjoyment with you.” Pramlocha said,— “ You have spent
nine hundred and seven years six months and three days.”
The ascetic again said, — “ No more of laughter, 0 fair nymph,
tell me the truth : methinks I have spent one day in your
‘COinpany.” To which Pramlocha replied : “ 0 veneiable sage


VISHNUPURANAM.


75


why shall I speak untruth nnto thee since I have been
specially requested by thee to-day to speak the truth.”
Soma said,— ‘*0 Princes, when the sage had heard these
words and thought them to be true he began to reproach him-
self exclaming”, 0 fie, fie upon me ; my penance has been
obstructed — the wealth of those who are congizant of BrahmS,
has been stolen; my judgement has been blinded; by whom
women have been created to beguile mankind ? 0 fie upon

that passion by which my self-control has been stolen where-
by I,**vas about to attain the knowledge of Brahma who is
above the reach of those who are immersed in the six
waves— namely, hunger, thirst, sorrow, stupification, decay
and death. By this evil company, which is the road to hell
all my austerities, leading to the acquisition of the wisdom
of the Vedas, have been obstructed”. Having thus reviled
himself the pious sage spoke to the nymph, who was near
him, saying, — “Go where dost thou wish, 0 vile nymph —
thou hast performed that for which thou hast been enjoyned
by the lord of the celestials— thou hast obstructed my
penances with thy facinations. I do not reduce thee to
ashes with the fierce fire of my rage. Seven paces together
are quite sufficient for the friendship of the pious, and thou and
I have lived together for a pretty long time. Or what for is
thy folly — and why should I be offended with thee — verily
this is an outcome of my own folly since I have not been
able to control my passions. 0 fie on hated thee, the box
of fascinations, who, to win favour with Sakra, has disturbed
my devotion.” Soma siad, — “While the sage spoke thus to
the nymph she perspired and stood trembling. Thereupon,
the foremost of ascetics again said angrily to her, thus
trembling and with drops of perspiration issuing from every
pore— ” Depart ! Depart.” Being thus remonstrated with
by that sage she issued out of the hermitage and began to
wend her way by the welkin, rubbing the perspiration with
the leaves of the trees. She went forth from tree to tree*


76 VISHNUPURANAM.

rubbing her limbs and the perspiration with the durky shoots.
And the child, she had conceived by the sage, came out from
the pores of her skin, in drops of perspiratiop. The trees
received those drops and the wind collected them. I
protected it with my rays till it increased in size gradually.
Because she sprang from the drops on the tops of the trees
that fair damsel was called MSrisha ; the trees will give her
to thee— let your anger be appeased. She is Kandu*s child—
she was sprung from the trees — she is my offspring as well
as that of the wind — and she is also the daughter PralWocha.
And the great sage, Kandu, on the wane of his devotion,
repaired to the region of Vishnu called Purushottama, 0
Maitreya. And there he, 0 princes, devoted himself, with
his whole mind to the adoration of Vishnu and engaged in
the Yoga^ with uplipted hands and uttering the prayers
comprehending the supreme truths of the Vedas.” The
Prachetasas said, — “We wish to hear of the excellent prayers
of the sage, by which Kandu engaged in devotion and in the
adoration of Keshava.” On which Soma repeated them ; —
“Vishnu is beyond the limit of all earthly things, he
is the infinite ; through him we may get at the other end
of the limitless deep — ^the earth : he is above all that is
above; he is the finite truth; he is worthy of being
approached by those who are conversant with the Vedas ;
the limit of elemental being ; above the perception of the
senses and the protectors (the divinities who protect the
creation). He is the cause of cause ; the cause of the cause
in cause ; the cause of finite cause ; and in effects he, both
as every object and agent, preserves the creation. He is
BrahmA the lord ; BrahmA all beings ; BrahmA the creator of
the human race ; the undecaying, imperishable and eternal ;
he is spread all over the earth, unborn, incapable of increase
or diminution. Purushottama, is the eternal, unborn,
immutable BrahmA. May he annihilate the infirmities of
my nature. Repeating those prayers, comprehending the


VisflNUPURAT^lAM.


77


essence of divine truth and propitiating Keshava the ascetic
attained to the final emancipation. I shall now describe to
you what MApsha was in her previous birth — for a recital
of her glorious acts will be of immense benefit to you. 0
princes, she was in her previous birth a queen, and was left
childless at her husband’s death ; and she therefore propitiated
Vishnu with zealous devotion. Thus pleased with her
devotion Vishnu appeared to her in person and said, — “Do
thou beg of me a boon.” Whereto she replied communicat-
ing 4ier desire, — “0 lord of earth — I am a widow from my
childhood — unfortunate as I am, in vain is my birth on this
earth. Do thou so favour me, that I may be blessed with a
good husband in every birth and a son equal to a patriarch
amongst men ; I may be possessed of beauty and wealth and
may be pleasing unto all — that I may be born out of the
ordinary course.” Hrishikesha, the lord of the celestials,
the giver of all boons thus prayed to, raised her from her
prostrate attitude and said, — “In one birth you shall have
ten husbands of great prowess whose fame shall spread far
and wide. And 0 fair damsel, you shall have a great son
gifted with mightv prowess and all the accomplishments that
are to be seen in the great Patriarch. The supremacy of his
family shall be established all over the universe and the three
worlds shall be filled wdth his descendants. And you, by
my favour, shall be of marvellous birth, chaste, endowed with
grace and loveliness and delightful to men.” Having thus
spoken to that fai^ damsel, having spacious eyes, tho Deity
disappeared and the princess, was accordingly born as MSrisha,
who is given to you for a wife. Princes. ParAsara said : —
‘Thereupon renouncing their ire against the trees at the
words of Soma, the Prachetas took MArisha righteously to
wife. And the Ten Prachetas begot on MArisha the eminent
Patriarch, Daksha, who had (in a former birth) been born as
the aon of BrahmA. 0 thou of great mind, for the multiplica-
tion of creation and increase of . his ow n race this eminent


VISHNUPURANAM:


Daksha created progeny. Obeying the mandate of Brahml
for the furtherance of creation he made moveable and
immoveable things, bipeds and quadrupeds. Having created
(that) by his will he created females out of which ten were
conferred on Dharma, thirteen on Kasyapa and twenty-seven
who regulate the course of time on the Moon, And from
them were produced the gods, the demons, the snake-gods,
cows, birds, singers, the spirits of evil and others. Thence-
forth creatures were produced by sexual intercourse. 0
Maitreya — ^before that they were generated, by the by
sight, by touch and by the influence of austerities practised
by the ascetics of accomplished piety.” Maitreya said : — ”0
great ascetic, Daksha, as I am informed, was born from
the right thumb of Brahma : tell how he was born again as
the son of Ten Prachetas. Another great doubt exists in my
mind 0 Brahml that how could he, who was the grandson
of Soma, be also his father-in-law.” Parisara said : — ”0 thou
of great piety, birth and death are constant in all creatures.
Rishis having divine vision do not wonder at it. Daksha
and other eminent ascetics take birth in every age and they
again cease to be : the learned are not perplexed by it. 0
foremost of the twice-born ones, tn the days of yore there
was neither senior nor junior (by age) ; asceticism and
spiritual power were the sole causes of being considered as
senior.’^ Maitreya said : — ”0 BrShman, do thou relate at
length, the origin of the gods, demons, Gandharbas, serpents
and goblins.” ParSsara said : — “Do thou hear, 0 thou of a
high-mind, how commanded by BrahmS, Daksha created
living creatures. At first Daksha created his will-born
progeny— the deities, the Rishis, the Gandharbas, the demons
and the snake-gods. When he found, 0 twice-born one, that
his mind-born progeny did not multiply he began to meditate
upon some other means of increasing the living creatures,
Then desirous of multiplying the race by means of sexnal
intercourse he married the daughter of the Patriarch Veerana


ViSiiNUPyHANAM.


79


by , name Ashikni who was devotee! to austerities and the
eminent supportress of the world. And the energetic Patriarch
ior the multiplication of the progeny begot on Ashikni the
daughter of Veerana, five thousand sons. And beholding them
desirous of multiplying the race, the divine ascetic Narada
approaching,, them addressed them with sweet words —
NSrada said, — “ 0 ye highly powerful Haryaswas, it is evident
that you intend multiplying the progeny — do ye hear this :
you like ignorant people, do know not the middle, the
heighJiand the depth of the world : how would you propagate
progeny then ? Your understanding is not hindered by
interval, height or depth, why do ye not 0 fools, behold the
end of the universe ?” ParSsara said — “ Having heard these
words they repaired to various quarters and have not returned
as yet as the rivers lose themselves in the ocean (and do not
come back).'^

The Haryaswas having gone away the Patriarch Daksha
again begot thousand sons upon the daughter of Beerana.
And, they, who were named Savalaswas, were desirous of
multiplying mankind and they were again addressed by
NSrada, Brahmana, with the words mentioned before. They
said to one another, — *‘What the Muni had said is perfectly
true. We must follow the path wended by our brothers :
there is not the . least doubt about it. And ascertaining the
extent of the universe we will multiply our race. They also
went to various quarters by the path (followed by their
brothers) and have not returned like rivers flowing into the
deep. Thenceforth, 0 twice-born one, a brother searching after
a brother, is generally lost : the wise do not resort to such
actions. Finding that all his sons had disappeared the
eminent Patriarch Daksha was worked with ire and imprecat-
ed Nftrada. We have heard, 0 Maitreya, that thereupon the
learned Pratriarch Daksha, desirous to multiply the race hegot
upon the daughter of Yeerana sixty daughters. Of whom he
gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, twenty-seven to


8o


VlSl)H(J!’URANANi.


soma, four to Arishtanemi, two to Bahuputra, two to Angiras
and two to the learned Krisaswa. Do thou hear their names
from me. Arundnati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhaiyi Marutwati,
Sankalpa, Muhurtta, Sadhya and Viswa were the ten wives
of Dharma. I will mention their offspring. Viswadevas*
were the sons ot Viswa and the Sadhyasf were the sons of
Sadhya. The Maruts or Winds were the offspring of
Marutwati and the Vasus of Vasu. The BbAnus (or suns)
were the sons of Bh5nu and the deities governing the moments
of Muhurtta, Ghosa was born of Lamba and Nftgabithif'^was
born of Yami (night). And all the objects of the world were;
born of Arundhuti and Sankalpa (pious determination) was
the son of Sankalpa. I shall mention at length the particulars
of the eight Vasus who abound in effulgence and night.
They are Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha*
and Prabhasha. The sons of Apa were Vaitandya, Srama
(weariness) Sranta (fatigue) and Dhur, and the son of
Dhruva was the great Kala (Time) the cherisher of the world.
The son of Soma was Varchas (light) by whom was generated
Varchaswi (radiance). And Dhara had, by his wife
Monohora, Dravina, Hutaravyavaha, Sisira, PrSna and
Ramana. Anila’s wife was Siva; and he had by her two
sons— Monojova (swift as thought) and AvijnStagati (un-
knowable motion), The son of Agni — Kumara, was born in
a clump 6f Sara reeds, whose sons were SSkha, VisAkha,
Naigameya and Prishthaja. The son of Kritikas was named
Kartikeya. The son of Pratyushwa was the great ascetic Duvala
who had two intelligent and philosophic sons. The great ascetic
Vrihaspati had a sister who was the foremost of the females,
virtuous and of accomplished asceticism. Without beings
attached to the world she travelled all over the world. She
became the spouse of Pravasha the eighth Vasu. Of her was

* A class of deities to whom daily offerings are to be made.

t Are the personifications of Vedic rites and prayers.

t The milky way.


VlSHNUPURANArM. gt

born the noble Patriarch Viswakarma the author of a thousand
arts^ the architect of the celestials, the inventor of all
ornaments and the foremost of the artists. He constructed
the chariots of all the deities; and by the skill of that high-
gouled one, people obtain subsistence. He had four sons
whose names hear from me. They were Ayaikapad, Ahir-
vradhna, Twashtri and Rudra and they were all wise. And
the self-born son of Twashtri was also the famous Viswarupa.
There are eleven well-known Rudras, lords of the three
worlds— Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, AparajitS, Vrisha! api,
Sambhu, Kaparddi, Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sarava and
KapRli ; but there are a hundred names of the Rudras of
unmitigated prowess*

Kashyapa married the thirteen daughters of Daksha
nam^y Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Surabhi, Vinatl,
TUmri, Krodha, Vasa, Ida, Khasi, Kadru and Muni. 1 will
describe their progeny to you. There were twelve well-
known celestials in a former Manwantara, named Tushitas,
who, on the approach of the present Manwantara and at the
end of the reign of Manu Chakhusha assembled and said to
one another, — “0 deities, let us all speedily enter into the
womb of Aditi that we may be born in the next Manwantara
for we shall thereby be again crowned with blessings.^'
Having said this they at the end of the reign of Manu
Chakshusha were born the sons of Kashyapa, the son of MSrichf
by Aditi the daughter of Daksha. Of them were born first
Vishnu and Sakra and the Aryaman, Dhuti, Twashtri, Pushan,
Vivaswat, SSlvitri, Mitra, Varunl. Ansa and Bliaga. These
who, in the reign of Chakshusha Manu were Tushitas, were
called the twelve Adityas in the Manwantara of Vaivaswata.
The twenty-seven virtuous daughters of the Patriarch who
were married to the Moon were all well-known as the rrytnphs
of the lunar constellations after their names ; they had
children o{ unmitigated effulgence. The wives of Arishtha*
nemi bore sixteen children. The daughters of the learned


11


la


Baliuputra weH the f6ur llglitnihgs. The ^jccellent Par^tfyiUrt-
^itasa Richas were born from the wives of Angiras And the
celestial weapons were the children of the Rislvi Krishaswa.
These deities take their birth once after the expiry 6f A
thousand they are thirty-three in number and thcit

appearance and disappearance is here spoken of*as birth and
death and 0 Maitreya these divinities appear and disappeaf*
age after age as the sun sets and rises again.

It is said that Kashyapa begqt on Diti two sons-^One was
named Hiranyakashipu and the other was named Hirany^sha
and both of them were invincible. She had also a daughtAf
named Sinhika who was married to Biprachitwa. Hiranyaw
kashipu had four highly effulgent sons — named AnuhlSda
Hilda, Prahllda and Sanhlada ; — they were all highly
intelligent, powerful and the multiplier of the Daitya race.
0 noble sage, amongst these, PrahlSda, looking impartially
on all things, devoted his whole faith to Janirdana. 0 t\vice*-
born one, the flames lighted by the king of Daityas did not
consume him in whose heart Vasudeva was present. Tho
whole earth shook, when bound with ropes, he moved in the
midst of the water of the deep. Having his mind entirely
engrossed by Achuta his body Arm as the rock was not
assailed by the diverse weapons hurled on him by the ordet
of the king of Daityas. And the venomous snakes could not
destory him (even). And he remembering the excellent
Purusha and protected by the recollection of Vishnu as his
armour he did not renounce his life albeit overwhelmed with
rocks. The earth received the high-minded (Prahllda) wheti
he was hurled from on high by the king of Daityas residing In
Swerga. The slayer of Madhu being present in hts mind> the
wind sent into his body to witheV him up, was itself destrdyed.
Bhing ordered by the lord of DeityaS the maddened
ele{>hancs of the spheres broke their trunks and bafflhd their
pfide against his fitlh breast. The rites of the priests df

Daitya monarch wete m^iess to bring aboat thh daatlst|^


ViSHlKUPUf^AHitM.


tioti of one who was attached to Govinda, The thousand
illusiiOOS of the illusive Samvara were baffled by the discus of
Krishna. The poison offered by the cooks, at the command
of the king of* Daityas, could not produce any change upon
the intelligent (Prahiada) void of pride, who unhesitatingly
partook that.. He looked impartially upon the world and all
creatures, Was full of kindness and regarded all things equally
and as identical with himself. He was pious and an inexhaus-
tible udne of purity and truth and a model for all pious men.


SECTION XVI.


]M[aitrEYA said — ^'0 great ascetic, you have described to
me tlie human races and the ever-existing Vishnu, the cause
of the world ; but who was this PrahlSda the foremost of the
Daityas of whom v’xi spoke and whom fire could not burn,
and who did not die even when assailed by weapons. And
Prahiada being present in the waters, in bonds, earth trembled,
agitated by his movements. And he did not die before albeit
overwhelmed with rocks. Thou hast related the unlimited
glory of that intelligent Prahiada. 0 muni, I am desirous to
hear an account of the character and unequalled might of that
effulgent worshipper of Vishnu. 0 Muni, Why was he
assailed by the descendants of Diti with weapons ? And why
was he, ever engaged in pious observances, thrown into
water ? For what was he overwhelmed with rocks ? And
winy bitten by venomous snakes ? Why thrown down from
the ^mountainttop ? Why cast into ffre ? And why was he
madie a butt for the tusks of the elephants of spheres ? And
why^waa, wind sent by the mighty Asuras into his body to
wi^ler^Uii up ? Q Muni, Why the spiritual guides of the


VISHNUPURANAM;


«4

Daityas were engaged in ceremonies (or his destruction?
And why did the Daitya Samvara spread thousands of
illusions for his destruction ? Why did the cooks of the
Daitya-chief oifer him poison for his destruction which
was digested by that high-souled sage ? 0 noble Manu— I
wish to hear all this--*an account of the higlusoul^d PrahlAda,
full of mavellous glories. I am not the least surprised for the
Daityas not being able to destroy him: for who can slay him
whose mind is solely devoted to Vishnu? Why did the
Daityas, horn in his race, cherish dreadful malice againatihim
ever engaged in pious observances and in the worship of
Kesava? Relate to me, Why the sons of Dili offer violence
to one so pious,— high-souled and ever devoted to Vishnu
and free from sin ? The great cannot offer violence to a
person gifted with such qualiiies even if he be an enemy ;
bow could his own kin (behave thus towards him)? 0
foremost of the Muni, do thou relate all this — the character of
the sovereign of Daityas. I wish to hear it at length.


SECTION XVII.


P ARASARA said : — ** Maitreya, hear the interesting story
of the wise, high-souled and magnanimous PrahlSda. In the
days of yore the three worlds were brought into subjection
by the valiant son of Dili — Hiranyakasipu, proud of the boon
conferred on him by Brabmi. That Daitya had usurped the
sovereignty of Indra and exercised the functions of the sun
of air, of the lord of waters, of fire and of the moon. He
himself became the lord of riches and Yama ; and that Asura
a})pjropriateii to himself, withoi^t reserve, all that was offered


VISimUPURANAM.


8S


in sacrifice to the celestials. 0 foremost of ascetics, renounc-
ing their own region the celestials, through his fear, wandered
upon the earth, disguised in mortal shapes. Having conquered
the three worlds, he was inflated with the pride of the riches,
and being eulogised by the Gandharbas, enjoyed all wished-
for objects. .Thereupon all the Siddhas, Gandharvas and
Pannagas worshipped the valiant Hiranyakasipu addicted to
drinking. The Siddhas stood delighted before the Daitya chief,
some singing,some playing on musical instruments and others
shouting out cries of victory. When the Asura delightedly
quaffed the inebriating cup in his picturesque crystal palace,
the nymphs danced there gracefully.

His illustrious son, by name PrahlSda, while yet a boy,
residing in the dwelling of his preceptor, read such readings
as are studied in early years. Once on a time the high-
souled (Prahlada) in the company of his preceptor appeared
before his father the Daitya-chief while drinking. The
father Hiranykasipu, raising up his son prostrate at his
feet, spoke to Prahlada of unmitigated prowess, saying,—
Repeat, boy, agreeably, the subatance of what you have read
during the period.*^ Prahlada said , — ** Hear, father I will
repeat the substance of what I have read. Hear attentively
what occupies my thoughts. I bow to that Great Being who
is without begining, middle or end, increase or diminution :
the imperishable lord of the world, the universal cause of
causes.” Parasara said .Hearing those words the lord of
the Daityas, his eyes red with ire and lip swollen with indig.
nation, looked towards the preceptor and said, — “ 0 vile
Brahmana, what is this ? 0 vicious-minded, thou hast, in
disrespect to me, taught my boy the worthless commenda-i
tion of my foe.** The preceptor replied, — ” 0 sovereign of
Daityas, it doth not behove thee to give way to anger ; I have
not taught thy son what he has uttered.** Hiranyakashipu
said,w< Prihlada, ray boy, by whom then you have been thus
fought. ^ Your preceptor says that he has not ^instructed you


thiwi.” Prahlada replied, -7'* Vishnu^ 0 father, i$ the inatruekor
of the whole world aud is present in our minds. Who else,
but that Great Soul can teach us (any thing) ?” Hiranya-
kashipu said, — ‘^0 thou of vile understanding, wlio is this
Vishnu, of whom thou art speaking again and again before
me the valiant lord of the world ?” PrShlada $aid, — “He is
Vishnu, the great God, who is being meditated upon by the
devout, whose glory cannot be described in words, who is
all things and from whom all things proceed.” Hiranyakashipu
said.-^ ‘ 0 fool, myself living, to whom else you give th^ tittle
of supreme lord ? Are you desirous of death that you are
mentioning this again and again ?” Prahlada replied,
father, Vishnu, who is Brahm 5 , is not only the creator,
preserver and supreme lord of me only, but of all creatures
as well as of thyself. Be propitiated ; why art thou angry ?”
Hiranyakashipu said, — “ What evil spirit has entered into the
breast of this silly lad, that, he, like one possessed, gives
expression to such profane words.” Prahlada said, — “That
Vishnu is not only present in my mind, but he pervades the
whole universe; He is omnipresent and commands me, thysplf
and all creatures." Hiranyakashipu said, — “ Away with this
wicked boy 5 take hi«n again to the preceptor’s house and
govern him ; perli.iijs he has been taught by some vicious-
minded (men) to sing the glories of my, foes.” Parasara
said:— “He having said this Prahlada was again con-
ducted to the preceptor’s house by the Daityas, where
always prompt to attend upon the preceptor he received
instructions constantly. After a considerable time that
lord of Asuras sent for Prihlada again and said 0 my'
boy, recite me some poetical composition.” Pr&hlada said»**-
May that Vishnu be propitiated with as, from, whom matter
mi soul originate and all that is mobile and inxmobil^
proceeds and who is the cause of all this creation." Hiranya*
kashipu said,— “ Destroy Ibis vicious-minded boy; thw i*
ije.Aijie of bis life j he is a Iraud to hb own lamily > since


Vl&HNi;i*UltANX«(.


87


hdt fjroVed A tfait^yr to his kin.'' Parasara said— Being thus
ebfftmanded by him, hundreds and thousands of Daityas, with
huge weapon^, addressed themselves for his destruction.
PrShlada said to the Daityas-^** Since Vishnu is present in
youf weapons as Weil as in mind, your weapons shall fail to
hurt me.*' Parasara said— Thereupon hundreds of DaityaS
assailed PrShlada with their weapons but he did not feel the
least pain and his strength was ever renewed. Hiranya-*
kasliipu sAid^*‘ 0 you of vile understanding, refrain front
glorifying my enemy ; I promise you immunity, be not so
toolish." Prihlada replied : No fear can overwhelm me

Jince that immortal remover of all dangers is present in my
mind, the very recollection of whom is enough to remove
all perils consequent upon birrh and human infirmities/'
Hiranyakashipu said — “0 serpents, speedily bring this vicious
lad to destruction with your envenomed fangs." ParSsara
^ftid i-^'Reing thus commanded by him, Kuhaka, Takshaka,
Artdhaka and many other venomous serpents, bit him m
every palrt of liis body. But with his mind solely devoted to
Krishna he remained in that pleasurable recollection ; he
could not feel anything although he was bitten by deadliesl
serpents. The serpents said to the sovereign of th^
Daityas— “Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are
shattered ; our hoods are burning ; Our hearts are trembling;
but the skin of this body is unheart; 0 king of Daityas^
Resort to some other expedient." Hiranyakashipu said — “ 0
Elephants, of the spheres, unite your tusks and slay thii
deserter of his own family and the supporter of our enfoiny :
sometimes our own descendant| bring about our own destruc*
fckm as the ftre consumes the wood from which it proceeds.'*
PitAsara said The boy was then cast down on the earth
btirtg assailed by the tusks of those elephants of the spherei
as hage as lAountain peaks; but he recollecting Govtnds^
of tusks were blunted against his breast : lie then
iQ htS Mtbes : “ The tuekS of the elephants hards «


VISHNUPURANAM,


88


axiamant have been blunted. This is not on account of any
strength of mine but is Consequent upon my calling upon
Janirdana who destroys all dangers and sins the sources of all
these evils.^' Hiranyakashipu said : — “ Away, 0 ye elephants
of tlje spheres. 0 Asiiras, light out fire ; 0 deity of the
winds, blow up the fire, and let this perpetrator of endless
iniquities be destroyed therein.'* ParSsara said Thereupon
commanded by their master the DSnavas piled a hjuge heap
ot wood around the son of the king of Asuras and then put
fire thereto to burn him. Pr&hlada said — “This fire, although
blown up by the wind, doth not burn me : I behold al^
around me the face of the quarters, cool, and the beds of
lotuses." Parasara sa'd : — Thereupon the twice-born ones,
the sons of Bhargava, tlie high-minded priests skilled in
speech and the reciters of Shama Veda, eulogising him, said
to the sovereign of the Daityas, — “ 0 king, subdue thy anger
against this lad, thy own begotten son. Even thy ire against
the celestials bore fruits. 0 king, we shall so bring up this
boy, that he growing humble shall engage in the destruction
of thy enemies. 0 king of daityas, since childishness is the
root of all these evils, it behoveth thee to renounce thy ire
against this boy. If he according to our instructions, does not
abandon the cause of Hari we shall then concert infallible
measures to bring about his destruction." Par&sara said
Thereupon being thus solicited by the priests the king of
DaityAs had his son brought out from the flames by the
Daityas.

Thence-forth residing in the house of the preceptor the
boy PrAhlada, whenever he gpt an opportunity, gave Icssone
himself to the sons of the D&navas. PrShlada 8aid,-^0 «Jon9
of the descendants of Diti, hear from me the supreme ^^ruth>
do not take my instruction otherwise for there is no touch of
covetousness. All creatures are born first, then they attain
to Infancy and youth and then succeed grAduslly the tnevit'
l^e decay; and then they meet with deith> Olsens


ViSllNUPURAKAM.


ftaitya^chiefs. This myself and you all have witnessed. He
who is dead is born again— this cannot be gainsaid; the
sacred texts warrant it. Birth is consequent upon the virtue
and vice of pristine actions. All conditions ffom conception
to fe-birth are tinged with pain. The simpleton, in his
childishness, thinks that the .-alleviation of hunger, thirst cold
and the like is identified with pleasure; but in sooth that is
pain ; for cXefclse gives delight to those whose limbs are
incapable of motion and suffering affords pleasure to those
whose understanding is blinded with delusion. Where is this
vile body which is a compound of phlegm and other humours
and where are its beauty, grace, loveliness and other qualities ?
The foolish wight will take delight even in hell, who is fond
of this body composed of flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine,
membrane, marrow, and bones. The agreeablcncss of fire is
produced by cold ; of water by thirst ; of food by hunger; and
thus all other things are rendered agreeable by their contraries.
0 children of Daityas, he, who will take to a wife will
introduce so much of pain into his bosom. The more a man
will create dear relations, the more deeply Avill be implanted
the thorns of anxiety in his heart. He, who has got large
possessions in his house, is troubled, wherever he goes,
with the anxiety that they may be lost or burnt or stolen.
Then there is a great pain in being born : the dying are
afflicted by the tortures of Death and again by the pain of
passing into the womb. Fancy, there is not the least pleasure
la the embryo state ; you must then admit that the world is
full of miseriesv Verily I speak unto you, that in this ocean
of the world infested with many miseries Vishnu is your only
stay. Do not consider yourselves as mere boys and therefore
igflorant of it for the spirit embodied in your bodies is eternaK
Birth, youth and decay are the properties of the body not of
the soul. I am now a. child — when I shall be young I shall
exert myself for my behoof ; lam yet a youth and when I
shall grow old I shall work for the benefit of my soul. I am


12


90


VISHNUPURANAM.


old now— all my senses have failed me and I cannot eXPft
myself. What shall I do now, vicious-minded as I am ? I did
not do anytldng when I was capable of doing it. 1 bus, men,
although thirsting after knowledge, having tjieir minds
distracted by vain hopes, do not attain to beatitude. The
ignorant, addicted to sport in boyhood, to worldly things in
youth, find, when they become incapable, that old age is come
upon them. Therefore let the soul even in childhood exert
itself for its welfare independent of the conditions of infancy,
youth or age. This is then what I speak unto you. Jf you
think that it is not true, do you, for my satisfaction, think
of Vishnu the liberator from all bondage. What trouble is there
in calling him to mind ? When remembered he bestows pro-
sperity upon people. And if you recollect Him d^«y and night
there will be an end of all sins. Let your mind be fixed on
Him day and night who is present in all beings and you .shall
laugh at every trouble. The whole world is subject to a triple*
affliction. What wise man would cherish hatered against
beings who are all objects of compassion? If others are
crowned with, prosperity and I am incapable of enjoying the
same why should I be malignant against those who are more
prosperous than myself ? I should rather be glad for their
happiness for the suppression of malice is itself a reward.
Even those who cherish malice against foes are considered as
objects of pity by the wise, as being overwhelmed with
delusion. 0 Daityas, admitting the distinction between
myself and all other creatures, I have described to you the
various reasons for repressing hate. Hear briefly the duties
of those who approach tlie Deity. This whole world is the
manifestation of Vishnu who is identified with all beings.
The wise therefore do not regard any difference between

' The three kinds of affliction refered to in the Sankhya Philosophy,
internal, bodily or mental affliction. External, such as injuries received from
mtn or animals. Superhuman— such as miseries inflicted by gods, or through
some supernatural agency.


VlSHNUPURANAWi


9X


themselves and all other creatures. Let us therefore renounce
the angry passions of our race and so exert ourselves that we
may obtain ths^jt perfect beatitude which is beyond the power
of the deities of fire, of the sun, of the moon, of wind, of
Indra, of the regent of the sea, of the Siddhas of the
Rakshasas, of the Daitya-chief, of the serpents, of Kinnaras,
of men, or beasts or human weaknesses and which is uninter-
rupted by various deseases such as fever, eye-desease &c., by
hatred, malice, passion or desire. The beatitude, which can
not b# destroyed by others which is pure and eternal, can be
enjoyed by him, who fixes his mind on Kesava. Verily I
speak unto you, that you shall attain no satisfaction through
various revolutions of this world. 0 Daityas, regard all
creatures with impartiality — this is the adoration of the
undecaying (Vishnu). He being propitiated what cannot be
attained — wealth, pleasure, virtues are things of the little
significance. Do ye resort to the exhaustless tree of true
wisdom and undoubtedly you shall reap precious fruits there-
from.


SECTION XVIIL


ParaSARA said:— Having observed the conduct of
Prahlada, the Danavas, out of fear, reported it to the king.
Hiranyakashipu sent for his cooks and said “0 cooks — my vile
and wicked son is teaching others his impious doctrines. Do ye
slay him without his knowledge by mixing up deadly poison
with all his viands. Do not hesitate to destroy that wretch ”
ParSsara said Thereupon they offered poison to the high-
souled Prahlada as they were commanded by his sire. 0
Maitreya, repeating the name of the imperishable and mixing


92


VISUNUPURAfUM.


that poison with his food he ate it up. PrahlSda did not suffer
ai^ harm either in body or in mind for the very name of the
endless baffled the power of the poison. Beholding that
deadly poison digested by him, they stricken with fear
approached the king of Daityas and said: “0 king of
Daityas, deadliest poison was offered by us but it was digested
with food by thy son Prahlida.” Hiranyakashipu said, —
“Hasten, hasten, 0 ye priests of the Daityas: do ye speedily
perform the rites that will bring about his destruction."
ParHsara said : — Thereupon the priests approaching PrahlSda
and beholding him lowly consoled him and said,— “Thou
hast been born in the family of BrahmS celebrated in the
three worlds and thou art the son of Hiranyakashipu the
king of Daityas. Why dost thou depend upon the gods ?
Thy father is the refuge of all people : — thou dost also
become the same. Do thou renounce eulogising the enemy
of thy family : know that a father is the most venerable of all
preceptors." Prahl^da said — “ O illustrious Brahmins, that
ye have said is true — the family of Marichi is celebrated in the
three worlds — this cannot be gainsaid. My father has
attained to the foremost place in the world by his actions — I
have known this to be true — there is not the least shadow of
untruth. That a father is the most venerable of all preceptors
— I do not find the least mistake in this assertion. Forsooth,
father is a venerable preceptor and is to be respected with all
care. Methinks I have not committed any offence in this
respect. You have said, Why do you seek shelter of the
eternal?" I do not know how far this statement is sound
and reasonable." Having said this Prahlada remained speech-
less for some time to uphold their dignity. And again smiling
he said : “ Why do you seek shelter of the eternal " was it fair
for you to accost me thus ? What need of the eternal ? Most
admirable, most \\ orthy of you, O my preceptors. If it does
not pain you, hear what need there is of the eternal. Virtue,
desire, wealth and emancipation are the fourfold objects


^rtSHNUPURANAM.


93


of men. Is It vain to adore him who is the source of these
four objects ? Why do ye speak in vain ? Marichi and pthcr
ascetics, the P^atriarch Daksha and other eminent men attained
to virtue and others and obtained the enjoyment of their desire?#
Others, through true wisdom and holy contemplation, have
come to know his essence, and being freed from the bondage
of the world have obtained emancipation. The adoration of
Hari, attainable by unity, is the root of all wealth, dignity,
glory, wisdom, progeny, piety and emancipation. 0 twice-
born Ajne, virtue, wealth, desire and final emancipation (all)
proceed from him (and still you say) what need is of the
eternal ? What is the use of speaking more, you are all my
preceptors — speak ye good or evil, limited is my understand-
ing,” The priests said — “0 boy thou wert about to be
consumed by fire, but we saved you thinking that you would
not give vent to such words again. We know how fpolish
you are. If you, at our words, do not remove this hallucination
we shall, O vicious-minded one, perform rites for your
destruction.” Prahlada said — ^*Who slayeth what living
creature — who preserveth what living creature ? Every one is
his own destroyer or preserver accordingly as he follows evil or
good.” ParSsara said : — Being thus addessed, the priests of the
Daitya-chief were excited with rage, and instantly, by virtue
of their magical powers, created a female form enveloped with
fiery flame. That highly dreadful figure, under whose tread
earth trembled, greatly wroth, struck him instantly on his
breast with a dart. That fiery dart reaching speedily the
breast of the boy fell on the ground broken into hundred
pieces. Even a thunder-bolt is shattered against the brea 5 t
of him in whose heart the imperishable Ilari resides — what to,
speak of a dart? The magic, which w^as directed by the
vicious priests against the guileless (PrahlSda), then fell upon
them and slew them all; And beholding them thus consumed
by fire the noble PrahlSda exclaiming, Save, 0 Krishna, O
Eternal” approached them and said— “0 thou, spread all over


VISHNUPURANAM.


the universe, O thou who art manifest in the universe, 0 thou
the creator of the universe, O Janirdana ! do thou save these
Brihmanas from the unbearable flame set up by , their magical
incantations. As the omnipresent Vishnu, the preceptor of
the world, is present in all creatures, let these priests regain
their life. Vishnu being present everywhere, as I did not
consider fire as my enemy let the priests be restored to life.
I regarded with a friendly attitude all those who came to
slay me, those who offered me poison, those who kindled fire,
the elephants of the skies and serpents by whom I was fyitten.
And I never entertained malice against them ; if this be true
let the priests of Asuras be restored to life.” ParSlsara
said : — He having said this they all, touched, rose up unhurt,
and spoke to PrahlSlda who was humble, — ‘‘ 0 boy, 0 foremost
<)f all, be thou crowned with a long life, undaunted strength
and prowess.” 0 great Muni, having said this, the priests
repaired to the king of Daityas and related to him every thing.


SECTION XIX.


P ARASarA said : — ^When Hiranyakashipu had heard that
the magical charms (of the priests) had been baffled he
sent for his son and asked him of the secret of his prowess,—
“ PrahlAda, thou art gifted with extraordinary prowess — is
it the result of your self-exercise or the outcome of magical
powers or thou art, from birth, gifted with it

Being thus interrogated by his father the Asura boy
Prahi&da bowed down to his father's feet and said , — ** This
not the outcome of magical powers, 0 father — nor is it
natural with mc; This is trifling to him in whose mind resides
the undecaying. He who d6cs not cherish malice against'


VISHNUPURANAM.


9f

other^i 0 father, and regards all like hb a\vn self, is not visited
by any affliction inasmuch as the cause does not exist. He
who tortures others in act. thought or speech, sows the seed
of numberless miseries. I wish no evil to any ; neither do nor
speak it ; I always meditate, in me, upon Keshava who* is?
existent in all beings. Why should miseries, physical or
mental, or those inflicted by elements, or the gods, affect
whose soul is purified ? Considering that Hari exists in alf-
beings the learned should assiduously love all creatures.^'’
Paraatra said : — Having heard this the Daitya-king, seated
on the summit of his palace, having his face darkened with
ire, said to his attendants. — “ Throw this vicious-souled one,
from this palace which is hundred yoynnas in height, down
upon the tops of the mountains, so that his body may be
crushed into pieces against the rocks.” Thereupou all these
Daityas and Danavas hurled that boy down : and he fell down
cherishing Hari in his mind. And Earth, the upholder of
the world, anproaching, received him falling w’ho was devoted
to Keshava the protector of the wmrld. Thereupon beholding
him unhurt and having no bone fractured, Hiranyakashipir
said to Samvara the foremost of those conversant with
charms : — ” We have not been able to slay this vicious-minded
lad ; thou art congnisant of various charms: do thou slay him.’^
Samvara said : — ” Instantly shall I slay him, 0 king of
Daityas : do thou behold my powder of illusion which can
invent thousands and myriads of artifice.s.” ParSsara said
Thereupon that silly Asura Samvara, desirous of destroying
the boy, practised his magical charms against PrahlSda, looking
upon all creatures with an impartial eye. With a heart tranquil
and void of malice even against Samvara, 0 Maitreya,
EfahUda engaged in the meditation of the destroyer of Madhur
Thereupon to protect him the excellent and flaming discus
Sudarshana was despatched by the Great God. Thereupon
thousands of Samvara’s illusions were baffled by the quick-
<^oursing discus for the protection of that boy.


VISHNUPURANAM. /


Thereupon the Daitya-king spoke to the withering Wihd
saying,— Do thou, speedily, at my command, bring this
vicious-minded boy to destruction/^ Saying '‘^So be it” the
wind immediately penetrated into his body— cold, cutting and
insufferable, for his destruction. Perceiving that wind had
entered into his body the Daitya boy again meditated, in his
mind, upon the great upholder of the earth. And JanSrdana,
presetit in his mind, wroth, drank up that dreadful wind. And
the wind thus meft with its own destruction. All the magical
diarms being thus baffled, the wind being thus annihiiated,
the high-minded Prahlada again repaired to the abode of his
preceptor. And the preceptor instructed that boy daily in
the science of polity essentially necessary for the administra-
tion of the government and invented by Usanas for the
behoof of kings. When the preceptor found him well-versed
in all political sciences and humble, he then communicated
it to his father, saying,—'' 0 lord of Daityas, thy son Prahlada
hfas become conversant with the principles of government as
laid down by the descendant of Bhrigu.” Thereat Hiranya-
kashipu said to his son, — “Prahlada, how should a king conduct
himself towards friends or foes and what steps he should take
at the three periods {i,e. advance, retrogression and peace) ?
How should he behave towards his ministers, courtiers, the
state and household officers, his emissaries, his subjects, those
of doubtful allegiance and his open enemies ? With whom
should he make alliance ; with whom enter into war; what
sort of fortress he should build ; how forest and mountain
tribes should be brought down to subjection ; how internal
disturbances should be removed : all this and all other things
you have read, do thou relate to me : I wisli to hear thy mind.”

Thereupon bowing to the feet of his father, Prahlada, who
had humility as his ornament, said, with folded palms^ to that
Daitya-king. “ Forsooth I have been instructed in all these
by my preceptor and I have learnt them ; but I do not approve
of all of them. For the subjection of friends and foes four


VISHNUPURANAM.


9 /

expedients have been prescribed by all — namely — conciliation,
gift^ punishment and sowing dissension. But 0 father, be
not angry, I ^know neither friends nor enemies. 0 thou of
mighty arms where there is nothing to be effected what is the
use of resorting to the means for effecting it ? 0 father, it is
useless to talk of friend or foe in Govinda, who is identicaf
with all beings, manifest all over the universe, the lord of it
and the Great Soul. The Great Vishnu exists in thee, in me
as well as in all other creatures ; and then what is the use of
makiri^ such distinction as he is friend and he is foe l it is
useless therefore to cultivate such tedious and unprofitable
sciences which contain but false knowledge. It is but proper,
0 father, to engage in the cultivation of the knowledge of
self. 0 father, the idea that ignorance is knoledge arises
from ignorance only. A boy, O lord of Asuras. regards the
fire-fly as fire. That is (proper) action that liberates us from
the bondage of the world and that is (true) knowledge that
leads us to the path of emancipatroa ; all other actions lead
but to weariness and all other knowledge is turned only into*
cleverness of an artist. Considering all this knowledge as
useless I shall relate to thee respectfully what is really profit*
able ; do thou, 0 great king, hear it. Who does not think
of a kingdom? Who does not desire for riches? But all
these are acquirable by the piety accumulated in a pristine
birth-— so the pious obtain them both. 0 great king, all men-
desire to be great — but this greatness is not acquired by
exertion, it is the destiny that confers it upon men. 0 lord,,
kingdoms are acquired by fate, even by the stupid, the
ignorant, the cowardly and those who are ignorant of the
science of goverment Therefore, he, who longs for greatness,
should try to acquire piety. He, who desires for final beauti-
tude, should try to regard all people with an impartial eye.
^ds, men, animals, ‘birds, reptiles, all are but diverse
(nanifestations of the eternal Vishnu and exist in a separate
state. By him, who knows this, the whole world, moveable
13


VISHNUPURANAM.


and immoveable, is considered as at one with him— all
proceeding alike from Vishnu assuming the universal form.
When a man obtains this knowledge, the undecaying and
eternal Visnnu— the remover of all afflictions, is propitiated
with him.'* Parisara said; — Having heard this and got up
from the excellent seat, in great rage, Hiranyakasjiipu spurned
his son on the breast with his foot. And burning in ire and
wringing his hands as if bent upon destroying the whole
universe, he exclaimed : ^‘Ho Viprachita j Ho RShu j Ho V|lli
binding this boy with serpents, do ye throw him uuto the
deep : delay not or else the Daityas, the Dinavas and ail
other people shall be initated into doctrines of this stupid
and vicious boy. We nave prevented him many a time and
oft and still he persists in chanting the glories of our foe : it is
proper to destroy the wicked boy at once." ParSsara said
Thereupon obeying the mandate of their master the Daityas
speedily bound him with ropes and threw him into the water.
Thereupon with PrahlSda triembled the mighty deep ; and
being agitated throughout, it rose in mighty waves. Beholding
the earth about to be submerged by the great ocean, Hiranya-
kashipn again said to the Daityas,— '‘0 ye descendants of
Dili j Do ye bury this wicked boy in the deep with rocks.
Fire did not burn him ; the weapons did not hurt him ; fhe
serpents could not bite him ; nor the withering blast, poison,
and the magical incantations bring about his destruction. He
baffled the illusions (of Samvara), fell uuhurt from the loftiest
mountains, foiled the elephants of the skies. He is a wicked
boy and his life is a perpetual source of miseries. Let him be
buried down with rocks into the deep. If he remains in that
wise for a thousand years he may lose his life." Thereupon
the Daityas and Dinavas. attacking PrahlAda in the mighty
deep with rocks, covered thousands of yoyams jtberewith.
And lying at the bed of the deep covered with racks, the high-
npnded Prahlada, offered thus; with undisturbed tpind, his
praise to the undccaying,j-'‘Salutation ulUo thee, 0


ViSIINUPURANAM.


PundarikJlsTia, salutation unto thee, O thou excellent Puhuras |
Salutati'n unto thee, 0 thou the soul of all worlds i Saluta-
tion unto thee* 0 thou the wielder of sharp discus ! Salutation
unto the best of BrXhmanas ! to the friend of BrSlhinanas and
of kine \ to Krishna, the benefactor of the world and saluta»
tion to Govihda! Salutation to him, who as BrahmS creates
the universe and who, being existent all over, preserves jt.
Salutation to thee, who dost at the end of Kalpa assume the
from of Rudra, and who art tri-form. Thou art, Achyuta, the
cause *of gods, Yakhas, Asuras, Siddhas, serpents, choristers,
dancers, goblins, demons, men, beasts, birds, insects, reptiles,
plants, and stones, earth, fire wanter, sky, wind, sound, touch,
taste, colour, flavour, mind, intellect, soul, time, and the
properties of nature ; and these are all manifestations of
thine. Thou art knowledge and ignorance, thou art truth and
untruth ; thou art poison and nectar ; thou art the performance
and continuance of acts and thou art the actions laid down
in the Vedas. Thou art theenjoyer of the fruits of all actions
and the means for effecting them. Thou, Vishnu, who art
all, art the fruit of all acts of piety. Thou art in me, in others
and spread all over the vast universe. Thy universal
manifestation ifidicates might and goodness. 0 lord. The
ascetics me litate upon thee, the priests offer sacrifice to thee.
Thou, identical with progenitors and celestials, redcivCSt
burnt-offerings and oblations. The universe is a huge
manifestation of thine ; the world is lesser than that, 0 lord ;
and lesser than that are all the subtile elements and elemen-


tary being and thy subtlest form is the subtile principle within
them that is called soul. Thou hast in thee a supreme soul,
better than this soul and beyond the perception of all subtile
elements and which cannot be conceived. Glory he fo that
Purusottam form of thine. And salutation be to that imperish-
eble foVm' of thirte, 0 lord of gods, which is the sOul of all


creatures, another manife.station of thy might and %vhic*h is the
of all qualities. I bow unto that s^ reme goddess

' ■ ' .'"’Cx


VISHNUPURANAM,*


TOO

who is beyond the perception of senses, the description of the
tongue and mind and who is to be distinguished only by
the wisdom of the truly wise. Salutation unto the Great God
V4sudeva, who is not separate from any thing and at the
same time separate from all. Salutation again and again to
that Great Spirit who has neither name nor form and whose
existence can only be perceived. Salutation unto that Great
Spirit, whose incarnate forms on earth the deities adore, being
unable to behold his true form. Salutation unto that Great
God Vishnu, the witness of all, who being present in all nsinds,
beholds the good and evil of all. Salutation unto that
Vishnu, from whom this world is not distinct. May He, who
is the object of the world’s meditation, its beginning, and who
is undecaying, be propitiated with me. May that Hari have
compassion upon me, who is the stay of all, in whom the
universe is wapred and woven and who is imperishable and
undecaying. Salutation again and again unto Vishnu, in
whom all things exist, from whom all things proceed and
who is the supporter of all. Sulutation to him who also am
I, and who is everywhere and through whom all things are
Irom me. I am all things and all things are from me who am
eternal. I am undecaying eternal, the asylum of tlie supreme
spirit* Brahm& is my appellation that is at the begining and
end ofall things/’


SECTION xr


P ARASARA said : ''0 twice-born { Thus meditating upon

Vishnu as identical with himself he attained to that uni(icatioii»
winch is desired by all and regarded him as the und^yiRg
divinity* He forgot bis individuality and ms not


VISIINUPURANAM.


IQI


of anything. And he thought that he himself was the endless,
undecaying supreme soul. And on account of this efficient
notion of identity, the undecaying Vishnu, whose essence is
wisdom, appeared in his mind which was wholly purified from
sin. When the Asura PrahlSda had become identified with
Vishnu by virtue of contemplation all the bonds were at once
. severed, as soon as he shook. The mighty deep rose up in
waves and the monsters therein were terrified. And the
earth trembled with all her mountains and forests. And
throwing aside the pile of rocks that were placed by the
Daityas on his breast, the high-minded Prahlada came out of
waters. And beholding the outer world, earth and heaven,
he remembered who he was and knew himself to be Prahlada.
And again the wise boy, with his mind solely devoted to him
and controlling his mind and speech, sat)g the glory of that
excellent Purusha who is without beginning: Prahlada said, —
" Salutation unto thee who art the true wisdom, who art
subtile and substantial, mutable and immutable, perceptible
and unperceptible, who art with form and without it, in-
describable and describable. Thou art the asylum of all
attributes ; thou art without qualities and with them ; thou art
with shape and without it; thou art minute and vast; visible
and invisible ; thou art hideousness and beauty ; 0 undecay-
ing Hari i thou art wisdom and ignorance. Thou art cause and
effect ; existence and non-existence ; thou dost comprise* all
that is good and evil ; tliou art the substance of all perishable
iind imperishable elements and the refuge of all undeveloped
rudiments. Salutation unto thee who art both one and many,
Visudeva and the first cause of all. Salutation unto that
excellent Purusha, who is both large and small, manifest and
hidden, who is present in all beings and not, and from whom
pW)cecds tic universe although distinct from universal cause."
Partsata said I— While with his mind thus devoted to Vishnu
Rrahl&da chanted his praises; the Great Hari, clad in yellow
rauddealy appeared before him. Beholding him, h.'


toa


vishnupuranam.


respectfully rose and with hesitating speech exclaimed repeat-
edly Glory unto Vishnu” and said, — ‘ 0 thou who removest
the affliction of thy followers, 0 Keshava, do thov be propitious
unto me. Do thou again purify me, 0 eternal god, with thy
sight.” The Deity replied, — “ I am propitiated with thee for thy
unshaken devotion unto me. Ask of me, Pfahlitla, whatever
thou wishest.” Prahl&da said, — ” My faith in thee may never
suffer decrease in all the thousand births through which I may
be doomed to pass. May my devotion unto thee be as firm
as the attachment cherished by the ignorant people towards
all worldly objects.” The Deity replied, — “Thou hast already
devotion unto me — ^and it shall ever be the same ; but do
thou beg of me a boon, 0 Prahlida, whatever thou wishest."'
Prahlada said, — “ My father has treated me malignantly for
proclaiming thy praises. 0 lord, do thou remove the sin he
hath thus committed. He assailed me with weapons — he had
me thrown into fire, bitten by the serpents, had poison mixed
up with my viands, had me cast into the deep in bonds,
and buried down with rocks and many other ills he had
wrought against me out of malice for being devoted unto thee.
May my father, 0 lord, by thy mercy, be speedily relieved
of the sin he hath thus committed.” The Deity replied,—
Prahlada, all this shall be accomplished by my mercy. I wdsh
to confer upon thee another boon, 0 son of Asura, do thou
beg it.” Prahlada said, — “ All my desires, 0 lord, have been
fulfilled by the boon thou hast confered upon me, that my
faith in thee may never suffer decrease. What to speak of
w’calth, virtue or desire, even emancipation is in his hands
who has firm devotion in thee, the root of the universal
world.” The Deity said,—** As unshaken is thy devotion unfo
me thou shaft by my mercy obtain final emancipatioii from
existence.” ParAsark said: — Having said this Vishttn dis-
appeared from his sight, 0 Maitreya and Prahlida again went
to his father and bowed down before him. Having smelt h\s
forObead, embraced him and shed tears, the father said,


VISHNUPURANAM.


103

thou live my child? The Great Asura treated him with
kindness and repented for his past actions. And Prahl^da,'
conversant with piety, attended diligently upon his father and
preceptor. Alter his father had been slain by Vishnu in the
form of the man-lion, he became, 0 Maitreya, the sovereign
of the Daityas. And obtaining the splendours of royalty on
account of piety, he came by immense wealth and was blessed,
with a numerous progeny. At the expiration of the regal
power and freed from the consequences of moral merit or
demerit, he obtained, by virtue of his meditation of the deity
final emancipation from future births. So powerful was the
wise Daitya PrahlSda devoted to Vishnu, 0 Maitreya, about
whom you asked me. Whoever listens to the story of
Prahlada, is speedily freed from all sins. Forsooth a man is
released from the iniquities he commits day and night by once
hearing or reading the history of Prahlada. The reading of
this history, on the day of full-moou, of new-moon or in the
eighth and twelveth days of the lunar half month, shall offer
fruit tantamount to the gift of a cow, 0 twice born one. As
Hari protected Prahl&da in all his calamities so he shall
protect him who constantly listens to his history.


SECTION XXL


P ARASARA said : — The sons of Sanglhada were Ayushman
Sivi and Vashkala. The son of Prahllda was named Virochana,
whose son was Vali who had a hundred sons of whom V&na
was the eldest, 0 great Muni.

All the son^ of Hiranyaksha were also gifted with great
prowess-^Jharjhara, Sakuni, Bhutasantfipana, M^thdoAbha,
^RhSjbShu^ and KaiartRbhan

* Ttfili is another readtnfr which has been translate by Wilson. The
aiKi Vtliant Tai»h«;


104


VISHNUPURANAM.


Dahu had many sons — Dwimurddha, Sankara, Ayomukha,
Sankusiras, Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra, Mah&b&hn, the
mighty Taraka, Swarbhanu, Vrishaparvan, Pulomon and the
mighty Viprachiti : these were the powerful and renowned
sons Danu.

Swarbhanu had a daughter named Prabha and SarmisthR
was the daughter of Vrishaparvan who had two other daughters
named Upadanavi and Hayasira.

The two daughters of Vaiswanara were named Puioma and
Kalika who were both married to Kasyapa and bore bins sixty

thousand celebrated Danavas called Paulomas and Kala-

»

kanjas, who were mighty, dreadful and cruel.

Viprachiti begot on Sinhika several sons named — Vyansa,
Salya the strong, Nabha the powerful, Vatapi, Namuchi,
Hwala, Khasrima, Anjaka, Naraka, Kalanabha, the Valiant,
Swarbhanu and the mighty Vaktrayodhi. These were the
most eminent Danavas who multiplied the race of Danu.
Their children and grand children were by hundreds and
thousands.

In the family of the Daitya Prahlada, the Nivlta Kavachas
were born, who were greatly purified by rigid austerities.

Six daughters, gifted with great energy were born to,
Tamra — named Suki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi, and
Gridhrika. Suki gave birth to parrots, owls, and crows, Syeni
to hawks, Bhasi to kites ; Gridhrika to vultures, Suchi to
water-fowl ; Sugrivi to horses, camels and asses. These were
the. offsprings of Tamra.

Vanati had two well-known sons, named Garuda and
Varuna ; the former also called Superna was the lord of the
feathered tribes and the dreadful enemy of the serpents.

The offsprings of Surasa were a thousand powerful many-
headed serpents coursing the welkin.

Kadru bad also a thousand powerful sons of unmitigated
prowess— -all subject to Garuda and many-headed. The most
celebrated amongst them were, Sesha, Vftsuki, Takshaka,


vishnupuranaM.


105


Sailkha, Sweta,'’^ MahSpadma, Kumbala, Aswatara, Elapatra,
Naga, Karkkota, Dhananyaya, and many other deadly and
poisonous serpsnts.

Krodas gave birth to highly powerful monsters and Suravi
gave birth to cows and buffaloes. Ira was the mother of
trees and creeping plants and shrubs and every kind of grass :
KhSsa of the Rfikshasas and Yakshas : Muni of Apsaras and
Aristha* of the celebrated Gandharbas.

These were the offprings of Kasyapa whether moveable
or stationary ; their children and grand children multiplied by
hundreds and thousands. Such was the creation, 0 Brahma
in the Swarochisa (or the second) Manwantara. In the pre-
sent or Viavaswata Manwantara Brahma being engaged in
sacrifices undertaken by Varuna I shall describe to you the
manner in which the progeny multiplied. I'he great Patriarch
begot as his sons the seven Rishis, who were in the days of
yore, engendered by his mind.

0 best of ascetics, when there was a quarrel amongst the
Gandharvas, serpents, Danavas and gods, Diti, having lost all
her children, propitiated Kasyapa, Being perfectly adored by
her, Kasyapa, the foremost of the ascetics, promised her a
boon and Diti prayed for it in the shape of a valiant son
capable of destroying Indra, 0 excellent Muni, he granted
his spouse that boon. And having granted her that boon
Kasyapa said — You shall give birth to a son who shall
destroy Sakra, if with pious thoughts and a pure body, you
carry the babe in your womb for a hundred years.'^ Having
said this the ascetic Kasyapa remained with her and she
conceived being perfectly pure. Knowing that this conception
Was for its own destruction, Indra the lord of immortals, came
to her and attended upon her with humility. And the slayer
of Pftka wanted there to thw^art her intention. At last in th-c
last year of the century he found out an opportunity. Diti,
without washing her feet, went to bed. And when slie waat


VISHN'UPURANAM.


iOS

asleep the wieUefof the thunder-bolt entered into her womb
and severed the embryo into seven pieces.

• The child, thus severed, cried out bitterly in the womb
but Sakra again and again said ** Do not cry." The embryo
was thus cut into seven portions, and Indra, wroth again, cut
each portion into seven pieces with his thunder-bolt. From
these originated the swift-coursing deities cafled Maruts
(winds.) They got this name from the words with which Indra
bad addressed (the embryo (Ma— rooda— do not cry) and be-
came forty-nine divinities, the assistants of the wieldet of the
thunder bolt. .


SECTION XXII.


ParasaRA said'.— When Pritha was Installed oii tk
throne by the great Rishis the great Patriarch by and by
conferred kingdoms upon other kings. He bestowed upon
the moon the sovereignty of stars, planets, twice-born ones,
grass, creeping plants sacrifices and penances. Vaisravana^
was made king over kings, and Varuna was made lord of
waters. Vishnu was made the king of Adityas and PSvaka
of Vasus- Daksha was made the lord of Patriarchs and
Visava of Maruts. And he conferred the sovereignty ®f
Daityas and Dinavas upon Prihlada. And Yama, the king of
justice, was made the king of the manes (Pitrls). AirJvata
«Ms made the king of many ekphants, Ganidaof birds/
Visava of the celestials- Uebaisravas was made the king of
horses and Vrishabba of kine. Sbesba became the king of
serpents, the lion, the monarch ef the beasts and tlie holy fig-
tree the king of the trees. Havii^lhus divided the kingdon*
the great Patriarch Brahml aj^oilntcd divinities to protect th^


VlS!imjPURANAM;


10 /

different quarters: he made Sudhanwan, the son of the
patriarch Viraja, the protector of the east ; Sankhapadai the
son of the patrjarch Kardama, of the south ; the immortal
Ketumat, the son of Rajas, protector of the west and
Hiranyaroman the son of the patriarch Parjanya, protector of
the north. By these the whole earth, with its even islands
and cities, was righteously governed, each confining himself
to his own limit.

All these and others appointed to govern the creation are
but persons of the Great Vishnu, 0 foremost of Munis, All
the^ kings who have been and who shall be, O foremost of
twice-born ones, are the portions of Vishnu. The fords of
celestials, the kings of the Daityas, the sovereigns of the
DSnavas, the rulers of the demons, the kings of the beasts,
birds, men, serpents, Nagas, the best of trees, of mountains, of
planets — those that were, those that are, and those that shall
be, are but portions 6l Vishnu who is identical mih the
universe. None else is capable of protecting the world, but
Hari, the lord of all. 0 greatly wise ascetic, the essence of
the universal creation exists in him and none else. The
eternal Vishnu invested respectively with the qualities of
foulness, goodness, and darkness, creates the universe,
preserves it and destroys it. By a four-fold manifestation of
himself he creates the world and in the same way preserves
and destroys it. In one mianifestation as Brahml, the
invisible (Vishnu) assumes a visible shape; in his second mani-
festation. he appears as the patriarch Marichi and others ; KAla
is the third manifestation and all other beings constitute his
fourth manifestation. Thus he becomes four-fold in his creation
invested with the quality of goodness. The Deity in one
portion as Vishnu, preserves the creation; in his second
portion he assumes the shape of Manu and others ; in his
third portion he assumes the shape of time, and in his fourth
portion he assuj^es the shape of all beings. An<f Mhur in-
vested with the qqality of goodness, the qjf;cjelleot Fur^s^


VISHNUPURANAM.


io8

preserves the universe. And invested with the quality of'
darkness at the end of creation the un-born Deity, in one
portion, assumes the form of Rudra. In another portion he
assumes the shape of fire — in another he assumes the shape
of time, and in his fourth portion he assumes the shape of all
beings. And thus in his four-fold form he is thp destroyer of
the universe. This is the four-fold division of the Deity, 0
Brahman, at all seasons.

Brahma, Daksha, time and all beings, are the energies of
the Great Hari, which are the causes of creation. ^Vishnu,
Manu, time and all beings are energies, 0 twice-born one,
of Vishnu, which are the causes of preservation. Ru^ra,

' Antaka, time and all other creatures are the energies of
Janardana that arc intended for universal dissolution. In the
beginning of the creation, till the hour of dissolution, Brahm5,
the patriarchs and all other animals, are engaged with the
work of creation. At first Brahma created the universe, then
Marichi and others were engaged in multiplying the race and
then the other animals multiply it every moment- 0 twice
born one, Brahma cannot create the univers unless the
proper time comes, and Marichi and other partriarchs as well
as other animals, independent of time, cannot help the
creation. Thus at the time of creation as well as that of
dissolution the four-fold divisions of the Great Deity are
equally essential, 0 Maitreya. Whatever is generated by
any living being, 0 twice-born one — the agent is considered
as a portion of Hari. And whatever destroys any living
being, moveable or immoveable, is considered as the destroying
portion of Janirdana as Rudra. In this wise Jan&rdana is the
creator, preserver and destroyer of the universe. And
assuming three qualities he is three-fold — in creation, preser-
vation and destruction — ^but his true form is void of these
qualities. And the four-fold manifestation of the Deity
comprises true wisdom, pervades the universe, and does not
aihhit of any similitude. Maitreya said : — “ Describe to me,


VISHNUPURANAM.


109


\n sooth, 0 Muni, how could the supreme condition of the
Deity admit of four varieties V* ParS-sara said : — 0 Maitreya,
that which is, called the cause of a thing is the means of
accomplishing it; and what is the desire of the soul to ac-
complish is the thing accomplished. The suspension of breath
and the liko operations, of the Yogi who is intent upon
obtaining final emancipation, are his means and the end is the
supreme BrahmS from whom he does not return to the world.
0 Muni, the means, adopted for liberation by the ascetic, is
the discriminative knowledge and this is the first variety of
the cokndition of Brahma, 0 great Muni, the second portion
is the knowledge that is to be obtained by the ascetics for
liberation from suffering. By the third sort, they arrive at
the knowledge of the identity of the end and the means and
the rejection of the idea of duality. The last sort is the
removal of whatever differences may have been formed
regarding the three first varieties of knowledge and the
necessary contemplation of the true essence of soul. The
highest condition of Vishnu, who is identical with wisdom^
is the knowledge of the truth. This knowledge requires no
exercise, is not to be taught, is spread all over, admits of no
comparison with anything, which does not require any other
thing to explain it, which is itself existent and docs not
require any explanation, which is calm, fearless and pure,
which is not the subject of reasoning and does not require
any support. And this knowledge is the excellent condition
of Vishnu. 0 twice-born one, these ascetics, who, by the
destruction of ignorance, emerge themselves in this knowledge
of Brahma, lose the semenial property and do not germinate
in the field of worldly existence.* That which is the excellent
condition of Vishhu is pure, eternal, universal, undecaying
and uniform. And the ascetic who obtains this supreme

* i.e. Those who obtain this highest knowledge regarding the condition of
8rahmS are freed from future births i.ff. they arc not required any more to go
*htough the cycle of birUis.


no


VISHNUPURANAM«


condition of BrahmSl is not required to be born again, for he
is (reed from the distinction of virtue and vice and suffering.

• There are two states of BrahmS — one with shape and the
other without it — one perishable and the other imperishable.
These two states are manifest everywhere. As the blase of
fire, at one place, spreads light and heat all around so this
vast universe is nothing but the manifestation of the energy
of the undecaying and eternal Brahm§. And as the light and
heat are stronger or feebler proportionate to the distance
of the spot, so the energy of Brahma is more or less marifest
in beings as they are more or less remote from him. O
Br&hman, BrahmJ, Vishru and Siva are the most powerful
energies of BrahmS: next to them, 0 Maitreya, are the
inferior celestials — next to them are the patriarch Daksha and
others— next to them, men, beasts, birds and serpents and
then the trees and plants each growing feebler proportionate
to their distance from the Supreme God. In this way, the
world, although eternal and indestructable, appears and
disappears as if being subject to birth and death.

The all-powerful Vishnu is but the manifestation of
BrahmJ. He being invested with form, the Yogis worship
him at the very commencement. And the great ascetics, with
their minds unagitated, in whose minds exists great spirit
of devotion with the object to be meditated upon and along
with the means for effecting it, endeavour to bring about
mystic union with him. 0 great Muni, Hari is the most
powerful of all the energies of Brahma, because he is the most
immediate. And he is an embodiment of Brahma because
he is composed entirely of his essence. In him the whole
universe is interwoven— from him and in him is the universe,
0: Muni. Vishnu, the lord of the universe containing all that
if destructable and indestructable, holds the creation material
ahd ^ijSritual with his ornaments and weapons.”

Maifkeya said:— Do thou relate to me how does the great
God'VisRiu hold the universe with bis ornaments and weapons.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


ril


ParAsara said Having bowed down unto the mighiy
and indescribable Vishnu I shall relate to you what was for^
merly described by Vasishtha, The Great Hari holds the pure
soul of the world uncontaminated and divested of qualities like
the Kaustava gem. The undecaying holds Pakriti as Srivatsa
mark and intellect exists in MAdhava in the shape of his mace^
The lord holds the two-folded divisions of egotism namely inter
elements and organs of sense in the shape of his coneh-sheU
and bow. He holds in his hand^ in the shape of discuS/
mind»vvhich is the strength of ail and excels wind in its flights
The necklace, of the holder of mace, namely Vai}ayenti^
contains five precious gems (pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire
and diamond) being the emblems of the five elemental rudi-
ments* JiinArdana holds the faculties of action and precep-
lion in the shape of numerous shafts. The holy wisdom is
the bright sword of Achyuta concealed sometimes in the
scabbard of ignorance. In this wise, 0 Maitreya, Hrisbikesba
is the refuge of soul, nature, intellect, egotism, the elements,
the senses, mind, ignorance and wisdom. And although Harl
is without any shape, yet, he, for the behoof of mankind^ in
his dillusive form, embodies the elements of the world as
his weapons and ornaments. Then the lotus-eyed deity,
the lord of the universe, holds the nature and the universes
0 Maitreya, true wisdom, ignorance, all that is transient, all
that is everlasting, exist in the slayer of Madhu, tlie lord of all
creatures. The time with its division of seconds, minutes,
days, months, seasons, and years, is but the manifestatioft
of the Great Hari. O Great Muni, the seven worlds, the earth
the sky, the heaven, the world of Patriarchs, of sages, of saints,
of truth are but diverse manifestations of his. His form is
the whole universe ; he is first born before all the first-born-
He is the refuge of ail being; he is bimself self-sustained J
his various forms are celestials, men and animals* 1 herefore
he is the supreme lord of all ; eternal ; he has a risible shape
and IS without it He is known in the Vedanta ^ thn


VISHNUPURANAM..


ir2

Yoyish, Sima and Atharva Vedas, history and sacred science.
The iVedas with their manifold divisions^ the institutes of
Manu and the writings of other law-givers, sacred lores and
their translations, poems and all that is said or sung are bodily
forms of that Great Vishnu in the shape of sound. All kinds
of things with or without form — here or elsewhere are the
body of Vishnu. I am Hari ; all this is Janirdana •, cause and
effect proceed from none else but him. He, who is cognizant
of these truths, shall never be subject to the afflictions of
worldly existence. r

Thus, 0 twice-born one, the first portion of the Purina,
has been related to you, hearing which one may be freed fcom
sins. The man, who hears this, obtains the fruit of bathing in
the Pushkara lake* for twelve years in the month of Kartih
O Muni, the celestials confer upon him, who hears this
Purina, the dignity of a divine sage, of a patriarch, or of a
spirit of a heaven.

* This lake is still to be seen near Ajmere.


THE END Of part I.


PART II.


SECTION I.


MIaitreya said : — 0 venerable Sir, 0 preceptor^ yoi>
have fully described unto me all that I asked you regarding
the creation of the universe. But there is a portion of this
subject, 0 foremost of ascetics, which I desire to hear ^ain.^
Pryavrata ar^d Uttanapada were the two sons of Swayambhuva
Manu and you related to me the story of Dhruva, the son of
Uttanapada. But, 0 twice-born one, you did not mentiop
the progeny of Pryavrata and I wish to hear from you an
account of his family. Parasara said; — Prayvrata married
Kanya,^ the daughter of Kardama, and had by her two
daughters named Samrat and Kukshi and ten sons, wise^
valiant, humble, obedient to their father ; named Agnidhra^
Agnivihu, Vapushmat, Dyutimat, Medha, Bhabya, Savatt^
Putra. And the tenth of them was Jyotishman ; and the
significance of this name was made good by him. All .the
sons of Pryavrata were celebrated for strength and prowess.
Of these three, Medha, Agnivihu and Putra, were given up
to religious devotion. And those higl^-souled ones remeipber*
ing the actions of their pristine births, did not wish fpr
kingdom. And they deligently and in due time practised the
rites of austerities, wholly disinterested and expecting no
ceward. 0 Maitreya, 0 foremost of Munis, Pryavrata con-
ferred the seven islands ,upon his seven illustrious sops. The
father f^onfcrred upon Agnidhra the sovereignty of Jamvu-

* Marbandeya aad Vayu Puranas have Karoya as the name of tha
^9ughtcr of Ifpidaipa* ^.WUson has adopted this name.

^5


yiSHNUPURANAM.


II4

dwipa; to Medhathlti he gave Plakshadwipa : he m^de
Vapushmat the sovereign over the Dwipa of Salmali : and
appointed Jyotishmat, king of Kusadwjpa : he made Dutimat
the king of Kraunchdwipai Bhabya the king of Sakadwipa
and Savala the sovereign pf the Dwipa of Pushkara.

0 foremost of Munis, Agnidhra^ the king of* Jamvudwipa
had nine sons, all equal to the patriarchs in prowess. — NAbhi,
Kimpurasha, Harwarsha, Ilavrita, Ramya, Hiranvat, lC«rU|
Bhadraswa and Ketumala, who was a prince ever devoted to
the practice of piety. ®

Hear next,0 Brahman, from me how he divided Jamvudwipa
amongst his sons. He conferred on Nabhi the country called
Hima, south of HimavSln or snowy mountains. And he gave to
^JCimpurusha the country of Himakuta and to Harivarsha
the country of Nishada. And he bestowed upon Ilavrita the
country in the centre of which mount Meru is situated. And
he conferred upon Kamya the countries lying between it and
j the Nila mountain. He gave to Hiravat the country lying
to the north of it. He gave to Kuru the country bounded
by Sringavar. He gave to Bhadraswa the countries situate on
the east of Meru and he gave to Ketumala Gandhamadana
which was situate on the west of it. Thus that lord of men,
conferred the various portions of his kingdon), upon his sons.
And having installed his sons as kings of diverse regions that
lord of earth retired to the holy place of pilgrimage
Salagrama and engaged in penance, 0 Maitreya.

0 great Muni, the eight countries, Kintpurusha and others
are places of perfect enjoyment and spontaneous happiness.
In those countries there is no viccissitude of circumstances,
no fear of decrepitude or death, no distinction of virtue and
vice^ better or worse. Nor in these eight countries are to be
seen the effects wrought by the cycle of ages,

The high-souled Nabhi, who had obtained the country of
tHinn&hwa as his kingdom, had by his queen Meru^ the highly
offelgcelt 9on Hishabha ; and who had again a hundred sonsi


ViSHNUPURJ^NAM.


the eldest of whom was Bharata. Having ruled ovet the
kingdom piously and performed many sacrifices the illustrious
Rishablia installed his eldest son Bharata as the lord of the
earth and weht to the hermitage of Pulastya, being bent upon
practising religious penance according to the prescribed rites
of an anchoret. He practised religious austerities duly until
he was so reduced as to be but a collection of skin and fibres.
Thereupon putting a pebble in his mouth he went naked to
the great road. And from then the country was handed over
to Bharata by his father on retiring to woods and it was called
Bharata^

• Bharata had a highly pious son named Sumati. Having
ruled the kingdom for some time, the king Bharata, who was
fond of sacrifices, conferred it upon his son and invested him
with all royal splendours. O Muni, having engaged iti austere
practices, he renounced his life at the holy place of Salagrama.
He was again born in a distinguished family of ascetics*
which I shall describe to you later on.

From the illustrious Sumati was born Indradyumna : his sort
was Pratihara, who had an illustrrious son named Pratihartta ;
his son was Bhava who begot Udgitha, who begot Prastara*
whose son was Prithu. Prithu’s son was Nakta, whose son
was Gayaj whose son was Nara, whose son was Virat. Virat’s
son was the brave Dhimat who begot Maharta, whose son
was Manasyu, whose son was Twashtri, whose son was
Viraja, whose son was Raja, whose son was Satyjit* who had
a hundred sons, of whom Viswagyotish was the eldest. Undef
the rule of these princes Bharatvarsha was divided into nine
parts and their progeny successively ruled the country for’
seventy-one cycles*

0 Muni, this was the progeny of Swayambhava Manu, by
whom the earth was peopled, who was the lord of the first
Manwantara in the Kalpa of Varaha*


SIBOTION It


iMiAltR^VA said :--0 BrAhmana) you have related to the
the progeny of Swayartbhuva, I wish to hear frpm you an
account of the earth. It behoveth theC) 0 Muni to relate to
how many oceans there are, how many islands^ how maUy
kmgdomaj how many mountains, forests, rivers, cities of the
gods's Its si 2 e, its contents, its nature and its form. Parjisara
said%*-«-l3o thou hear from me, 0 Maitreya^ a brief account :
? canntA give you a detailed account even in a century.

0 tudte-born one, the earth consists of seven islands
ttamely Piaksha, Sllmali, Kusa, Krauncha, Saku and

Puskara : and they are severally girt by seven great seas *
the sea of salt water (Lavana), of sugar-cane juice (Ikshu), of
wine (Sura) of clarified butter (Sarpi), of curds (Dadhi), of
milk (Dugdha) and of fresh water (Jala).

Jambttdwipa is situated in the centre of ail these and in
the centre of that island is situate the golden mount Merui
which is eighty-four thousand in height and sixteen

thousand deep into the earth. The diameter, at its top, is
thirty-two thousand yoyanas and at the base sixteen thousand.
And this mountain is like the seed'cup of the lotus of the
tarCb.

On the south Sumeru are the mountains Himavat,
Hemakuta aud Nishadha and on its north are the boundary
mountains Neela, Sweta and Sringhec. The two mountain
ranges situate in the centre are a hundred thous^Lnt yoyanas
in extent. And others are ten thousand yoydnas lesser in
extent. They are two thousand yoyanas in height and breadth.

O twJce-'bom one, the first country on the south of Su'meru
is Bharata, then Kimpurusha and then Harivarsha. North
of Meru is Ramyaka, nett to that is Hiranmaya and beyond
the latter *.is Uttarakuru foHowing the same direction as


VISflhuPURANAM.


*7


Bhirata. And each of these Varshas, 0 foremost of the
twice-born oties, is extended over a nine thousand Yoyonas.
Iiabrita is also of the same size and the golden mount Meru
is situate in the centre, and the country extends nine
thousand Yoyonas in each direction from the foui^ sides of the
mountain. Fo^ fortifying the mount Meru four mountains
were created as buttresses, each ten^thousdnd Yoyonas in
elevation. The one situate on the east is calld Mandara,
the one on the south is called Gandhamddana, that on the
west is ^called Vipula and that on the south Suparswa. And
on each of these stands severally a Kadamba tree, a Jdmbu
tree* a Pipal and a Vata. And all these trees were eleven
thousand Yoyonas in height, standing as if like the banners
of the mountains. 0 great Muni, because a JSmbu-tree stands
on that mountain that insular continent is called Jdmbu-dwipa.
And that tree produces Jambu-fruits like so many huge
elephants. And those huge fruits are crushed into pieces as
soon as they Ml on the mountain. And out of the juice of
those fruits haa come out the river Jdmbu. And the inhabit-
ants, who drink the water of that river, do not experience
perspiration, bad smell and are not subject to infirmities of
age and organic decay. The soil, on the banks of that river,
receiving the juice of these fruits and dried up by pleasant
breeze, is turned into gold called Jdmbunada out of which the
ornament of the Siddhas are made. Vadraswa is situate on
the east of Meru and Ketumdld on the west. And in the
middle of these two Varshas, 0 foremost of Munis, is situate
lldbrita, oh the east is the Chaitrarath forest on the south
^andhamddana, on the west Baibhraju and on the north the
forest called Nandana. On the four sides of Meru there are
four tanks the water of which is partaken of by the celestials
namely Atunoda, Mahabhadra, Sitoda and Manasa. There
are some mouhtain ranges like the filaments from the root of
^0 lotus on the oast of Meru-^namely Sitinta Mukunda,
and Vaikanta*


Il8 VISHNUPURANAM,

And on the south Trikuta, SisirS, Patanga, Ruchaka and
Nishadha, on the west Sikhivasasi Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandha-
midana and JSrudho, and on the north Sankhakuta, Rishabha,
Naga, Hansa and Kalanjara. These and others extend from
the heart of the Meru.

On the top of mount Meru, 0 Maitreya. there is a vast
city, named after Brahma, extending for fourteen thousand
Yoyonasy and celebrated in the region of the celestials. And
around it in the various quarters and intermediate quarters
are situate the magnificent cities of Indra and other deities
presiding over various quarters. Originating from the foot of
Vishnu, and watering the region of the moon, the Ganges
falls from the heaven into the city of Brahma. Falling there
she has divided herself into four branches namely Sit§,
Alakakandd, Chakshu and Vadra. Taking her course towards
the east and going from one mountain to another, in the
welkin Sita, watering Vadrawshwa has fallen into the
ocean. The Alakakanda flows southwards to the country of
Bharata and dividing herself into seven branches on the way,
falls into the ocean. 0 great Muni. And Qjakshu crossing
over all the western mountains and passing through the
country of Ketumala falls into the ocean. And VadrS,
traversing the northern mountains and passing through the
country of Uttarakuru, falls into the northern ocean, 0 great
Muni.

Meru is thus situated between the mountains Nila and
Nishada (on the north and south) and between MSlyavSn and
GandhamSdana (on the west and east) and k lies there like
the peri-carp of a lotus. And the countries of BhSrata,
Ketumala, Vadrashwa and Kuru, lying outside the mountains,
are like petals of the lotus of the world. Jathara and Devakuta
are two mountainous ranges extending northward and south-*
ward and connecting the mountain Nila and Nishada. The
two mountains Gandhamadana and KaiUsha extend towards
the east and west for eighty Yoyonas from sea to sea.-


VISHNUPURANAM.


II9

;the two mountains on the east the two ranges Nishahad and
ParipSitra are situated on the western side of Meru. The
two mountains^ Trisringa and jSlrudhi are situated on the
north of Meru and they extend east aud west fron^ one sea
to another. Thus I have described to you the eight mountains,
mentioned by the ascetics as bounding the mount Meru, and
situate in pairs on four sides. Sit§nta and others which have
been described to you as filament mountains are extremely
charming. The vallies situate in the bosom of those
mountains are frequented by Siddhas and Charanas and there
are many picturesque cities and forests, containing the
palaces of Vishnu, Lakshmi, Agni. Surya and other deities
and inhabitated by the celestials. And in those pleasant
vales Gandharbas, Yakshas, RSikshasas, Daityas and Dinavas
sport day and night. These are the abodes of the pious, 0
Muni and are called the regions of paradise on earth where
the vicious, even after a hundred births, do not arrive.

In the country of Vadraswa, 0 twice-born one, Vishnu
resides in his horse-headed form, in Ketumala as the boar and
in Bh&rata as the tortoise. And in Kuru Jan&rdana resides
as the fish and Hari, the lord of all and everything, resides
everywhere in his universal form. And, 0 Maitreya, he, the
iio,ul of the world, is the supporter of all things.

0 great Muni, in the eight countries of Kimpurusha and
others there is neither grief, exhaustion, anxiety nor hunger.
All the subjects are healthy devoid of any fear, freed from all
afflictions and live for ten or twelve thousand years. Indra
does not send rain there and people live upon the water of

earth and there is no distinction of Satya, Treta and other
successive cycles. In each of these countries there are seven
principal mountainous ranges from which hundreds of river I
take their rise, 0 foremost of twice-born ones.


SECTION in.


P ArAsARA said The country that is situate on the

ocean and south of the HimSllya is called Bhirata where reside
the descendants of Bharata. The extent of this land is nine
thousand VoyonaSt and is the held of action, on account of
which men go to heaven or obtain final emancipation. The
seven principal mountain ranges in Bhirata are Mihendra,
Malaya, Sahya. Suktimat, Riksha, Vindhya and P^ripS^ra.
From this land people attain to heaven or final emancipation
or some hence, 0 Muni, fall into hell or pass into the
condition of brutes. From here people obtain heaven,
liberation, or the state in mid-air, or the state in the regions
under the earth for no other portion pf world is the
of actions.

Do thou again hear of the nine divisions of the CQpntry
of Bhar&ta. They are Indra-dwipa^ Kasermut^ Tflmravarna,
Cralehastimat, N&gadwipa, Saumya, Gandharba and Varuna.
The last is encircled by the sea and is a thousand Yoyom^ in
extent from north to south.

On the east of Bh&rata live the Kiratas, and on the west
Yavanas in the centre live Brahmanas, Kshtriyas, Vaidyas,
and Sudras engaged severally in sacrifice^ arms, trade and
service,

The rivers Satadru^ Chandrabhaga and others have taken
their rise from the Him^llaya. V.edasmriti and others have
taken their rise from the Vindya range. Tapi, Poypshni,
Nirbindhk and others have taken their rise from Riksba ;
Godaveri, Bhiiparathi, Krislu^aveni and others have taken
their rise from Sahya mountain* And all these remove the
dread of sin. Kritamala, Tamraparni and others flow from
the Malaya hills ; Trisatna, Risbikulya and others from the
Mahendra ; and the RUikuIya, Kumari and others from the


VISHNUPURANAM.


12 !


Suktimat mountains. There are thousands of rivers like
these and the tributaries thereof. The Kurus and Panchalas
in the middle districts, the inhabitants of KSnirupa in the east,
the Pundras, Kalingas, Magadhas, and other southern nations,
the Saurftsthras, Suras, Bhiras, Arbudas in the west, the
Karushas and Ivlalavas dwelling along the PfiripStra mount-
ains, the Sauviras, the Saindhavas. the Hanas, the Salwas the
inhabitants of Sakala, the Madras, the RSmas, the Ambasthas
and the Parishakas and others drink the waters of these
rivers and live on their banks happy and prosperous.

•There are four Yugas or ages in the Bharata-Varsha, 0
Great Muni, namely the Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and
Kali — there is no such cycle of ages in any other land. Here
the ascetics are engaged in penances, the devout offer
.sacrifices, and the people distribute gifts for the sake of
another' world. In JSlmbu-Dwipa, Vishnu, all sacrifice, in the
shape of sacrificial male, is worshipped by people with
sacrifices — there is altogether a different practice in other
lands. 0 Great Muni, BhSrata therefore is the best of all the
divisions of Jambu-dwipa, for it is the land of actions and all^
other divisions are places of enjoyment. 0 sage, it is after
many thousand births, and by the accumulation of piety, that
living beings are sometimes born in Bharatavarsa as men. The
celestials themselves have chanted “Blessed are those who are
born in BhSratavarsa as' men even from the condition of thcj
celestials for this is a land which leads to Paradise and finaa
liberation. And all actions, that are performed by men
born in this land and frcfed from sins, careless of the merited
rewards, ate consigned by therti'to the eternal Vishnu, tlie
Great ^oul aAd the‘n th^y emerge fti him. We do not know
'vheb the‘ actibfis, that hav4 secured for us heaven, sivall biear
wh'efi’ wd’^hall be 'born agiin. But “Blessed are
tbosd \vh6 are hoflj in BhSrataVarsk* With perfect 'fadultifcs.*' *
0 NTa'itt-feya, V Have, thus in’ dhbrt, described to 'you the
nine dftisnohs' of JaifcWSwKpa vvhich extend over a hundred*
16


ta


VMHNUPVRANAM.


thousand Yoyanas and which is girt, as if by a bracelet, by the
ocean of salt water which is similar in dimensions.


SECTION IV.


P ARASARA said :—As Jamhu-dwipa is encircled all Voufld
by the ocean of salt water like a bracelet, so that oceanris
afso girt by the insular continent Plaksha. The extent of
Jambu-dwipa is a hundred thousand Yoyanai\ and it is said^
0 Brahman, that the extent of Plaksha-dwipa is twice as
much.

Medhatiti, the king of Plaksha-dwipa, had seven sons,
Santabhaya, Sisira, Sukhodhaya, Ananda, Siva, Kshemaka and
Dhruva. And all these seven became kings of Plaksha-dwipa.
The seven divisions were named after them — Sant&bhaya-
varsa, Sisira-varsa, Sukhada-varsa, Ananda*varsa, Siva-varsa,
Kshemaka-varsa, and Dhruva*varsa. These seven varsas had
seven mountain-ranges as their boundaries. Do thou hear,
from me, the names of these mountains, 0 foremost of Munis,—
Gomeda, Chandra, N^rada, Dundhubi, Somaka, Sumanas, and
Vaibhraja. In all these picturesque mountains the sinless
inhabitants dwell perpetually along with the celestials and
Gandharbas. There are holy villages where people live for
a long time, freed from care and pain and enjoying unintef^
rupted happiness. And in those divisions there arc seven
rivers all flowing into the ocean — I shall relate their names,
bearing which all sins shall be removed. They arc the
AhutapUl, Sikhi, VipasI, Tridiv3i, Kramu, Amrkl and Sukritl
These are the principal rivers and mountains of Plakshs'
dwipa, which I have described to you ; but there atre thousands
of others of inferior siae. Those^ who partake of the waters


VrSlINUHJRANAM.


©f these rivers, always Hve happy and cohtented ; there i»
neither the increase nor decrease of the population ; the
revolution of .the four ages is not known there ; O thou of
great mind, the time there is uniformly of the character of
Treta Yuga. In all these Dwipas, O Brahman, people live
peacefully for* five thousand years, and religious rites are
severally performed by diverse castes and divisions of the
people. There are four castes which I shall relate to you.
They are Aryaka, Kuril, Vivasa and Bhavi corresponding
rwpecfively with Brahmanas, Kshatryas, Vaisyas and Sudras^
OJoreitiost of Munis. As there is a huge Jambu-tree in the
Jambu-dwipa so there is a large fig-tree in this insular
continent and this Dwipa is called Plaksha after the name of
that tree, 0 foremost of twice-born ones. Hari, the all, the
lord of all, the creator of tlie universe, is worshipped in the
form of the moon by the Aryakas and other caste people.
Plaksha-dwipa is girt, as if by a disc, by the sea of molasses
which is equal to the island in extent. I have thus given to
you, 0 Maitreya, in a brief compass, a description of the
island called Plaksha; I shall now describe the island
Salmala ; do thou hear it.

The heroic Vapusmat is the sovereign of the Salmala-
dwipa ; do thou hear the names of his seven sons who gave
names to the seven divisions of this insular continent. They
were Sweta, Harita, Jimuta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa, and
Suprabha. The sea of molasses is girt by this insular
continent on all sides, which is twice in extent. There are
seven mountain ranges containing precious jems and dividing
the^Dwipa and there are seven rivers. They are Kumuda,
Unnata, Valahaka, Drona, abounding in medicinal herbs,
Kanka, Mahisha and Kakkudwat. The principal rivers are
Yauni, Toya, Vitrishna, Chandra, Sukla, Vimochani and
Nivritti ; the waters of all these remove sins. All the varsas
^mcly Sweta, Harita, Vaidyuta, Manasa, Jimuta and Siuprava
wa vety charming. All these vajrsas arc peopled by men of


124


VISHNUPJURANAM.


four castes. The four castes, 0 great Muni, who reside in
.Salmala-dwipa, are severally known as Kapilas, Arunas, Pitas
and Rohitas (or twany. purple, yellow and red) corresponding
to. Brahmanas, Kshatryas, Vaisyas and Sudras,wlio all perforin
sacrifices and worship the Great undecaying Vishnu, the soul
of all things, in the form of Vayu (wind) with pious rites. The
people there enjoy frequent association with the celestials.
There is a huge Salmali (silk-cotton) tree in this insular
continent, which gives its name and affords delight to gods.

This Dwipa is encircled on all sides by the Oceam named
Suroda, which is equal to the island in extent. This
ocean Suroda is again girt on all sides by the Kusa-dwipa
which is twice the Salmali island jin extent. The king
Jyotishmat in Kusa-dwipa had seven sons ; do thou hear their
names. They are ^Udvida, Venuman, Swairatha, Lavana,
Dhriti, Prabhakara and Kapita after whom the seven varshas
were severally named. There live men along with the
Daityas, Danavas, gods, Gandharvas, Yakshas, and
Kimparushas. The four castes devoted to the performance
of their respective duties are called Damis, Sushinis, Snehas,
and Mandehas corresponding, in order to Brahmanas, Ksha-
tryas, Vaisyas and Sudras. They worship Janardana in the
form of Brahma, in the Kusa-dwipa according to the rites laid
down in the Sastras for the protection of their kingdom and
setting aside actions which lead to temporal rewards. There
are seven mountain ranges (in this island) namely : Bidruma,
Hemasaila, Dyutimat, Pushpavan, Kusheshaya, Havi
Mandarachala, 0 great Muni. There are seven rivers— the
names of which I shall relate in order, do thou hear them.
They are Dhutapapa, Siva, Pavitra, Sanmati, Bidyudambha
and Mahi. They all remove sins. Besides there are thousands
of small rivers and mountains. There is a huge clump ol
ICusa-grass and the island is named after that. It is' girt by
•the Ghrita sea (the ocean of butter) of the same dimension a*
this insular continent.


VfSHNUPURANAM.


125

The se« of Chrita is encircled by Krauncha-dwipa which
h twice as large as Kusa-dwipa. Dyutiman was « the
sovereign of this island. . The high-souled king named the
seven varshas after his seven sons. They were Kusala,
Mallaga^ Ushna, Pivara Andhakaraka, Muni and Dundhuvi,
0 Muni. There are seven boundary mountains highly
picturesque and resorted to by the celestials and Gandharbas,
0 thou of great understanding ; do thou hear their names from
me. They are Krauncha, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Devavrita,
Pundjirikavan, Dundhuvi, and Mahasaila — each of which is
double the preceding one in height as each dwipa is twice as
extensive as the one before it. In these charming mountains,
people reside, freed from fear, along with the celestials. In
this island, 0 great Muni, the Brahmanas, Kshatryas, Vaisyas
and Sudras are respectively called Pushkara, Pushkala,
Dhanya and Tishpa, Do thou, O Maitreya, hear the names
of the rivers, the waters whereof are drunk by those men.
There are seven principal rivers and hundreds of small rivers.
The seven principal rivers are Gauri, Kumudvati, SandhyA
Ratri, MAnojavA, KshAnti and PundarikA.

In this island the four caste people worship the great
JanArdana in the form of Rudra with various sacrifices.
Krauncha is girt by the sea of curds of a similar dimension
and that again is encircled by SAka-dwipa, which is twice as
much in extent, 0 great Muni.

The high-souled Bhavya, the king of SAka-dwipa had
seven sons upon whom he severally conferred the seven
})ortions. They are Jalada, KumAra, SukumAra, Manecchaka,
Kusumoda, Mandaki and MahAdruma. The seven varsas were
named in order after the seven princes. There are seven
boundary mountains. Of these one situate on the east is
Uda^Aghri ^nd others are named JatAdhAra, Raivatak, ShyamA
Astagiri, Anohikeya and Kesari. They are all charming and
welJcnt mountains. There is a large SAka (Teak) tree,
'frequented by the Siddhas and Gandbasbas ; and the wind


1^6


V1SHNUPURANAM.


produced by its fluttering leaves, spreads joy, Tiie holy lands
of this insular continent were inhabited by people of four
castes. There are seven sacred rivers which remove all sins—
they are Sukumari, Kamari, Nalini, Dhenuka, Ikshu, ?^Benuka
and Gavasti. Besides these seven rivers there are numerous
rivulttts. There are hundreds and thousands of- mountains.
People residing in Jalada varsa pertake of the waters of these
rivers. They seem to have come down from heaven to earth.
In those divisions there is no decrease of virtue ; there is no
quarrel and there is no deviation from honesty. TIk four
castes, Nriga, Magadha, Manasa ahd Mandaga corespond
respectively to Br&hmmanas, Kshatryas, Vaisayas and Sudras.
They worship Vishnu, in the form of the sun, having controll-
ed their minds with diverse pious observances. SSlka-
dwipa, 0 Maitreya, is girt by the sea of milk on all sides, as
by a bracelet, which is of the same dimension as the continent.

The sea of milk, 0 Brahman, is again enclircled on all
sides by the insular continent of Pushkara, which is twice the
extent of Sika-dwipa. The king Savala of Pushkara had
two sons; one was named Mahavira and the other Dhataki;
and the two varsas were named after them. 0 great sage,
there is only one mighty range of mountains, named
Mlnosattara, which runs in a circular direction like an armlet.
It is fifty thousand Voyanasin height and the same in breadth,
circular on all sides, and divides the island in the middle, as
if like a bracelet into two divisions. And being divided into
two portions by that mountain they are also of a circular
form. There the people live for ten thousand years, freed
from desease, sorrow, anger and jealousy. Their is neither
virtue nor vice, killer nor slain : their is no jealousy, envy
iear, hatred, malice, nor any moral delinquency. The varsa
stiuate on the outside of MAnosattara is called Mahavira and
the one stiuate inside is called Dhataki: they are both
.ifeq^nted by the celestials and Danavas. And in that island
of Pushkara there is neitlier truth nor falsehood. And in that


VlSHNUiFlIRANAM.


121


insular continent divided into two portions th<^re is no other
mountain nor river. All men and celestials here have the same
■form and dress. There is no distinction of caste or order ; they
do not perform rites and the three Vedas, Puranaa, ethics,
polity and the laws of service are unknown there. These
‘two portions, O Maitreya, might be denominated as paradise
•on earth. In these two yarsas of Dhataki and Mahavira,
where time affords delight to the inhabitants who are freed
from sickness and decay. There is a Nyagrodha-trce (Fisucus-
indica)# on this insular continent \vhich is a favourite resort
of^Bralima and where he lives worshipped by the celestials
and Asuras. Pushkara is encircled by Syaduka ocean (sea of
fresh water) which is of equal extent with the island.

In this way the seven insular continents are encircled by
seven seas and each ocean and island is twice the dimension
of that which precedes it. The water, in all these oceans,
remains the same at all i^easons and never increases or dimi*
nishes. Like the water in a caldron, which expands in
consequence of heat, the waters of the oceans swell with the
increase of the moon, 0 foremost of Munis. Except in the
light and dark fortnights the waters neither increase nor
decrease. 0 great Muni, the rise and fall of the waters is
five hundred and ten inches. In this island of Pushkara, 0
Brahman, foods are produced spontaneously and people there
tnjoy viands of various flavours.

Beyond the sea of fresh water, there is the land of gold
which is twice its extent where no living beings dwell.
Beyond that is the mountain Lokaloka which is a ten thousand
yQyanas in height and as many in breadth. The other side
of the mountain is enshrouded with perpetual darkness which
ikgain is encircled by the shell of egg.

Such, 0 Maitreya, is the earth with ail its continents, mount-
ains and oceans amd e)tterior shell. The extent of the earth
^ five hundred millions. It is the mother and nurse of beings,
1^0 foremost of all elements and the stay of all the worlds.


SECTION V.


ParaSARA said The extent of the earth has been
related to you by me. I have also said, O twioe-born one,
that the depth belew the surface is seventy thousand Yoyanas.
0 foremost of Munis, each of the seven regions of PStala,
extends over ten thousand Yoyanas. They are seven in
number— namely Atala, Vitala, Nitala, Gavastimat, Malmtala,
Sutala and PitSla. Thus soil is severally white, black, pittrpl(v
yellow, sandy, stony and of gold. They are adorned with
numberless palaces in which reside Danavas, Daityas, Yakshas
and serpents by hundreds, 0 great Muni. Once on a time
Nlrada, after coming back to heaven from these regions,
declared amongst the gods that PitSla was much more charm-
ing than heaven. He exclaimed " What can be compared
with Patlla where NSgas are adorned with beautiful and
brilliant and pleasure-diffusing gems? This region is
embellished with the daughters of Daityas and Danavas. Who
does not find delight in Patila? Even those who have
letired from the world find delight therein. By day, the rays
of the sun diffuse joy and not heat ; by night the moon diffuses
illumination and not cold. There the sons of Danu, always
bappy in the enjoyment of sweet foods and good wines, do
not know how the time glides away. There are many charm-
ing forests, livers and ponds abounding in lotuses and the
skies are resonant with the Koii'ssong. Charming ornaments,
fragrant perfumes, ungents, the sweet music of the lute, pipe
and tabor are always enjoyed by the Daityas, Danavas ao*!
serpents who dwell in the regions of Pfttftla. .

' Below the regions of Patala there is a form of Vistinui

called Sesha* which is the outcome of the qualityof dkrkness.

- . ' » '* '■ ^ - > { ' ' ■

* He is the great serpent upon whtch^ Vithiiu rests- duringi the intervals*

divine creations. And the world is snpportedl'on hts^lihouAnd heaiUir. '


VlSimUPUnANAM.


\29

The Daltyas and Danavas are incapable of* counting tlie
glories of this Deity. This is Called Ananta by the ascetics
of accomplished piety and is worshipped by the Celestials and
great sages. He has a thousand heads which are adorned
with mystic lines. For the behoof of the world he illuminates
all the quarters with the jewels on his tliousand fangs and all
the Asuras are disabled thereby. His eye rolls perpetually in
consequence of inebrietion ; he has an exclient Kundala,
a diadem on his head and a wreath upon each brow. He shined
briliaiftly like white mountain topped with flame. He alwayd
wfar^a pilrple raiment, is always drunk, and adorned with a
white neclaCe and appears like another Kailasha with sable
clouds and the Ganges flowing. In one hand he holds a
plough and in the other a mace. And he Is being Worshipped
by the Goddess of wealth incarnate and Varuni (the goodness
of wine). At the time of great dissolution proceeds from his
mouth the venomed Are in the form of Rudra, which devours
the three Worlds. This Sesha form of the great God
worshipped by celestials, is in Patala, bearing the entire
World on his head like a diadem. Even the celestials are not
capable of describing or knowing his strength, prowess, fornl
and nature. Who can describe his prowess who holds the
entire earth like a garland of flowers tinged with purple dye
by the brilliance of jems on his crests?

When this Ananta, With his eyes rolling with intoxication,
yawns the entire earth with its oceans, rivers and forests
trembles ; the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, Siddhas, Kiiinaras^
serpents and Charanas have not been able to find out the
end df the qualities of his Being without end and hence he
Is called Ananta. The sandal paste, w'hich is ground by the
wives of the’Nagas, is spread around by his breath and
scatters fragrance all oyer the quarters.

Having worshipped him the .ancient s«lge Garga obtained
him a knowledge of astronjQmy, of the piariks and of
tlife good attd.evii.prfMsaged by the aspects of the heavens.

17


VISHNWtRANAM.


The earth ns supported by that Great Serpent, upon hrs
head ; and the earth again holds the garland oi spheres along
with men, celestials and Asuras,


SECTION VL


ParasArA said:-— 0 Brahman, there are soraf^:* herfb
below the earth and the waters into which sinners fall. I
shall give you an account, 0 great Muni.

The names of the various hells are: Ratrrava, Sukara,
Rodha, Tala, VrsSsana, Mahajwala, Taptakumbba, Lavana,
Vimohana, RudhirSndha, Vaitarani, Krimisha, Krimibhojana,
Asipatravana, Krishna, Lalabhaksha, Danina, Puyavaha, Papa,
Vahnijwala, Adhosiras, Sandansa, Kaia.sutra, Tamas, Avichi,
Swabhojana, Apratishtha, and another Avichi. These are the
dreadful bells constituting the various provinces of the
kingdom of Yama dreadful with his instruments of torture,
into which are hurled down those persons, who arc addicted
to sinful actions.

Those who give false evidence, those who act as mcdiatowi
through partiality, those who speak untruth, are thrown into
the Raurava (dreadful) helF. He, wha causes abortioir,
devastates a town, kills a cow, or strangles a man to death
goes to the Rodha hell (or that of obstruction). He who
drinks intoxicating liquors, destroys a BrShmana, steab gold
or associates with them who perpetrate these crimes, goes to
Ibe Sukara (swine) hell. He, who murders a Ksbatrya or ^
Vaisya or commits adultery with the wife of bis preceptor, b
despatched to the TM (padlock) hell. And one, who* holds
intercourse with his sis^r or slays royal emissarv,
gfks to TapUkimbha (beat^ jar) hell. Oncj who sells hb


VISHNUPURANAW.


rji

tHa$te wife, the jailor, one who deals in horses and forsakes
his followers, is sent to Taptaloha (red-hot iron) hell. One
who commits incest with a daughter-in-law and daughter is
sent into Mahajawla hell. That vile of a man who disrespects
his spiritual guide or his betters, who reviles the Vedas or sells
them and who associates wdth women to whom they should
not go, is sent into Lavana hell. A thief and a hater of
prescribed rites fall into Vimohana hell. He who disrespects
his father, the Brahmanas and the gods, or one who spoils
gems,* falls into the Krimibhoksha hell. He, who practises
nuigio^ntes to injure others, falls into Krimisa hell. That
vile of a man who takes his meals before offering food to the
gods, to the manes and guests is despatched into Lalabhoksha
hell (where saliva is given for food.) One who makes arrows
is sent into Vidhaka hell. He, who makes lances, swords
and other weapons, is sent into the dreadful hell of Visashana
(murderous.) He who takes bribes is sent into Adhomukha
hell (in which head is inverted) as well as he who offers
sacrifices to improper objects and predicts the movements
of stars and planets. One who eats alone sweetmeats, a
BrSlhmana who deals in lac, flesh, liquors, sesamum, or salt,
one who commits violence, and those who rear up cats, cocks
goats, dogs, hogs and birds are despatched into hell Puyavaha
(or where matter flows.) The Brahman who leads the life
of an actor, fisherman, who depends upon a person born in
adultery, who is a prisoner, an informer, one who lives by his
wife^s immoral habits, who looks to secular affairs on Parva
<Jays, who is an incendiary, a faithless friend, a soothsayer,
who vends birds, performs religious rites for the rustics, who
sells the juice of some trees is thrown into Rudhirandha
hell (whose wells are blood). He, who spoils honey or
devastates a village, is sent into Vaitarani hell. He, who
causes impotence, tresspasses upon others’ lands, is impure
^nd Kves on magic rites, is sent into the Krishna hell (black).
He who uselessly cuts down trees goes to Asipatravana hell;


13 *


VIEHNUPURANAM.


Those who tend on sheep, those who haunt deer and those
who give fire to unbaked vessels are sent to VahnijwSla hell
or of fiery flame. One, who violates his own vow or tran-
gresses the rules of his own order, goes into the Sandan-
Sana (or the hell of pincers.) The religious student who
sleeps in the day and becomes defiled and those * who receive
instruction from their children go to the hell called Swfibho*
jana (where they feed upon dogs).

Besides these there are hundreds and thousands of other
hells, where persons, perpetrating diverse iniquities, areVisited
with various punishments. There are thousands of hetis like
the numberless crimes committed by men, in which they are
punished according to the nature of their offences. And
those who swerve from the obligations laid upon them by
their caste or order, in thought, word or deed are thrown
into these hells. The celestials are seen by those who are thrown
into these hells, with their own heads inverted and the celes-
tials also behold the inhabitants of hell with their heads down-
wards. After undergoing the sufferings of hell the sinners go
through the various stages of existence, namely .-—inanimate
things, the acquatic animals, birds, anlnvils, men, pious men,
gods and liberated spirits. 0 great sage, each of these stages
is in succession a thousand degrees superior to that which
precedes it. People go through these stages until they obtain
emancipation. There are as many inhabitants in hell as
are in heaven : those who commit sin and do not make an
expiation of guilt proceed to hell. Becoming acts of expia-
tion for every short of inquity have been laid down by the
great sages. 0 Maitreya, Swayambhuba and others have
dictated severe penances for great crimes, and light ones for
ordinary offences. Amongst the numerous arduous penances
Md down by them, the remembrance of Hari is the foremost.
For them, who are penitent after having committed many
iniquities, the greatest penance is the remembrance of Hari
U a man meditates upon Hari either in the morning, at sun«


ViSHNUPURANAM.


*33


set, midday or at night he is released from all sins. By
meditating upon Vishnu he is released from the heap of
worldly afflictions. He obtains final emancipation considering
even heaven as impediment. He, whose mind is devoted
to VSsudeva in prayer, burnt offering or adoration, considers,
0 Maitreya, even the dignity of Indra as an obstacle to the
acquirement of final liberation. What is the use of going to
heaven whence it is necessary to come back to earth ? And how
different is the meditation of Vasudeva which leads to final
liberation. Therefore, 0 Muni, the man, who meditats upon
V^hniJ^day and night, is released from all sins and does not
go to Naraka after death. 0 foremost of twicc-born ones,
that which gives delight to mind is heaven, and that which
gives pain is hell, hence vice is denominated as hell and
virtue as heaven. The self-same thing some times gives
delight, sometimes produces pains, sometimes excites Jealousy
and sometimes anger. Therefore every thing (in this world)
is the source of miseries.* The same thing at one time
brings on anger and again conduces to our delight. There-
fore nothing in itself is cither pleasurable or painful ; pleasure
pain and the like merely denominate the various states of
the mind. Therefore true wisdom consists only in the
knowledge of Brahma, which brings on confinement to the
World. True wisdom pervades through the whole universe
and there is the existence of no other thing but this ; ignorance
And knowledge are therefore comprised in true wisdom, 0
Maitreya. 0 twice-born one, I have thus described to you
the entire earth, all the divisions of the region under the
earth and the hells, the oceans, the mountains, the insular
continents, and the rivers. I have described all to you in
short, what again do you hear ?

* There is another reading yasfu Vastatmakan kuia : which when
stands as “Whence they can it be considered as essentially the same
»^ith the eithnr."


SECTION VII.


]M[aitreya said:— The entire earth has been described
to me by you. 0 Brahman, I wish to hear now, 0 Muni,
an account of the regions above the world, the Bhuvar-Ioka,
the situation and dimension of the heavenly bodies. Do
you relate them to me, 0 great sage. Parasara said — The
terrestrial sphere (or Bhurloka) comprising the oceans, ^’rivers
and mountains extends as far as it is illuminated by the
rays of the sun and the moon. The atmospheric sphere (or
the Bhuvar-loka), of the same extent both in diameter and
circumference, spreads upwards, 0 twice-born one, as far as
the heaven. The solar region is situated a hundred thousand
Yoyanas from the earth ; and tlie region of the moon is
situated at an equal distance from the sun. About the same
distance above the moon is situated the orbit of all the lunar
constellations. And two hundred thousand Yoyanas, up-
wards, 0 Brahman, is situated the region of the planet Budha
(Mercury). And at the same distance above that is situate
the planet Sukra (Venu.s). And at the same distance above
that is Angaraka (Mars'. And at the same distance above
that is the priest of gods (Vrihaspati or Jupiter). And Sani
(Saturn) is two hundred and fifty thousand Yoyanas above
Jupiter. 0 foremost of twice-born ones, one hundred thousand
leagues above that is the’ region of seven Rishis. And at a
similar distance above that is Dhruva (the pole-star) the axis
of the circle of planets. Thus I have described to you, 0
great Muni, the elevation of three spheres, which constitute
th^ region of the fruits of works. And the land of works is
also here namely Bhlirata. At a distance of one Koti Yoyanas
above Dhruva is Maharloha (the region of saints) the'
Inhabitants of which live for a Kalpa (or a day of Brahma)*


■VTSHNUPURANAM4


*35


And at a distance of two Koti Yoyanas above that is Janaloka
where reside the pure-minded sons of BrahmS, Sananda and
others, of whom I had described to you before, 0 Maitryeya.
And at a distance of eight Koti Yoyanas is Tapa-loka
where reside the celestials named Baibhrajas, uncon-
sumable by fire. At six times the distance from Tapa-
loka is situated Satya-loka, where-in the inhabitants do
not know death and which is otherwise named Brahma-loka.
Wherever earthly object exists which may be trodden by
feet, that makes up Bhur-loka whose dimensions I have
alread^irdescribed to you. The region that extends from the
earth to the sun is called Bhur-loka, inhabited by the Siddhas,
Munis and others and which is called the second sphere, 0
foremost of sages. The distance, between the Sun and
Dhruva which extends over fourteen hundred thousands
leagues, is called Swar-loka by those who are conversant with
the position of planets. These three spheres are called
transitory, 0 Maiireya and three, Jana, Tapa and Satya, arc
termed durable^ And Mahar-loka, which is situated between
these two, partakes of the nature of the both and though it
becomes devoid of all beings at the end of Kalpa it is not
finally destroyed. I have thus described to you, 0 Maitreya,
the seven Lokas, and the seven PStilas constituting the
extent of the whole world.

As the seed is covered by its rind so the world is girt on
every side and above and below by the shell of the egg of
BrahmS. And this shell again, 0 Maitreya^ is encircled
by water which extends over space equal to ten times the
earth. And the waters again are encompassed on the outer
surface by fire. And this fire is encompassed by the air, and
the air by the sky, the sky by the origin of the eienicnts and
that again by the intellect, 0 Maitreya. And each of these
•even extends ten times the breadth of one it encircles, 0
Maitreya. And the last is encircled by the Chief- Principl?.'*"


* This IS Prakriti or su^eme


136


vishnupuranam.


Thid supreme nature has no end and cannot be measured, tt
Is therefore called endless, immeasurable and the - cause of all
existing things. This Prakriti, O Muni, is the source of the
endless universe and of thousand, ten thousands and millions
and thousands of millions of mundane eggs. As fire exists in
wood, oil exists in sessamun, so the self-conscious, all-spread,
ing and self-irraviating soul exists in this PradhSna. 0 thou of
great intellect, this nature and soul exist as dependants and
are encompassed by the energy of Vishnu, which is the soul
of the universe. 0 thou of great mind, this energy o^ Vishnu
separates them at the time of dissolution and unitw tjjem
at the time of creation. And this at the beginning of creation
is the cause of this agitation. As the wind agitates the surface
of water in a hundred bubbles so this energy of Vishnu which
is at one with the nature and soul influences the universe.*
As a tree, containing root, stem and branches, originates
from an original seed and produces other seeds, from which
grow other trees, similar in kind to the first, so from Pradhani
germinate intellect and other rudiments of things — from them
grow grosser elements— from them Asuras and others and
who again are followed by sons and sons of sons. As the
first tree is not spoiled when another grows out of it so there
is no waste of beings by the creation of others. As space,
time and the like are the cause of the tree so the divine Hari
is the cause of the developments of the universe. As all
the portions of the plant remaining in the seed of rice, or the
root, the culm, the leaf, the short, the steam, the bud, the fruit,
the milk, the grain, the chaff, the ekr, grow up when they come
in contact with those things which help their growth (earth
•and water), so the celestials, men and other beings, remain-
ing in the states to which they are destined in consequence of
their good or bad actions, appear in their full growth by virtue
of the energy of Vishnu. He is Vishnu, the great Brahmin

• There is another reading PradhaHa purushattakani qualifying 'htf
ttfiivarae i. e. universe con3isti9g of inert nature aqd soul.


VISHNUPURANAM.


137


from whom the creation of the universe has proceeded, who
is the world, in whom the world exists and in whom it will
be dissolved. He is Brahma, the excellent abode, the excellent
state, the essence of all that is visible and invisible, from
whom proceeds, the creation, animate and inanimate. He is
the primary mature, manifestation of the universe, in whom
all beings exist and in whom all beings will finally immerge.
He is the performer of all devotional rites, he is the sacrifice ;
he is the fruit that it confers and he is the tools by which it
is celefcrated. There is no other thing but Hari.


SECTION VIIL


P ARASARA said : — I have described to you the system of
the universe in general : I shall now describe the situations and
dimensions of the sun and other luminaries.

0 foremost of Mnnis, the chariot of the sun is nine
thousand leagues in length and the pole is of twice that size^
the axle is more than fifteen millions and seven hundred thou-
sand yoyanas long, on which a wheel is placed with three
naves,* five spokes and six peripheries. It is undecaying
and continues for the year and consequently all the cycles
of the time are placed herein. The second axle of his chariot
is forty five thousand, five hundred leagues long. 0 thou of
great mind, the, two halves of the yoke are respectively as
long as two axles. The short axle and the short yoke are
supported by pole star : the end of the longer axle to which
is fixed the wheel is situate on Manasa mountain. The seven
steeds which draw the sun's car are the metres of the Vedas
Gayatri, Vrihati, Ushnih, Jayati, Tristubh, Anustubh and
Pankti.

* The three naves are the three portions of the day namely, morning, noon
and night ; the five spokes are the five cyclic years and the six peripheries arc
the six seasons.

18


VISHNUPURANAM.


The city of VAsava is situated on the eastern side of the
MSnosottara mountain, on its shouthern side is the city of
wealth, on its western side is the city of Varuna and on the
northern side is the city of Soma. I shall relate the names
of those cities ; do thou hear them. The city of Sakra is
named VaswoksSra, that of Yama is called Samyamani ; that
of Varuna ia named MukhyA and that of Soma Vibhlvari.

0 Maitreya, the glorious sun moves speedily like a dart on
his southern course attended by the constellations of the
Zodiac; He creates day and night and is the divine path of
the sages who have got over the worldly afflictions. ^

0 Maitreya, while in one insular continent the sun shines
in midday, in the opposite Dwipas it will be midnight; rising
and setting thus take place at all seasons and are always
opposed in the different cardinal and intermediate points of
horizon. Wherever the sun is visible he is said to rise
there and wherever he dissappears from view he is said to be
set. In sooth, their is neither rising nor setting of the sun;
for he always exists; the appearance and disappearance of
the sun are merely called rising and setting.

When the sun is in the cities of Sakra and others, the three
cities and two itermediate points are illuminated; and when
he is in an intermediate point he extends light to the two
cities and three intermediate points. From the time of
his rising till midday the rays of the sun gradually io*
crease ; and from then he moves towards . setting with his
diminishing rays. By the rising and the setting of the
sun the east and west quartars are ajicertained. As far
as the sun shines in front so far he shines behind, and
thus on both the sides illuminating all the places except
the court of BridimA which is situate on the summit of Mern
— ^the mountain of the celestials. When the rays oi
the sun reach the court of BrahmA they are repelled and
driven back by the radiance which prevails there. Conse-
quently there is the alternation of day and night in


VISHNUPURANAM.


139


northern quarter in as much as all the insular continents
are situated on the north of Meru.

The radiance of the sun, after its setting, is deposited
in fire and hence fire is visible even at a greater dis-
tance in night. During day the rays of fire enter into
the sun by virtue of which the sun becomes more bri-
lliant. Elemental light and beat, proceeding respectively
from the sun and fire and mixing with each other, pre-
vail in diverse degrees both by day and night. When
the sutP prevails either in the northern or southern hemis-
phjre^ay or night goes into waters according as they are
attacked by darkness or light ; it is for this reason that
waters appear dark by day because night is within them
and white by night because when the sun is set the light of
the day enters therein.

When the sun goes to Pushkara Dwipa, a thirtieth part of
the circumference of the globe, his course is equal in time
to one Muhurtta; and whirling round like the circumference*
of the wheel of a potter he alternately spreads day and night
on the surface of the earth. At the begining of his nordiern
course the sun passes to Capricorn us, thence to Aquarias,
thence to Pisces, successively passing from one sign of the
Zodiac to another. After he has gone through them the
sun gets at the vernal equinox when he makes the day and
night of equal duration. From then the length of the night
decreases and the day grows longer until the sun reaches
the end of Gemini when he follows a different course and
entering Cancer begins his declension to the south. The sun
moves quickly on his southern course like the circumference
of a pottePs wheel revolving respectively. He glides along his
course with the velocity of the wind and traverses a great
distance in a short time.' In twelve Muhurttas it goes through
thirteen lunar asterisms and a half during the day, and during
the night, it goes through the same distance only in eighteen
UuhurtUs. As the centre of the potter’s wheel revolves more


HO


VISHNUPURANAM.


slowly than the circumference so the sun in his northern
course revolves with less rapidity and passes over a less space
6f the earth in a longer time, until at the end of his northern
route the day is again eighteen Muhurttas long and the night
twelve the sun passing through them by day and night
respectively in those periods. As the lump of the clay on the
centre of the potter's wheel revolves most slowly, so the polar
star, which is the centre of the Zodiacal wheel, moves very
slowly and always remains in the centre like the clny. The
relative length of the day or night is dependant uj^on the
greater or less motion with which the sun rtJrolv^s
through the degrees between the two points of horizon.
During the midday when his diurnal course is quickest
his nocturnal is slowest and when he moves quickly by
night he moves slowly by day. The length of his journey
in both the cases is the same ; for during the day and
night he travels through all the signs of the Zodiac or six
by night and six by day. The length and shortness of
the day are measured by the extent of the signs ; and
the duration of day and night is measured by the period
which the sun takes to pass through them. When he
declines towards the north the sun moves quickest by night
and slowest by day and when he declines towards the south
the case is thoroughly the reverse.

The night is called Usha and the day is called Vyushta
and the intervening time between them is called Sandhya.
When the dreadful Sandhya sets in, the awful RSikshasas
named Mandehas attempt to devour the suu. 0 Maitreya,
the Patriarch BrahmSi imprecated this curse upon them that
they should perish by day and revive at other times. For
this reason a fierce contest takes place daily between them
and the sun. At this time, 0 great Muni, the pious Brah-
mins scatter water purified by the mystical Omkara and
consecrated by the Gayatri * and by means of this water as by

* It is a vedic verse in the shape of a short prayer to the sun.


VISHNUPURANAM,


141

a thunder-bolt the dreadful Rakshasas are destroyed. While
during the course of morning rites the first oblation is offered
with solemn invocations, the sun, having thousand rays,
appears with unclouded splendour. Omkara is the glorions
Vishnu, the essence of the three Vedas, the lord of speech ;
and by its mention the Rakshasas are slain. The sun is a
principal portion of Vishnu and light is his immutable essence,
the manifestation of which is made by the mystic syllable Om,
Light, spread by the utterance of Omkara, becomes radiant
and buftis up completely the Rakshasas denominated as Man-
debas^^Therefore one should not be dilatory in the perform-
ance of SandhyS sacrifice j for he, who neglects it, is guitly
of the murder of the sun. Being thus protected by the
Brahmanas called BAlakhilyas the sun proceeds to protect
the world.

B'ifteen Nimeshas (twinkling of the eye) make a Kashtha ;
thirty Kashthas make one Kala ; thirty Kalas a Muhurtta and
thirty Muhurltas a day and night ; the divisions of the
day become longer or shorter in the way explained before.
But as regards increase or decrease Sandhya is always
the same for it is only one Muhurtta. From the time
when half of the sun^s orb is visible to the expiration of
three Muhurttas the interval is called Pratar (morning)
forming a fifth portion of the day. The next portion or
three Muhurttas from morning is called Sangava (forenoon)*,
the three next Muhurttas make the midday ; the three
next Muhurttas constitute the afternoon ; the three next
Muhurttas make the evening ; and thus the fifteen Muhurttas

the day are divided into five portions of three each.
But the day comprises fifteen Muhurttas only at the
Equinoxes and increases and diminishes in number as
the sun declines towards the north or the south, when
the day encroaches upon the night and the night upon
the day. The equinoxes take place during the spifng
ftnd autumn when the sun enters the signs of Aries and


142


ViSHNUPURANAM.


Libra. When the sun enters Capritorn his progress
towards the north begins and when he enters Cancer his
progress towards the south commences. Fifteen days
of thirty Muharttas each are called a Faksha (fort-
night) ; two fortnights make one month and two months a
solar season and three seas«)ns make one Ayana* (a northern
or southern declination) and two Ayanas make one year.
Years are made up of four kinds of months* and five years
make one Yuga or cycle. The years are respectively called
Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idvatsa'ra, Anuvatsara and Hatsara.
This is the time called a Yuga. ,

The mountain that is situate in the north of BhSratvarsa
is called SringavSn for its having three principal horns or
peaks, one to the north, one to the south and one in the
centre. The last is called equinoctial for the sun goes there
in the middle of the two seasons of spring and autumn,
arriving at the equinoctical points in the first degrees of Aries
and Libra and making day and night of equal duration of
fifteen Muhurttas each. When the sun is in the first degree of
KirtikA and the moon in the fourth of Visakhfi or when the sun
is in the third degree of VisakhI and the moon is in the bead
of KirtikSl that equinoctial season is holy and is cklled the
Mah&vishubha. At this time devout persons should make
offering to the celestials and the manes and gifts to the Brah-
mans, for such gifts produce happiness. Liberality at the
equinoxes is always fruitful to the donor, and day and night
seconds, minutes and hours, intercalary months, the day
at full moon (PaurnamSsi) ; the day of conjunction, when the
moon rises invisible, the day when it is first seen, the day
when it first disappears, the day when the moon is quite


• (a) The Saura containing; the sun's pass^e through a sign of zodiac i
{h) Chandra containing thirty lunations ; (c) Savana containing thirty days
•f sunrise and sunset ;(<i) Nakshatra or the moon’s revolution throu^k
tkt twenjjy-eight lunar mansions,


ViSHNUPURANAM.


*43


round and the day when one digit is deficient are the seasons
when gifts prove meritorious.

The sun declines towards the north in the months of
Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, MSidhava, Sukra and Suchi and
declines towards the south in the months of Nabhas,
Nabhashya, Isha; Urja, Sahas, Sahasya,

There live four devout protectors of the world on the
mount LokSloka of which I had mentioned to you formerly.
These are severally named SudhSman, Sankhapid — the
two sons of Kardama, Hiranyaroman and Ketumat. These
four protectors of the world live around the naounteiin
Lok&loka. They are devoid of malice, haughtiness, are
active and have not taken to wives.

On the north of Agastya, and south of Ajabithi (the
line of the Goat) and outside the VaiswSnarapath is situate
flje road of the Pitris. There live the great Rishis who
offer oblations to the fire. They read those portions of the
Vedas which contain injunctions for the multiplication of
the progeny. They perform the duties of ministrant priests
and at the end of yugas they make new rules of conduct
and re-establish the interrupted ritual of the Vedas. And
after their death they proceed by the southern course.
Mutually descending from each other in successive births,
progenitor coming from descendant and descendant from
progenitor, they repeatedly appear indifferent houses and
races along with their prosterity, austere practices and
established rites, residing to the south of the solar orb as long
as the moon and stars endure.

The path of the celestials is situate on the north of
the solar sphere of the NSlgavithi and south of the seven
•Rishis. There reside the Siddhas of subdued senses, con-
tinent and pure, not desirous of having offspring and con-
sequently victorious ^fcver death. Eighty-eight thousand
of these continent ascetics live in the regions north of
the Sun till the time of dissolution. They are freed from


144


VISHNUPURANAM,


covetousness and concupiscence, love and hatred and are
npt engaged ifi the work of procreation. They always detect
the deficiency of the properties of elementary matter and
being fre.ed from these desires they do not meet with any
obstacle in the way of asceticism. For these reasons they
are highly pure and have attained to immortality. By immor%
tality is nreant existence to the end of the Kalpa : living
as long as tiiree regions exist is exemption from death. The
consequenoes of the acts of impiety or piety such as
Brahmanicide and Aswamedha last until the end of a^ Kalpa
wh:Cn all within the interval between Dhruva and t^J- earth
is destroyed. The region between the seven Rishis and
Dhruva, the tliird region of the sky is the excellent celestial
path of Vishau and is the splendid abode, 0 twice-borne one,
of the ascetics, who have controlled their senses and are freed :
from sins and in whom virtue and vice are annihilated. Those j
in whom virtue and vice are annihilated and who are freed •
from the consequences of piety or iniquity go to this excellent
place of Vishnu where they never suffer sorrow. There live
Dharma, Dhruva an<d other spectators of the world radiant
with the superhuman faculties of Vishnu obtained by virtue,
of religious meditation. With this excellent place of Vishnu,

0 M itreya, are interwoven all that is and all that ever shall
be, animate or inanimate. The seat of Vishnu is being
meditated upon by the wisdom of Yogis at one with supreme
light as the radiant eye of heaven. In this portion the
splendid Dhruva is stationed as the pivot of atmosphere. On
Dhruva are placed the seven great planets and on them
depend the clouds. 0 great ‘Muni, from clouds, proceed the
rains ; from them the water which is the nutriment and delight
of all the celestials and the rest. The celestials who receive
oblations, being pleased by burnt offerings, cause the rain
to fall for the support of created bein^. This holy seat of
Vishnu is the stay of the three worlds ais it is ..the source of
the rain.


ViSIINUPURANAM.


From this region, 0 Brahman, proceeds the river Ganges,
that removes ail sins, embrowned with the unguents of the
nymphs of heaven. She issues from the nail of the great toe
of Vishnu’s left foot.

Dhruva, with devotion, holds her on his crown day and
night. And thence the seven Rishis ’practise their devout
ajisterities in her water wreathing their braided locks with
her waves. The orb of the moon, surrounded by her accumu-
lated current, increased in lustre by her contact. Having issued
from tWfe moon she falls on the mount Sumeru and thence
to puHfy the world, flows to the four quarters of the earth.
Sita, AlakanandS, Chakshu and Bhadra are only the ‘.four
divisions* of one river and are named so after the regions
towards which it proceeds. Alakananda, which flows towards
the south, was borne delightedly on his head by Mahadeva
for more than a hundred years. And having issued from the
braided locks of Sambhu and washed the sins of the sinful
sons of Sagara it raised them to heaven. 0 Maitreya, the
iniquities of sfny man, who bathes in this river, are instantly
removed and they obtain unprecedented virtue. And its
water, if offered reverentially for three years by the sons to
their manes, gives them rare gratification. Having wor-
shipped the excellent Purusha, the lord of sacrifices, with
sacrifies in this river, many, born in the race of twice-born ones,
obtain whatever they desire either here or in heaven. Saints,
who are purified by bathing in the wsters of this river, and
whose minds are devoted to Kesava, obtain final liberation.
The sacred river, when heard of, desired, seen, touched,
bathed in, or hymned, day by day purifies all beings. And
those who living even at a distance of hundred yoyanas
exclaim ** Gangi and Gang!” are relieved of the sins commit-
ted during the three previous existences. The place, from
which this river has issued for the purification of the three
Worlds, is the third division of the celestial region— the seat
Vishnu.


*9


SECTION IX.


P ARASARA sai(h — The form of the glorious Hari con-
taining the constellations, in the shape of a porpoise in the
tail of which is attached Dhruva, is seen in heaven. As
Dhfuva revolves, it makes the moon, the sun and stars to revolve
also, and all the planets follow in its circular path 3 for the sun,
moon and all the luminaries are in sooth tied to tfie polar
star by aerial cords. The porpoise figure of Ihe^^lestial
sphere, which has been described by me to you, is upheld
by NSrSyana, who himself, the source of all radiance, is
seated in its heart. And having worshipped the lord of
people, Dhruva, the son of UttanpSlda shines in the tail of
the steller porpoise. JanSrdana, the lord of all, is the supporter
of this porpoise-shaped sphere — and this sphere is the supporter
of Dhruva ; and by Dhruva the sun is upheld. 0 Brahman,
I shall describe how this earth is upheld by the sun ; do thou
listen to it attentively.

During eight months of the year the sun attracts the
waters of the earth, and during the remaining four months
he pours them upon the earth : from rain grows corn and by
corn the whole world is upheld. The sun absorbs the mois-
ture of the earth by means of his scorching rays and nourishes
the moon thereby. And the moon through tubes of air
distributes theip to the clouds which are made of smoke, fire
and wind. The clouds are called Abhras because their
contents are not dispersed The waters in the clouds, bein^
driven by the wind, and freed from impurities by the sweeten-
ing process of the time, descend (upon earth), 0 Maitreya*
The glorious sun, 0 Maitreya, exhales tnoisture from four
sources, namely — seas, rivers, the earth and the living
creatures. He immediately pours down on earth, without
turning it into cloud, the water that he absorbs from


VISHNUPURANAM.


147


Gangi of the skies, and people who are touched by this water
are freed from all iniquities and are not constrained to see
hell. This is called celestial ablution. When the sun comes
in view and the water comes down from the sky without
cloud then the waters of the.Ganga in the skies are sprinkled
by the rays of the sun. And the water that falls from the
sky when the sun is in the mansion of KirtikA and the other
asterisms counted by odd numbers, the water of the Gangft is
scattered by the elephants of the spheres. The water, that
falls from the bright and cloudless sky when the sun is in the
mansion, of Rohini and other even asterisms, is distributed
by nis own beams. 0 twice-born one, both the waters arc
holy and they wash away the sins of the people : it is the water
of the GangA in the skies and is termed celestial ablution.

The water that the clouds distribute iipou earth is in
fact, the ambrosia of living beings ; for it sustains the plants
which are the support of their existence. By this water
all vegetables grow and are matured and become the means
of bringing about the well being of mankind, seen and un-
seen. Those men, who have got holy scriptures as their
eyes, perform sacrifices with them and give gratification to
the celestials. In this wise all sacrifices, all celestials, BrAh-
tuanas and other castes, all infernal creatures, all animals
ind the whole world are supported by the rains'which pro-
duce food. 0 great Muni, this rain, which is the source of
mainfold blessings, proceeds from the sun. And the sun,
3 foremost of Munis, is upheld by Dhruva, which is again
supported by the porpoise-shaped sphere which is at one
vith NSrSyana; for the ever-existing glorious NSirSyana,
he supporter of the universe and the primary deity, is seated
iu the heart of the porpoise-shaped steller sphere.


SECTION X.


P ARASARA said Between the extreme northern and
southern points the sun has to travel in a year one hundred and
eighty degrees, ascending and descending. His car is guided
by divine Adityas, Rishis, Gandharvas, ApsarSs, Yakshas,
serpents, and Rakshasas. The Aditya Dhatri, the sage Pulas-
tya, the Gandharva Tumburu, the nymph Kratusth^lS, the
Yaksha Rathakrit, the serpent Vasuki and the R^cshasas
Heti, live in the sun’s car as its seven guardians, in the month
of Madhu or Chaitra. In the month of VaisSkha or Madhava
the seven are Aryamat, Pulaha, Nareda, PunjikSsthali Ra-
tbaujas, Kachanira and Praheti. In the month of Suchi or
Jaistha they are Mitra, Atri, Haha Mena, Rathaswana, Taks-
haka, and Paurusheya. In the month of Sukra or AshSdha they
are Varuna, Vasishtha, Huhu, Sahajanya, Rathachitra, NSga
and Budha. In the month of Nabhas or Sravana they are
Indra, Angiras, ViswSlvasu, PramlochA, Srotas and Eiapatra.
In the month of BhSdrapada they are Vivaswat, Bhrigu, Ugra-
sena, Anumlocha, Apurana, SankhapSla and VySghra. In
the month of Aswin they are Pushan, Gautama, Suruchi, Ghri-
tachi, Sushena, Dhananjaya and Vata. In the month of
KSrtik they ara Parjanya, BharadvvSija, (another) ViswSvasu,
Viswichi, Senajit, AirSivata and Ch§pa. In AgrahSyana or
MSrgasirsha they are Ansu, Kasyapa Chitrasena, Urvasi
Tarkshya, Mahapadma and Vidyut. In the month of Pausha,
Bhaga, Kratu^ Urnayu, Purvachitti, Arishtanemi, Karkotaka,
and Sphurja are the seven who live in the sun’s orbit and
distribute light throughout the universe. In the month of MSgha
the seven are, Twashtri, Jamadagni, Dhritarashtra, TillattamS,
Ritajit, Kambala, and Brahmlpeta. In the month of PhSighuna
those living in the sun are Vishnu, Visvamitra, Suryaverch-
qbas, Rambha, Satyajit, Aswataia aud Yajnapeta.


VISHNUPURANAM.


149


In this wise, 0 Maitreya, a group of seven celestial beings
supported by the energy of Vishnu lives, during the several
months, in the orb of the sun. The sage chants his glory, the
Gandharba sings and the nymph dances before him ; the night-
rangers attend upon his steps; the ‘ serpent harnesses his
horses and the Yaksha trims the reins and the Balakhilyas
surround his chariot. 0 foremost of Munis, these seven
groups, residing in the suns, orb at their respective seasons,
become the instrumentals in the distribution of cold, heat and
rain.


SECTION XL


IVIaitreya said : — I have heard as described by you, O
holy preceptor, the seven groups of beings who are present
in the sun’s orb and are the agents in the distribution of heat
and cold. You have also described the individual functions
of the Gandharbas, serpents, Rakshasas, sages, Balakhilyas
Apswaras and Yakshas who, supported by the energy of Vishnu,
remain as guardians in the sun's car but you have not des-
cribed the function of the sun himself. If the seven beings
stationed in the sun’s ear are the agents in the distribution
of heat, cold and rain, how can it also be true, as mentioned
hy you before, that rain proceeds from the sun ? If the act of
the collective seven be same then why the people say that the
sun rises, reaches the meridian or sets ?

Parasara said :~0 Maitreya, hear what you have asked
The sun, though at one with seven beings in his orbit,
is separate from them being their head. The whole and
great energy of Vishnu, which is called the three Vedas, — Rich


Ijo


VISHNUPURANAM.


Yajush and SSman lightens the whole universe and destroys
its iniquity. This energy exists as Vishnu for the preserva-
tion of the universe and abiding as the three Vedas within the
sun. And wherever in every month the sun exists there is
the Vishnu-energy composed of the three Vedas. The Richas
shine in the morning, the hymns of Yajush at noon and Vrihad-
rathantara and other portions of the SiLman in the afternoon.
This threefold manifestation of Vishnn designated under the
three Vedas is the energy of Vishnu that Influences the divine
positions of the sun. ^

The energy of Vishnu docs not exist only in the rob^^of the
sun but is also manifest in BrahmSl, Vishnu and Kudra. At
the time of creation it is Brahmi eonsisting of the Rig-veda
in the work of preservation it is Vishnu composed of the
Yajur-Veda; — and in the work of destruction it is Rudra
formed of the Sima- Veda, the utterance of which is therefore
inauspicious.

In this way the energy of Vishnu composed of the three
Vedas exists in the sun encircled by the seven beings. And
the glorious sun becomes radiant by that energy of Vishnu
and destroys the entire darkness of the universe. The sages
chant his glories, the Gandharbas sing and the nymphs dance
before him ; the RSikshasas follow his steps, the serpents har-
ness his steeds and the Yakshas trim his reins and the BSila-
khilyas are seated around him. The seven beings in the
sun's orb rise and set every month, but Vishnu, in the Shape
of his energy, never rises nor sets and is at once the seven-
fold sun and distinct from it. As a man, nearing a mirror kept
on a stand, observe in it his own image so the energy of Vishnu
is never disjoined but remains month by month in the sun
whieh he there placed.

The sovereign sun gratifying the manes, gods and men,
revolves being the instrument of day and night. The moon
is cherished by the Sushumna ray of the sun. And in the
dark fortnight of the month the ambrosia of its substance is


VISIINUPURANAM.


*51


drunk by the celestials. And at the last day of the half month
the two remainig digits are drunk by the manes; then the
celestials and the progenitors are nourished by the sun. The
moisturC} which the sun attracts from the earth he again
distributes for the nourishment of animals and plants and thus
the sun is the source of subsistance to every living being—*
gods, manes, mankind and the rest. The sun gratifies the
celestials for a fortnight, the progenitors once a month, and
men and other animals every day.


SECTION XIL

P ARASARA said— The car of the moon has three wheels
and is drawn by ten steeds white as the Jasmine — five on
the right half and five on the left. The asterisms upheld by
Dhruva move before the sun. And the cords that fasten
the moon are tightened or relaxed in the same manner like
those of the sun. 0 foremost of Munis, like the steeds of the
sun, the horses of the moon, sprung from the waters, drag
its car for a whole Kalpa. 0 Maitreya, when the moon is
reduced, having its rays druak up by the celestials, to a single
Kala, the radiant sun supplied it with a single ray. And

the moon is gradually exhusted by the celestials it is
replenished ia the same way every day with his rays by the
sun, the plunderer of waters. Thus, O Maitreya, when in the
half month the ambrosia is deposited in the moon, the celes-
ti^ drinkit for it constitutes their food, Thirty-six thou-
sand jjAree hundred and thirty three divinities drink the
ambrosia of the moon. When two kalAs remain the moon
enters the orbit of the sun and lives in the ray called


J52


VISHNUPURANAM.


AmSi and the period is accordingly called AmavasyS.
During this period the moon is first immersed for a day
and night in the water ; thence it enters the branches
and shoots of the trees and thence it proceeds to the sun.
Hence any person, who cuts off a branch or casts down a
leaf when the moon is in the trees is guilty ot the crime
consequent upon the destruction of a Brahmin. When the
remainder of the moon contains but a fifteenth portion
the manes near it in the^ afternoon and drink tife last
but sacred Kala which is composed of ambrosKi and
contained in the two digits. The nectar that corned •frqm
the rays of the moon on the day of codjunction is drunk by
the progenitors — and they remain satisfied thereby for a
month. The progenitors are divided into three classes j—
Saumyas, Varhishadas^ and AgnishwSltta. In this wise, the
moon, with its cooling rays, nourishes the celestials in the
light fortnight and Pitris in the dark fortnight. It nourishes
the plants with its cool nectary aqueous atoms. And through
the development of those planfs it sustains men, animals and
insects and satisfies them with its radiance.

The chariot of Budha, the son of the moon^ is made of the
wind and fire and is drawn by eight bay hosres gifted with
the velocity of the wind. The huge car of Sukra (Venus)
is carried by earth-bone horses, equipped with a protecting
fender and a floor, armed with arrows and adorned with a
pennon. The magnificient car of Bhauma (Mars) is made
of gold, of an octagonal shape, drawn by eight steeds of a
ruby red originated from fire. Vrihaspati (Jupiter) in a
golden car drawn by eight pale-coloured steeds, travels, at
the end of the year, from one sign to another. Tfte slow-
paced Sani (Saturn) travels in a car drawn by piebald horses.
O Maitreya, the chariot of Rihu are drawn by eight black
horses,, which once harnessed are attached to it for ever. At
the time of lunar and solar ecclipses the Rihu travels from
tlie sun to the moon and comes back again from the moon to


Vt^^NUPURANAlii.


m

llie sun. The car of Ketu is is drawn by eight horses having
fieetness of the wind and of the dusky red colour of lac or
bf the smoke of burning straw.

I have thus described to you, 0 Maitreya, the chariots of
the nine planets all of which are fastened to Dhruva by
aerial cords. To Dhruva are attached the orbs of all the
planets, asterisiils and stars. And they all move in their
respective orbits being kept in their places by their respec-
tive b^ds of air. As many are the stars so many are the
aerial cords by which they are fastened to Dhruva. As they
turn ro^nd they cause the pole-star to revolve. As the
oilman goes round the spindle and makes it revolve, s6
the planets revolve suspended by the aerial cords which are
also whirling round a centre. The air is called Prav§ha
because it bears along the planets like a disc of fire driven by
the aerial wheel.

I have related to you, 0 forcraost^of Munis, that Dhruva is
fitted to the tail of the celestial porpoise : I shall now describe
in detail the constituent parts ; hear them as they are of great
efficacy. People are freed from the sins committed by them
during the day when they behold the celestial porpoise in the
hight. And those who behold it live as many years as there
are stars in it, in the sky or even more. Utt^npada is the
Upper jaw and sacrifice the lower jaw of that celestial por-
poise. Dhruva is situated on its brow and NSirayana in its
heart. The Aswinis are its two fore-feet and Varuna and
Aryamat are its two hinder legs. Samvatsara is its sexual
organ and Mitra is its organ of execretion. Agnij Mahendra
Kasyapa and Dhurva are successively placed in its tail ;
^hich four stars in this constellation never set.

I have thus related to you the situation of the earth and
the stars. I had ahready described to you the Varshas and
rivers and the animals living there. I shall again describe
them in short : hear them.

From the twaters which constitute the petson of Vishnu

20


VtSMMUl'UftANAM.


iS4

Originated the lotus-shaped earth with its seas and rtiOUrtw
tains. The stars are Vishnu, the words are Vishnu: forests,
mountains, regions, streams, seas are Vishnu — all that is, all
that shall be — all that is not are Vishnu. The glorious Vishnu
is identical with knowledge. He has got endless forms but is
not a substance. All the mountains, oceans 'and the various
divisions of the earth \^ou must consider to be the illusions of
the apprehension. When knowledge is pure, real, universal,
independent of actions, freed from defect then the varieties of
substance, which are the fruits of the tree of desire, aease to
exist in matter. What is substance ? What thing is th^ \5^hi(:h
has got no beginning, no middle and no end ? And which is of
one uniform nature ? How can that object be called real which
is subject to change and which reassumes no more its original
character ? The earth is seen as a jar ; the jar is divided into two
halves which are again broken into pieces : they again become
dust and the dust is again reduced into atoms. Is this reality ?
And although it is considered so by man it is because his
self-knowledge is obstructed by his own acts. Therefore,
0 Brahman, there is nothing anywhere, or anything real at
any time save discriminative knowledge. On account of the
diversity of their actions, people, having diverse temperaments,
consider that one knowledge as manifold. Knowledge per-
fect and pure, freed from pains and renouncing attach-
ments towards all these which cause affliction — knowledge,
single and eternal is the supreme Vasudeva, besides whom
there is nothing. I have thus communicated to you the
truth — the knowledge which is truth ; and all that differs from
it is false. That which is seen by the knowledge is but
illusion of a temporal and wordly nature. I have also des-
cribed to you the sacrifice, the victim, the fire, the priests^
the acid, juce, the celestials, the desire for heaven, the path
followed by acts of devotion and the worlds that are their
outcome. In this universe which I have described to yoUi
only those people travel who are subject to the influence of


VISHNUPURANAM.

actions. But he, who knows Vasudeva to be eternal, immuta-
ble, and of one unchanging, universal form, should so perform
them that he may enter into the deity.


SECTION XIIL


MaitrEYA said O respected Sir, all that I ask of
you, has been perfectly related by you, namely the situation
of the earth, seas, mountains, rivers, and planets, the system
of the three worlds of which Vishnu is the support ; you have
also related that the holy knowledge is pre-eminent. You
said that you w^ould relate the story of Bharata, the lord of
the earth : it becomes you now to relate that. Bharata, the
protector of the earth, lived at the holy pilgrimage of SalagrSm.
And he was engaged in devotion with his mind ever attached
to Vasudeva. Living at a sacred place he was always devoted
to Hari : Why then he failed to obtain final liberation, 0
twice-born one ? And why was he born again as a Brahmin,
0 foremost of Munis? It becomes you to relate this/^

ParaSARA said : — The illustrious lord of the earth, 0
Maitreya, lived for a long time at Sttlagrim having his mind
wholly devoted to the glorious God. And having been con-
sidered, on account of his kindness and other. virtues, the
foremost of the virtuous, he secured in the highest degree,
the entire control over bis mind. The Raja was ever repeat-
the names Yajnesa, Achyuta, Goyinda, Madhava, Ananta,
Keshava, Krishna, Vishnu, Hrishikesa. And nothing else
than this did he utter even in his dreams : nor did he meditate
'^Pon anything, but those names and their significance. He


VISHNUPURANAM.


I5<5

accepted fuel, flowers and holy grass for the worship of the
deity and did he celebrate no other religious observance
being entirely given to disinterested abstract devotion.

One day he went to the river MahSnadi for the purpose of
ablution. And having bathed there he engaged in after
ceremonies. Whilst thus engaged there came to the same spot
a doe big with young who had come out of the forest to drink
of the stream. Whilst the doe was drinking there was audible
a dreadful uproar of a lion capable of striking terror into all
creatures. Thereupon, the doe, greatly terrified, jump^3 out of
the water on the banks ; on account of this great leap her
fawn was suddenly brought forth and 'fell into the river.
And beholding it carried away by the stream^ the king
suddenly caught hold of the young one and saved it from
being drowned. The injury which the doe had received
on account of the violent exertion proved fatal. She lay down
and died. Having observed this the royal ascetic took the
fawn in his arms and came back to the hermitage. There he
fed it and nursed it every day : and under his fostering care
it throve and grew up. It frolicked about the hermitage and
grazed upon the grass in its neighbourhood. And sometimes
afraid of a tiger it used to come to the ascetic. In this wise
the young one sometimes wandered far away in the morning
and came back to the hermitage in the evening and frolicked
in the leafy bower of Bharata.

His mind, 0 twice-born one, was thus attached to that
animal, playing either in the neighbourhood or at some dis-
tance and he was unable to think of anything else. And the
king, although he had severed all bonds of attachments to
wards his friends, his kingdom, his son and wife, grew
inordinately attached to this fawn. When absent for an
unusually long time he would think that it had been carried
away by wolves, devoured by a tiger or slain by a lion. He
used to cry out, — The earth is embrowned with the prints of
its hoops. What has become of the fawn that was born for


VfSHNUPURANAM.


* 57 .


iny delight? How happy I should become if he had come
back from the forest. I felt his budding antlers rubbing
.against my arm. These tufts, of saered grass, the heads of
which have been nibbed by his new teeth, look like pious
lads chanting the Shama-Veda.'

Whenever’this fawn used to absent itself for a long time
from the hermitage the ascetic would think thus. And he
was delighted and his countenance grew animated whenever it
neared him. His mind being thus engrossed by the fawn his
abstraction was interrupted although he had renounced family,
wt^lfh and kingdom. His mind became unsettled with the
wanderings of the fawn. Whenever it wandered away to a
great distance the king’s mind followed it and when it was
silent his mind became settled. Thus in the course of time
the king became subject to its influences and was watched by
the deer with tearful eyes like a son mourning for the father.
And the king, when he died, saw the young fawn only before
him ; and having his mind engrossed by him, O Maitreya, he
did not see anything else.

On account of such feeling at such an hour be was born
again in Jambumarga forest as a deer with the faculty of
recollecting his former life. Cherishing a distaste for the
world on account of tliis recollection he left his mother and
again repaired to holy place of Salagram. Living there upon
dry grass and leaves he expatiated the acts which had led to
his being born in such a condition : and upon his death he
was born as a Brahmin still retaining the recollection of his
former life. He was born in a devout and illustrious family of
3-scetics who rigidly observed devotional practices. Having
been gifted with true knowledge and acquainted with the
spirit of all sacred writings he observed soul as contrddistin-
guished from Prakriti (matter). And acquainted with the
knowledge of self he observed the celestial and all other
beings as the same. When he was invested with the Brahmini-
thread he did not read the Vedas with a preceptor, did not


VISHNUPURANAM.


perform the ceremonies nor did he read the scriptures. And
requested again and again he replied incoherently in ungram-
matical and unpolished speech. His body was unclean and
he used to wear dirty clothes. Saliva dribbled from his
mouth and he was treated with hatred by the people.
Undue respect from the people obstructs abstraction and
hence the ascetics, disregarded by people, attain to the con-
summation of their asceticism. Without polluting the way
treaded by the saints the ascetics should so behave that the
ordinary folk might hate them and not come in thdir com-
pany. Having thus thought of this saying (Bharata) 'gifted
with high intellect assumed the appearance of a crazy idiot
in the eyes of the people. He used to live on raw' pulse,
potherbs, wild fruit and grains of corn and whatever came in
his way as a part of necessary but temporary infliction.

On the death of his father he was set to work in the field
by his brothers and nephews and fed by them with wretched
food. He w'as firm and stout like a bull and used to act like
a ^simpleton and people used to make him work and give
him food only as his wages.

Once on a time the gate-keeper of the king of Sauvira, re-
garding him as an idle uneducated Brahmin, considered him
a worthy person to work without pay and took him into his
master^s service to assist in carrying the palanqtiin. One day
0 Brahman, the king wished to go in palanquim to the
hermitage of the great sage Kapila, situated on the banks
of the river Ikshumati, to consult the sage, who was conversant
with the virtues leading to liberation, what as most desirable
in a world abounding with care and sorrow. And he was
one of those, who had, at the order of the head servant,
been compelled to carry the palanquin gratituously. And
that Brahman, gifted with the only universal knowledge and
recollecting former birth, although compelled to do this,
belre the burden as the means of expatiating the sins for which
was desirous to atone. While the other bearers proceed-


VlSHNUPURANAM.

ed with alacrity, he, fixing his eyes upon the pole, moved tar-^
dily. And perceiving the palanquin carried unevenly the hing
exclaimed *Ho bearers | what is this ? keep equal space/ Still
it went on unsteadily and the king again cried out. ‘What is
this? How irregularly are you going ?’ When this had again
and again taken place the palanquin bearers at last replied
to the king, ‘‘It is this man who lags in his space/ ‘How
is this’ said the king to the Brahmin, -Are you exhausted?
You have carried your burden only a little way. Are you
unable to bear exhaustion? But you look very robust’ To
which rti6 Brahmin replied— ‘It is not I, 0 king, who am
robust nor is it I who carry your palanquin. I am not
exhausted, O king ! nor am I capable of fatigue." The
king said, ‘I distinctly perceive that you are stout and the
palanquin is carried by you, and a heavy burden is weari-
some to all persons.’ The Brahmin said : ‘Tell me first what
you have distinctly seen of me and then you may distinguish
ray properties as strong or weak. The statement, that you
behold the palanquin borne by me or placed on me, is unreal.
Listen, 0 king, to my arguments about it. Both the feet are
placed on the ground : the legs are supported by the feet ;
the thighs rest upon the legs ; and the belly rests upon the
thighs ; the chest is supported by the belly and the arms and
shoulders are supported by the chest ; the palanquin is
carried by the shoulders and then how can it be conside 2 *ed
as my burden ? This body which is seated in the palanquin
IS known as ‘thou’ thence what is elsewhere called this is
here distinguished as thou and I. I and thou and others arc
tnade of elements and elements, influenced by qualities, assume
a bodily shape. Qualities depend on acts, and acts perpe-
trated in ignorance influence the condition of all beings. The
soul is pure, imperishable, tranquil, devoid of qualities, distinct
^rom nature and is without increase or diminution ; and if it is
freed from increase or diminution then with what properity
you say to me, ‘I see that you are robust ? If the palan-


l60 VISHNUPURANAM.

quih IS placed on the body, the body on the feet, the feef
the ground, then the burden is carried as much by you as by
me. Why are not others, 0 king, feeling the burden of this
palanquin. If I am exhausted with a burden that is being
carried on another’s shoulder, then why with the weight of this
palanquin, people may be worn out with the weight of moun-
tains, trees, houses and even of the earth, ^\'1len the nature
of men is different, either in its essence or its cause, then it
may be said that fatigue is to be undergone by me. The
material, with which the palanquin is made, is the substance
of you and me and of all others being a collection of Elements
collected by individuality.’ *' •

Parasara said : — Having said this the Brahman became
silent and went on carrying the palanquin ; the king too speedi-
ly got down from it and touched his feet. The king said :
0 Brahman, leave off the palanquin and be propitiated with
me. Tell me who art thou under the disguise of a fool?
The Brahman replied 'Hear me, king. Who I am it is not
possible to say; I go anywhere for receiving the fruits
of good and bad luck. The body is produced for the enjoy-
ment of pleasure and endurance of pain. Pleasure and pain
originate from virtue and vice ; therefore the soul assumes
bodily shape for enjoying pleasure and enduring pain conse-
quent upon virtue and vice. The universal cause of all living
creatures is virtue or vice, why therefore enquire after the
cause of my coming to this earth.’

The KI^^G said That virtue and vice' are the' causes
of all actions and that people migrate into various bodies for
receiving their consequences, there is not the least doubt about
it ; but as regards what you have said that it is not possi-
ble for you to say who you are, it is a matter which I wish
to have explained. 0 Brahman, how cannot a man declare
himself to be that which he (really) is : there can be no harm to
one^s self from applying to it the word V

The Brahmana said To use the word ‘I’ undoubted!/


VlSHNlUPtJftANAM.


m

is ddrimental ; but it is not improperly used if it is applied
merely to the souL But the term is erroneous in as much
as it conceives that to be the self or soul which is not self
or soul. The tongue articulates the word ‘P assisted by the
lips, the teeth and the palate ; and these are the origin of
the expre9ion,*as they are the causes of the production of
speech.

If by these instruments speech can utter the word T it is
not at all proper to say that speech itself is ‘1/ 0 king, the

body o{*a man having hands, feet and other limbs is composed
of ^various parts : to what part shall we apply the word ‘P ?
If another being had existed in this body quite different from
me, then it may be said, 0 king, that this is I, that is the
other i while one soul inhabits the whole body, then such
questions as “ Who are you ? Who am i ?” are useless. Thou
art a monarch ; this is a palanquin : these are the bearers :
these are thy followers i yet it is untrue that these are Ihine.
This palanquin, in which thou art seated, is made of timber
got from trees. Then tell me, what name, tree, timber or
palanquin, shall be applied to it, O king. The people shall
not say that their monarch is seated on a tree or on a timber
but they shall say that he is in the palanquin. The artificial
assemblage of the pieces of timber is called the palanquin :
judge yourself, therefore, O king, in what the palanquin
differs from the wood. Again consider the sticks of the
umbrella, in their separate state. What then is the umbrella?
Apply this argument to thee and to me. A man, a woman,
a cow, a goat, a horse, an elephant, a bird, a tree, are names
given to various bodies, which they assume on account of
their primitive actions. Man. is neither a god, nor a man, nor
a beast, nor a tree : these are the various shapes which he
assumes on account of his acts. 0 king, your name is
Vasuraja and another name is Raj abhat— besides you have
sot various other names^but none of these names is real
and is nothing but the work of imagination. And what thing

2X


i 62


VISHNUPURANKV.


is there in the world, 0 king, which being subject to changes,
does not in the course of time, go by different names? You
are called the king of the world, the son of your father, the
enemy of your foes, the husband of your wife, the father of your
children, wliat name the shall I apply to you ? What is your
situation ? Are you the head or the belly ? Or are they yours ?
Are you the feet or are they yours ? You are, 0 kin^, separate
in nature from the members of your body. Then considering
properly, do you think who I am. And since the truth
has been got at, how is it posible for me to recogflize the
distinction and to apply to my individual the expression I./ "


SECTION XIV.


ParasarA said : — Having heard his words pregnant with
the true essence of things the king humbly said to the twice-
born one, ; ‘ What you have said, 0 revered sir, is undoubt-
edly the truth — but in hearing tliis my mind has been greatly
worked up. What you have shown, 0 twice-born one, in
various creatures to be understanding and discriminative
knowledge, is very grand and distinct from plastic nature, f
have not carried the palanquin nor is it placed on my shoul-
ders. The body, which has carried the palanquin, is different
from me. The three qualities influence the actions of the
animals and these three qualities are again influenced by
destiny. This reaching my ears, 0 tbou conversant with
profound truth, my mind has been greatly disturbed for know-
ing that real and holy truth. 0 twke-born, I had already


VISHNUPURANAM.


163


addressed myself for going to the great ascetic Kapila, to
learn of him what in this life is the most desirable object.
But what, you have said in the interim, has attracted my mind
towards you for being acquainted with tlie profound truth.
0 Brahmin, the great ascetic Kapila is a portion of the
glorious Vishnu, who is at one with all elements. He is born
on earth to remove the illusions of the world. But what you
have said couvinces me that the great Kapalia, for my well-
being, has appeared within my vision. To me, who am thus
asking, 0 twice-born one, explain what is the best of things,
for you arc an ocean overflowing with the waters of the
divine wisdom.' The Brahmana said— ‘ You ask me, 0 lord
of earth, what is the best of all things, not the great end of life.
There are many things which are best in the world and there
are many truths of life. 0 king, sorpe worshipping the gods
desire for wealth, prosperity, children or kingdom: these are the
best things in their estimation. A sacrifice that gives
heavenly pleasures is also the best. That, which gives
best rewards though not asked for, is also the best. To him, who
with concentration meditates upon the great soul, union wdth
it is the best. Thus there are hundreds and thousands of
best things but these are not profound truths. Hear, I shall
describe to you what is the profound truth. If wealth is the
end of life then why do people spend it for the acquisition
of piety and for acquiring desired-f or objects? 0 lord of
men, if son is the end of life then the father of that son is
another's end of life and he again is another’s. If then every
action becomes the end of every cause then there exists no
supreme or final truth in this world. And if the acquirement
of sovereignty be characterized as the great end of life then
finite ends would sometimes be and some times cease to be. If
you consider the rites laid down by Rik, Yayur and Shama
Vedas as the ends of life, hear what I have got to say on that
head. Anything, that is the outcome of the instrumentality
of earth, partakes of its character and consists of clay*


l64 VISHNUPURANAM.

So any act, that is performed by such perishable things as
fuel, clarified butter and Kusha grass, must be in nature
perishable. The great end of life must be considered by
wise men as eternal and it would be transient if it were
accomplished through transitory things. If you consider
that which gives no reward to be the true end* of life then
that which brings on final liberation is not the true end of
life. If the union of the individual soul with the Great soul
is considered as the supreme end of life then this becomes
false : for one substance cannot become substantially at!fother.
Thus there are undoubtedly very many best things in<^tbis
world : hear from me, in short 0 king, the true end of life.
It is soul, one, all-pervading, uniform, perfect supreme over
nature, freed from birth, growth and destruction, omnipresent
undecaying, made up of t^ue knowledge, independent and
not connected with unreal things, with name, species and
the rest and in time, present, past and future. The spirit,
which is essentially one in one’s own and in all other bodies,
is the true wisdom of one who knows i lie unity and the true
principles of things. As air spreading all over the world going
through the perforation of a fiute is distinguished as the notes
of the scale so the (true) nature of the great spirit is one though
it assumes various forms consequent upon the fruits of
actions. When the difference, between the various froms*
such as that of god and man, is destroyed then the distinc-
tion of things ceases.”


- 00 -


SECTION XV.


JPaRaSARA said — Having heard those words the king
became speeoliless and engaged in meditation and the Brahm-
in told a tale illustrating the principles of unity.

The Brahmin said — ''Hear 0 great king what in the
days of yore Ribhu said for the instruction of illustrious
Nidagka. The great patriarch Brahma had a son by
Ribhu, who was by nature, 0 king, conversant with
true wisdom. A son of Pulastya by name Nidagha became
his disciple and (Ribhu) greatly delighted gave him
various instructions. 0, lord of men, he being thus ins-
tructed, Ribhu did not doubt of his being fully confirmed in
the doctrines of unity.

The residence of Pulastya was at Viranagara, a big,
beautiful city, situated on the banks of the river Devika.
And there lived in a beautiful grove near this river, Nidagha,
the desciple of Ribhu, acquainted with all devotional practices.
After a thousand divine years Ribhu went to the city of
Pulastya to see his pupil who stood at the gate after
the completion of the sacrifice to Viswadevas. He was
beheld by his pupil who came there specially to offer him
Arghya, (the usual present) and led him into the house.
And when his hands and feet were washed and he was
seated Nidagha requested him respectfully to eat.

Ribhu said — ‘0 foremost of Brahmins, tell me what food
is there in your house ? I do not like wretched food.'

Nidagha said— -‘There are cakes, of meal, rice, barley
and pulse in my house. Eat, 0 reverend Sir, whatever
pleases you best,^

Ribhu 0 twice-born one, these are wretched viands.
Give me sweet meats. Give me rice boiled with sugar,
wheaten cakes and milk with curd and molasses.’


i66


VISHNUPURANAM.


Nidagha said — '0 dame, quickly prepare whatever is
most excellent and sweet in my house and satisfy him
therewith/

Having been thus addressed the wife of Nidagha in
consonance with her husband’s behest prepared sweet food
and placed it before the Brahmin. And, 0 king, he then,
spoke humbly to the great Muni, who was delightedly eating
the meal.

Nidagha — ‘Have you been greatly delighted with this meal,
0 twice-born one ? Has your mind obtained contentment ?
Where is your residence, 0 Brahmin and where are you goiag?
And tell me, whence art thou coming, 0 twice-born one ?

Ribhu said : — ‘0 twice-born one, he, who has got appetite,
is pleased with his meals. I have got no appetite and hence
have got no satisfaction : why do you question me in vain? Hun-
ger is created, when by fire the earthly element is dried ; and
thirst is produced when the moisture of the body is absorbed
by internal heat. These are the tv. o functions of the body,

0 twice-born one, not mine — I am satisfied with that by which
they are removed. And pleasure and contcnment are the
faculties of the mind, 0 twice-born one ; ask those men about
it whose minds are affected by them. As regards your three
other questions — Where I dwell, wither I go and wbenca

1 come, hear my reply.

Man goes everywhere and penetrates everywhere like
the ether. Then is it rational to ask “Where is thy residence?
Whence are you coming ? And where will you go ? lam not
coming from anywhere. I shall not go anywhere and I
do not live in one place. Such is the case with you and other
men. What people see of you is not real you j what people^
see of other men are not real they^ and what people see of
me is not real /. I made distinction between the sweetened
and not sweetened food only to hear of your opinion about
that : do thou hear my explanation about this, 0 twice-born
one. Is there anything really sweet and not sweet to hi*®


VISIINUPURANAM.


16}


wlio takes meals ? That which is considered sv»reet is no
longer so when it causes the sense of repletion, and that
which is not sweet, becomes so when a man considers it as
such. What food is there which is equally delightful from
the first to the middle and last ? As a house built of clay is
strengthened by fresh plaster so this earthly body is main-
tained by earthly ato^is. And barley, wheat, pulse, butter,
oil, milk, curds, treacle, fruits and the like are made of earthly
atoms. You have now understood what is sweet and what i»
not ; do* 2 ^ou so act that you may be impressed with the notion
of idetitity which leads to final liberation.”

Having heard those words explaining the true end of
life, the illustrious Nidagha humbly bowed to him and said—
“Be then propitiated with me, 0 twice-born one. Thou hast
come here for my welfare. Tell me whence thou hast come ?
Hearing thy words the infatuation of my mind is removed.^^

RibhU said : — “0 twice-born one, I am thy preceptor
Ribhu. I have come here to confer upon thee the true
knowledge. Now I depart ; for you have been acquainted with
the true end of life. Consider again this universe to be one
undivided nature of the supreme spirit Vasudeva.”

Having said *so be it' Nidaglia reverentially bowed to
and worshipped him. And Ribhu too repaired to his wished-
for quarter.

.. ■ .


SECTION XVI.


After tire expiration of another thousand years Ribhu
^gain repaired to that city for conferring knowledge upon
Tlie ascetic beheld Nidagha at the outside of the city
the king was about to enter it with a huge army and a
host-of relations. He saw his illustrious pupil staivding at a


t6S


vishnupuranam.


distance avoiding the crowd — his throat was parched with
hunger and thirst coesequent upon carrying thicket fuel and
ho'ly grass. Beholding Nidagha and saluting him Ribhu
aaid — ^VVhy are you standing aloof, 0 twice-born one V

Nidagha said : — “There is a great rush of people for the
lord of men is entering this huge and picturesque city ; I am
staying to avoid the crowd.’'

Ribhu said “0 foremost of twice-born one, who is the
king amongst these ? And who are his attendents. Me-
thinks you know all these. Tell me."

Nidagha said:- -“He, who is seated on the infufiated
elephant, huge as a mountain, is the king : and all others
are his attendents.”

Ribhu said ; — “You have simultaneosuly pointed out to me
both the king and the elephant, but you have not particularly
said, who is the king and which is the elephant. Therefore
0 illustrious one, tell me in particular, who is the king and
which is the elephant ; I am anxious to know it."

Nidagha said : — “ That which is under is the elephant
and one who is above is the king. Who is not aware, 0 twice-
born one, of the relation between that which bears and
that which is borne ?"

Ribhu said : — “ Explain to me in the way in which I can
understand it. What is meant by the Word underneath and
what is meant by the word above}

As soon as he had said this Nidagha jumped upon Ribhu
and said — Hear what you have asked of me. I am above
like the king, you are underneath like the elephant. I show
this example, 0 Brahman, for your better information. "

Ribhu said—** Onoremost of Brahmins, it seems that you
are as if the king "and \ am the elephant and tell me now
which of us two is you and which is /.”

Ribhu having s<^'This Nidagha, speedily got down and
falling at his feet saidA“ Sure thou art my saintly preceptof'
Ribhu. The mind of no other person is so much acquainted


VlSHi4Ut*URANAM. I69

\vitli the principles of unity as that of the mind of my pre-
teptot. Therefore I know that thou art he."

RiBHU said : — O Nidagha, I am your preceptor Ribhu.
Pleased with the attention which you had shown to me
before, I have come here to give you instructions O yol
gifted with a high mind. I have briefly described to you
the divine truth, the essence of which is the none-quality
of all."

Having said this the learned Ribhu went away. Nida-
gha, top by his instructions, was impressed with belief in
unity. He began to observe all beings in no way distinct
from him. And being devoted to Brahma he obtained final
liberation.

“ Therefore, 0 king, O thou, conversant with duty, do thou,
consider thyself as one with all beings, regarding equally
friend or foe. the same sky looks apparently as w^hite
or blue so Soul, v^aich is in reality one, appears diversified to
erroneous vision. That, which exists in the universe, is
one which is Achyuta. There is nothing distinct from Him.
He is I : He is thou : He is all : This universe is His form.
Give up therefore the misconceived notion of distinction."

ParASarA said The Brahmin having uttered this the
king became cognizant of the true end of life. He re-
nounced all idea of distinction and the Brahmin, who, on
account of the recollection of former lives, had obtained
perfect knowledge, now acquired liberation from future
births.

He, whb tvill tfeverentially hear this story of Bharata or
harrate it, will have his mind illuminated and will not mistake
the nature of individuality. And he who remembers it even
shall be considered an object of reverence.

The end of Part II.


{'•


22


PART III.


SECTION I.


E ITREYA said : — The situation of the earth and of seas
the spurn of the sun and the other planets, the creation of
the celestials and the rest and of the Rishis, the origin of the
four castes and of the brute creation and the stories of Dhruva
and Prahiad have been fully described by thee, my preceptor.
Do thou describe to me, O Venerable Sir, all the Manwan-
taras and all the presiding d'^^ies with Sakra as their chief.
I wish to hear this from you. ^

ParaSARA said I shall serially describe to you all the
Manwantaras that had passed away and all that shall take
place.

The first Manu was Swayambhuva. Then came SwArochisha
then Auttami, then Timasa, then Raivata, then ChAkshusa :
these six Manus have passed away. Vaivaswata, the son of
the ;sun now presides over the seventh Manwantara, which
is the present period.

The era of Swayambhuva Manu, which took place in the
beginning of Kalpa together with the celestials, saints and
other personages, has been related by me. I will now des-
cribe to you the period of SwArochisha Manu together with
the presiding deities, saints and his sons.

There flourished two classes of celestials in the Manwan-
tara of SwArochisha named PArAvatas and Tushitas— >and
the king of the celestials was the powerful Vipascbitj the
seven Rishis were Urja, Stambha, PrAni^, Dattoli, jRishabha,
Nischara, Arvarivat j and the sons of the Manu were Chaitra,


172


VISHNUPURANAM.


Kimpurusha and others. I have thus described to you the
second Manwantara. In the third Manwantara of Uttami,
SusSnti was the king of the celestials, who were severally
denominated as the SudhSimas, Satyas, Sivas, Pradersanas
and Vasavertis and each of these orders consisted of twelve
deities. The seven sons of Vasishtha were the seven celes-
tial saints and Aja, Parasu, Divya and others were the sons
of the Manu.

In the reign of Tamasa the fourth Manu, the Surupas,
Haris, Satyas and Sudhis were the orders of the Celestials
each consisting of twenty-seven. Sivi was their *kirig^ho
was named Satakratu by his performance of hundred sacri-
fices ; the seven Rishis were JyotirdhamSi, Prithu, K?lvya,
Chaitra, Agni, Vanaka and Pivara. The sons of Tlmasa
were the powerful kings Nara, Khyiti, Santahaya, Janujanglia
and others.

In the fifth Manwantara Raivata was the Manu : Indra
was their king and the celestials were Amit^lbhas, Abhutara*
jasas, Vaikunthas, and Sumedhasas each consisting of four-
teen divinities. The seven Rishis were HiranyaromS, Vedasri,
Urddhabihu, VedabMiu, SudhSman, Parj&nya and MahSmuiii.
The sons of Raivata were Balabandhu, Susambhavya, Satyaka
and other brave kings.

These four Manus, SwSrochishas, Uttami, TSmasa and
Raivata were born in the race of Pryavrata who propitiated
Vishnu by jiis devotions and obtained in consequence thereof
these ruler^of Manwantaras as his son.

In the sixth Manwantara ChSlkshusha was the Manu, when
Manojava became the king of the celestials who wer®
grouped as Adyas, Prastutas, Bhavyas, Prithugas, and the
high-minded Lekhas each consisting of eight divinities ; the
seven Rishis were Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttamn#
Madhu, Abhinaman and Sahishnu. The sons of Chakshusha
were the mighty Uru, Puru, Satadyumna and other king*
Ihic earth.


VISHNUPURANAM.


173

O twice-born one, the Manu, who reigns in the present
period is the wise and illustrious lord of obsequies the
offspring of the sun. The celestials are the Adityas, Vasus
and Rudras. Their king is Purandara. Vasishtha, Kasyapa,
Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, Vis warn itra and Bharadwaja are
the seven Rishis. And the nine pious sons of Vaivaswata
Manu are the kings Ikshawku, Nabhaga, Dhrista, Sanyati,
Narishyanta, Nabhanidishta, Karusha, Prishadhra and the
well known Vasumat.

Tilt incomparable energy, of Vishnu at one with the
qi;ality of goodness and preserving all created things, rules
overall the Manwantaras in the shape of divinity. From a
part of that divinity Yajna was born in the SwSiyambhuva
Manwantara the will-begotten child of Akuti. And at the
arrival of the Manwantara of Swarochisha the irrepressible
Yajna was born as Ajita along with Tushitas the sons of
TushitS. And at the advent of the Manwantara of Auttama,
Tushitas were born as the excellent Satyas, of Satya. In
the Manwantara of Tamasa, Satya became Hari along with
the Haris, the children of Hari. And in the Raivata Man-
wantara of Sambhuti the excellent Hari was born as Manasa
along with the celestials called Abhutarajasas.

In the next Manwantara Vishnu was born of Vikunthi,
as Vaikuntha along with the celestials called Vaikunthas. In
the present period Vishnu w^as again born as Vamana the son
of Kasyapa by Aditi. With three paces he conquered the
worlds and having released them from all disturbances he gave
them to Purandara. By these seven persons, in the various
Manwantaras, the created beings have been preserved. He
is called Vishnu because his energy pervades the whole world
from the root Vts to ‘ enter’ or ^pervade :* and all the celes-
tials, the Manus, the kings of the gods are but the imperso-
nations of the power of Vishnu.


SECTION II-


M^AITREYA said : — 0 foremost of BrShmins, you have
described to me the seven Manwantaras that have passed
away. It behoves you to describe now the Manwantaras that
shall take place in future.

Parasara said San jnSl, the daughter of ViswaVaiwi^n,
was the wife of the sun, and bore him three children, the
Manu Vaivaswata, Yama and the goddess Yami. Beinf
unable to endure the fervours of her husband, she engagcc
ChSlya in his attendance and repaired to the forest to practise
devout austerities. Considering that Chaya as Sanjna, he gol
upon her three other children — Sanaischra (saturn) anothei
Manu Savarni and a daughter Tapati. Once on a time being
offended with Yama, the son of Sanjna, Chaya imprecated
a curse upon him and gave out to Yama and the sun that she
was not in reality Sanjna the mother of the former. (Having
heard this) the sun, by his meditation saw her as a mare in
the region of Uttara Kuru.

Thereupon assuming the shape of a horse the sun begot
upon Sanjna three other children the two Aswins, and
Revanta and brought her back to bis own house. To de-
minish his fervours Viswakarman placed him on his lathe
and reduced some of his effulgence ; to the eighth portion,
for more than which was insperable. The portions of the
divine Vaishnava effulgence that were in the sun being
filed off by Viswakarman, fell down shining on the earth
and the krtist constructed of them the discus of Vishnu— the
trident of Siva, the weapon of the god of wealth, the lance of
Kartikeya, and the weapons of the bther celestials : all these
Viswakarman made from the additional rays of the surv


VISIINUPURANAM.


*75


The son of Chaya, who was also called a Manu, was
Sivarni on account of his belonging to the same caste as his
elder brother the Manu Vaivaswata. He rules over the coming
or eighth Manwantara^ the details whereof and of those
following I shall now describe.

In the era when Savarni shall be the Manu the orders
of the celestials will be Sutapas, Amitabhas and Mukshyas,
each consisting of twenty-one divinities. The seven
Rishis will be Diptimat, GAlava, Rama, Kripa, Drauni : my
son VyStea will be the sixth and the seventh will be Rishya*
srii^. *The chief of the celestials will be Bali — the innocent
son of Virochona who, on account of Vishnu^s favour, is the
king of a portion of Patala. The sons of Savarni will be
Virajas, Arvarivas, Nirmoha and others.

0 Maitreya, Daksha-Savarni will be the ninth Manu.
The Paras, Marichigarbhas and Sudharmas will be the
three orders of the celestials each consisting of twelve divi-
nities. Indra Adbhuta will be their mighty king. Savana
Dyutimut, Bhavya, Vasu Medhatithi, Jyotishman and Satya,
will be the seven Rishis. Dhritaketu, Driptiketu, Panchahasta,
Niramaya, Prithusrava and others will be sons of the Manu.

In the tenth period Brahma-Savarni will be the Manu:
the celestials will be the Sudhamas, Viruddhas and Sata*
sankhyas : their king will be the powerful Santi. The
Rishis will be Havishman, Sukriti, Satya, Apammurtti,
Nabhaga, Apratimaujas and Satyaketu and the ten sons of
the Manu will be Sukshetra, Uttamaujas, Harishena and
others.

In the eleventh period Dharma-Savafni will be the
Manu and the leading celestials will be Vihangamas, Kama-
gamas and Nirmanaratis each consisting of thirty ; Vrisha
be their king. The Rishis will be Nischara, Agni-
fojas, Vapushman, Vishnu, Aruni. Havishman and Anagha.
Savarga, Sarvadharma, Devanika aivd others— the kings
sf the earth— will be the sons of the Manu.


t^6


VlSHNUPUtlANAM.


In the twelfth period Savarni, the son oE Rudra, will be
the Manu. Ritudhama will be the king of the gods who will
be Haritas Lohitas, Sutnanasas, and Sukarmas, each con->
sistingof fifteen divinities. The Rishis will be Tapaswi,
Sutapas, Tapomurtti, Taporati, Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti and
Tapodhana. And the Mann's sons will be Devayan, Upadeva,
Devareshta and others — who will be the powerful kings of
the earth.

In the thirteenth period Rauchya will be the Manu. The
gods will be the Sudhmanas, Sudharmans and Suk^rmarts
each consisting of thirty-three. Their king Will^ ^be
Divaspati. The Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersin, Nish-
prakampa, Nirutsuka, Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutpas.
The sons of the Manu will be Chitrasena, Vichitra, and
others who will be the kings of the earth.

At the fourteenth period Bhautya will be the Manu and
Suchi will be the king of the celestials who will be the
Chakshushas, Pavitras, Kanishthas, Bhrajiras and Vavrtddhas^
The seven Rishis will be Agnibahu, Suchi, Sukra, Megadha,
Grighra, Yukta and Ajita. Uru, Gabhira, Bradhna and others
will be the sons of Manu who will be the kings* of the
earth.

At the end of every four Yugas the Vedas disappear. And
the seven Rishis descending on the earth again establish*
them. In every Krita age the presiding Manu beeonnes the
legislator and during the Manwantaras the (Tefestiais of the
various classes receive sacrifices. And those born* in the race
of Manus lord over the earth for that period. In every Man-
wantara, the Manu, the seven Rishis, the king of the gods
and the sons of the Manu rule over the earth. In this wise/
O Brahmin, fourteen Manwantaras constitute a tCalpa. Aod
it is succeeded by a night of similar duration.

And the glorious Jannardana, wearing form of Hrahn»;
the essence of all things, the lord of all, the creator of
involved in his own illosions and having swalbwod


VtShNUPURANAM.


thre^ spheres, sleeps upon the serpent Sesha in the midst
of the ocean. And awaking after sleep the undecaying Hari,
tesorting to the quality of foulness, creates fi.ll things
as they were before. And by virtue of a part of his essence
which is identical with the quality of goodness he, as the
Manus, the celestials, theit chiefs, kings, as well as the seven
Rishis, preserves the universe. I will now explain to you*
0 Maitreya, how Vishnu, who is regarded as Providence all
through the four ages, preserved (the universe).

In the krita Yuga, He, for the behoof of all creatures,
Was,h^)rn*as the great ascetic Kapila and imparted to then!
true wisdom. In the Treta Yuga he was born as the Lord
Paramount and repressed the wicked and protected the three
Worlds. In the Dwapara Yuga He was born as VySsa and
divided the Vedas into four divisions which were again
divided into various branches ; which Were again divided into
diverse sections. And at the end of Kali the fourth Yuga,
He shall be born as Kalki and shall lead again the wicked
to the paths of piety. Thus the endless Vishnu creates*
preserves and destroys the universe. And there is none else
but Him. 1 have thus described to you, 0 Brahman, the
feal nature of that Great Being who is at one with all things,
and besides whom there is nothing else, nor has there been,
aor will there be either here or elsewhere. I have also
described to you all the Manwantaras with their presiding
deitiesi What else do you wish to hear ?'*


SECTION III.


Maitreya said : — I had been informed before by you
that this universe is but the manifestation of Vishnu, that it
exists in Him and that there is nothing else distinct from
Him. I wish now to hear how the illustrious Veda*vyasa
divided the Vedas into varfous sections in diverse Yugas,
Describe to me, 0 great Muni, who were the VyAsas in
different eras, and what were the various divisions of the
Vedas?

pARASARA said : — 0 Maitreya,— The great tree of Vedas
has a thousand branches. It is impossible for me to describe
them at length. Listen, I shall, however, describe them in
short.

0 great Muni, the glorious Vishnu, in the form of VySsa,
at every DwSpara Yuga, for the benefit of mankind, divided
the Vedas into various branches. Beholding the diminution
of the prowess and energy of mankind. He, for their behoof,
divided the Vedas into various divisions. The form, in which
the glorious Vishnu divides the Vedas, is named Veda-vySsa.
Listen, I shall now describe to you, 0 Muni, who were the
VySsas in their respective periods and how they divided the
Vedas.

In the Vaivaswata Manwantara in the Dwapara age, the
Risbis divided the Vedas twenty-eight times and accord-
ingly twenty-eight VyAsas have passed away who divided
the Vedas in their respective periods into four. In the
Dwapara age the distribution was made by Swayambhuva
(Brahma) himself; in the second period Veda-vyasa was
theManu; in the third, Usana8;inthe fourth, Vrihaspatii
in the fifth, Savitri ; in the sixth, Mrityu ; in the seventh,
Indra;in the eighth, Vasishtha ; in the ninth, Saraswata ; w
the tenth, Tridhaman ; in the eleventh, Trivreshan ; in tb«
twelfth, Bbaradwaja; in the thirteenth, Antariksha f in tbf


VISHNUPURANAM.


* 79 .


fourteenth, Vapra j in the fifteenth, Trayyaruna j in the six-
teenth, Dhananjaya ; in the seventeenth, Kritanjaya; in the
eighteenth, Rina ; in the nineteenth, Bharadwaja ; in the
twentieth, Goutama ; in the twenty-first, Uttama, also called
HaryRttn 5; in the twenty-second,Vena,who is otherwise nained
RJjasravas; in»the twenty-third, SomasushinSpana, alsoTrina-
Vindu; in the twenty-fourth, Riksha, the descendant of Bhrigu,
who is known by the name Valmiki ; in the twenty-fifth my
father Sakti was the Vyasa ; I was the VySsa of the twenty-
sixth period ; and was succeeded by Jaratkaru : the Vyasa,
in tb^ twenty-eighth period, was Krishna Dwaipayana. These
are the twenty-eight* elder Vyasas who divided the Vedas into
four in the preceding Dwapara ages. In the next DwSpara,
Drauni, the son of Drona, woll be the Vyasa when my son
the Muni Krishna Dwaipjiyana, who is the actual VySsa,
shall cease to be.

The syllable Om is defined to be the eternal monosyllabic
Brahma. The word Brahma is derived from the root Vriha
to increase because it is infinite and because it is the cause
by which the Vedas developed. The regions, Bhur, Bhuva
and Swa exist in Bhrama, who is Om. Glory to Brahma,
who is known as Om and who is at one with Rik, Yajur, and
ShSlma. Salutation unto Brahma who is the cause of
creation and destruction, who is the great and mysterious
cause of the intellectual principle (Mahat), who is devoid
of limit in time and space and is freed from diminution and
decay, from whom proceeds worldly illusion and in whom
exists the end of soul through the qualities of goodness and
foulness. He is the refuge of those who are acquainted
with the Sinkhya philosophy and those who have mastered
their thoughts and passions. He is the invisible and im-
perishable Brahma, assuming various forms but invariable
in substance and the chief self-create principle. He lightens
the recesses of heart, is indivisible, radiant, undecaying
-and multiform. Salutation unto this supreme., Brahma,


VISHNUPURANAM.


i8o

cv«r and ever— this form of Vasudeva who is at one with
the supreme spirit. This Brahma, althongh diversified as
threefold, is identical, is the lord of all, exists as one in all
creatures, and is perceived as many on account of their
diversity of understanding. He, composed of Rik, Shama
and Yajur Vedas, is at the same time their essence as He
is the soul of all embodied spirits. He, though at one with the
Vedas, creates them and divides them into various branches.
He is the author of these divisions — He is those branches
collectively ; for that eternal lord is the essence of true
knowledge.


SECTION IV

—

Parasara said : — The original Veda, divided into four
branches, consists of one hundred thousand Stanzas..and
from it originated sacrifice of ten kinds<— the fulBller of all
desires. In the twenty-eighth DwApara era, my son Vyte
divided the Veda into four branches.

As the Veda was divided by the intelligent Veda-VySsa,
to it was divided at various other periods by myself and
other VySsas. In this way, 0 foremost of twice-born ones,
the Veda is divided into various branches and the people of
the four Yugas perform sacrifices. 0 Maitrcya, know^
this Krishna DwaipAyana VyAsa, as the NArAyana,< for
who else on this earth could have composed the Malwr*
bhArata ? How in the Dwipara age the Veda was divided
by my high-souled son, I shall describe, 0 Maitreya, : do
thou hear it.

When VySsa was engaged by Bvahtn} in the work
arranging the Vedas, he took four persons, proficieiit in
these works^ a$ his discifdeo. He appointed PbSar reader


VISHNUPURANAM.


l9f

ef the Rich^ Vaisamp&yana of Yajush; and Jaimini of the
Sb^ma Veda. And Sumantu, who was acquainted with the
Atharva-Veda, was also the disciple oi the learned Vy&sa,.
He alst) took Suta^ who was named Lomaharshana, as his
<Jesciple in history and PurSnas.

There wa? but one Yaju Veda, which he divided into
four parts— from which originated the sacrificial rite that is
performed by the four orders of priests. In this, the Muni
enjoined the Adhwaryu to recite the prayers of Yajuns ; the
Hotri to sing the hymn of (Rik-Veda); the Udgatri to sing
the# hymns of ShSlma-Veda and the Brahman to utter the
formulae of the Atharva-Veda. He then compiled the Rig-
Veda with the collection of these hymns (Richas) ; the Yajur-
Veda with the prayers and directions named Yajush ; and
Shima Veda, with those called Shama ; and with the Atharvas
he laid down the function of the Brahman and the rules for
the performance of all the ceremonies by kings.

In this way the huge Veda tree was divided into four
stems, which soon spread out into an extensive forest. 0
Brahmin, Paila first divided the Rig-Veda and gave the two
Sanhitas to Indra-Pramati and to Bhashkali. Bhashkali again
divided his Sanhita into four and handed them over to his
disciples Baudhya, Agnimathara, Yajtiawalka, and Parasara;
ai!id they studied these secondary branches from the original
0 Muni.

Indira-Pramati, 0 Maitreya, gave his Sanhita to his
oanimoiis son Mandukeya, which thence descended through
^cessivc generations and disciples. Vedamitra, other-
'^96 called Sikalya, read the same Sanhita and divided
it into five Sanhitas which he gave to his disciples nanted
severally Mudgala, Goswalu,, VStsya, SAliya askd Sisira.
SHkapuvni made a different classification of the original
Sanhita into three and added a Nirukta (glossary) consti-
tuting a fourtrh. And he gave these three Sanhjtas to his
three pupils, Kraunch, Vaitalaki, and Valaka. And , the


VISHNUPURANAM.


182

glossary was given to the fourth who was named Niruktakrit
and who was versed in the Vedas and their various branches.

In this way,* 0 foremost of twice-born ones, Vedas, their
divisions and Sub*divisions sprang up. Bash kali com-
posed three other Sanhitas which he gave to his three pupils
Kalayani, Gargya, and Kathajava. These are they by whom
various Sanhitas have been composed.


SECTION V.


P ARASARA said : — ^The high-minded disciple of Vyasa,
Vaisampayana made out twenty-seven branches of the tree
of Yajur-Veda and gave them to as many disciples, of whom
Yajnawalka, the son of Brahmarata was famous for piety
and obedience to his preceptor.

Formerly at one time the Munis had entered into a
covenant that any one of them, who at a certain time,
did not join a council held on mount Meru, should perpe-
trate the crime of Brahminicide within a period of seven
nights. Vaisampayana alone was not present at the ap-
pointed hour and so broke the engagement. And he ac-
cidently slew the child of his sister by a kick of his foot
Thereupon he said to his disciples— “0 my disciples, do
ye engage in such ceremonies as will remove the sin con-
sequent upon the destruction of a Brahmin on my behalf*
You need not hesitate in this.” Thereupon Yajnawalka
said— ** What is the use of troubling these miserable
and inefficient Brahmans? 1 shall alone perfom this
nance.” Thereupon the high-minded preceptor, enragoA
said to him— thou who hast insulted these Brahmins>
relinquish all thou hast learnt from me. Dost thou
that these Brahmins are inefficient ? What Is the use of ^


ViSHNUPURANAM.


fSj


disciple who disobeys my commands ** Whereto Yajna^
walka replied--*'^ I spoke this out of my devotion to thee. !t
is more than enough— do thou take, 0 twice-born cne, what
I have learnt from thee.”

Having said this, he ejected from his stomach the texts of
Yajush stained in blood. He then went away. The other
pupils ofVaisampayana transforming themselves into partridges
(Tittiri) picked up the texts which he had ejected, which, in
consequence thereof, were called Taittriya and the pupils
were named the Charaka professors, of tlie Yajush, from
Cha^afiti * — Agoing through.’ YAjnawalka too, 0 Maitreya, who
was accomplished in devout practices engaged in propitiating
the sun, being desirous of recovering the texts of the Yajush.

YajNAWALKa said : — Salutation unto the sun who is the
gate of final emancipation, the spring of bright radiance,
the three-fold source of splendour as the Rig, the Yajur
and the Sama-Vedas. Salutation unto him, who is the
Aftnhhome^ sacrifice, the cause of the universe and who is
charged with radiant heat and the Sushumna ray. Salutation
unto him, who is identical with the idea of time and all its
divisions of hours, minutes and seconds, who is the visible
form of Vishnu, as the impersonation of the mystic Om«
Salutation unto him, who is gratification, who nourishes the
moon with his rays and feeds the manes and the gods with
nectar and ambrosia ; salutation unto the sun, who in the
form of three seasons distributes and absorbs the water in the
time of the rains, of cold and heat. Salutation unto Vaiva-
swata, who, alone as the lord of the world, dispels darkness
und who is clothed with the quality of goodness. Salutation
unto him, until whose rising people cannot perform religious
ceremonies, water does not purify and who is the source of

* That is performing the expiatory rites for their master.

t Therein another reading ylgntseeia Bkuiaya which professor Wilson has
i.f.,who as lire and the moon#


VlSMNUPUKAlfWy.


184

alt religious rites. Salutation onto him who is the cetctre
and source of purification. Glory to Savitri, to Surya, to
Bhaokara, Vaivaswata, to Aditya to the first-born of the
celestials and demons. Salutation unto him who is the eye
of the universe borne in a golden car whose banners scatter
ambrosia.

Parasara said : — Being thus eulogised by Yajnawalka
the sun assumed the form of a horse and said—'* Ask of me
what you desire.” Having bowed unto him Yajnawalka
said— “ Confer upon me a knowledge of those texts of’Yajusb
which even my preceptor does not know.” »- »

Being thus addressed, the sun gave to him the texts of
Yajush called Ayatayama which Vaisampayana even did
not know. Because these texts were imparted by the
sun in the form of a horse, the Brahmins who study this
portion are called Vajis (horses). Fifteen branches of this
school originated from Kanwa and other pupils of Yajnawalkav


SECTION VL


P arasara said : — Hear 0 Maitreya, how Jaimini, tfe
pupil of Vyasa, divided the branches of Sama-^Veda. The
son of Jarmini was Sumanta whose son was Stikarman.
They both studied the same Sanhita- under Janmini. The
latter composed Sahasra Sanhita which he gave to his
two pupils named Hiranyanabha, otherwise named Kau*
salya and Paushyinji. Fifteen pupils of the latter composed
as many Sanhitas and they were called the northern chanters
of SAman. Hiranyanabha had as many desciples whe
were called the easrern chanters of Saman. Lokakshmii
Kutliami, Kushidi and Langali were tfhe|pupils of.Paudhyinji ;
and by them and their descipleS; many other hranchcs wer0^


VISHNUPURANAM.


1^5

made. There was another learned disciple o( Hiranya-
n&bba by name Kriti who gave twenty^four Sanhitas to as
many pupils; who again divided Sama-Veda into various
branches.

I will now give you an account of the various branches
of tAtharva-Veda. The highly illustrious ascetic Sumanta
taught this Veda to his pupil Kabandha who divided it
into two and gave them to Devadersa and Pathya. The
disciples of Devadersa were Mandga, Brahmabali, Saul
k&yani|»and Pippiiada. Pathya had three disciples^ Jajalii
Kuj^daSi and Saunaka to whom were severally given
three Sanhit&s. Saunaka divided his Sanhit& into two and
gave them to his disciples Babhru and SaindhavAyan and
from them originated two schools the Saindhavas and
Munjakesas. The Sanhitls of the Atharva-Veda are divided
into live Kalpas or ceremonials ; namely Nakshatra Kalpa
or rules for worshipping the planets ; the Vait&na Kalpa
or rules for oblations ; the Sanhitl Kalpa or rules for sacri-
fices; the Angirasa Kalpa or incantations and prayers for
the destruction of enemies; the Santi KaIpa-<^or prayers
for averting evil.

The glorious Veda-Vyasa, conversant with the knowledge
of PurSnaSi composed a Paurgnik Sanhitg consisting of
historical and legendary traditionSj prayers and hymns
and sacred chronology. He had a distinguished pupil Suta^
who was otherwise named Romaharshana, to whom he
gave the Purftnas. Suta had six disciples, Sumati, Agni«
varchas, Mitrayu, SAnsapIyana, Akritavrana, who is other-
wise called Kgsyapa and Sgverni. The last three Composed
three principal Sanhitas and Romaharsana himself compiled
a fourth, which is named (after him) Romaharshanika. The
substance of these four Sanhitas is embodied in this Vishnu-
Pnrgna.

Brghma is the first of all the Purgnas. Those, who
are conversant with the knowledge of Purgnas, enumerate,
24 '


i86


VISHNUPURANWV.


them as eighteen— Brihma, Padma, Vaishnava, Saiva,
Bhagvata, NSradya, MSrkandeya, Ageney, Bhavishyat, Brahma
Vaivartta, Lainga, Varaha, Skanda, VSimana, Kaurmma,
Matsya, GSrura, BrahmSnda, The creation of the universe
and its successive generations, the genealogies of patriarchs
and kings, the Manwantaras, and the royal * dynasties are
described in the Puranas. The Purana, which I have des-
cribed to you, 0 Maitreya, is Vaishnava and is next to
Padma. And in every part, in the creation of universe
and the successive generations, in the description » of the
genealogies of the patriarchs it has declared the* glory of
the great Vishnu. There are fourteen principal kinds of
knowledge— namely, the four. Vedas, the six Angas,* the
MimSnsa (theology,) Nyaya (logic,) Dharma (the institutes of
law) and the Puranas. And they are enumerated as eighteen
with the addition of these four— Aur-Veda, medical science
taught by Dhunwantari ; Dhanur-veda, the science of archery,
taught by Bhrigu ; GhSndharba-Veda, the art of music, dan^
cing &(r. of which the 'Muni Bharata was the author ; and the
Artha Sastram or the science of Government, taught by
Vrihaspati.

There are three orders of Rishis— the royal Rishis or
princes who have devoted themselves to devotion as Viswa-
mitra ; divine Rishis or demi-gods, as NSrada ; and Brahman
Rishis, who are the sons of BrahmH as Vasishtha and others,

I have thus related to you the various branches of the
Vedas and their sub-divisions, the persons by whom they
made and the object with which they were ushured into exis-^
tence. Such was the division in all the Manwantaras. The
primitive Veda, which was instituted by Brahma at the begin-
ing of Kalpa, is eternal ; these branches are but its roodifica^
lions.

* These are the subsidiary portion of the Vedas— namely (o) SikshUt
tales for reciting prayers {b) Kalpa, ritual (c) Vyakarana, (grammcr) {d)
fHkia, glossary (c) Chanias, metre (0 Voytisk, astronomy.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


t8/

1 have thus related to you, Maitreya, the Vedas which
you desired to hear. What else do you wish to hear now ?


SECTION VII.


JIIaitreya said 0 twice-born one, you have related
to me what 1 have asked of you. I wish to hear one thing
more from you : Relate that to me. 0 great Muni, this egg
of Brahma, consisting seven zones, seven subterrestiaf re-
gions, and seven spheres, abounds in living creatures, large or
small, smaller and smallest, larger and largest. And there
Is not the eighth part of an inch where they do not dwell;
And all these are bound by chains of acts and at the end of
existence are subject to the power of Yama by whom they are
doomed to dreadful punishments. And being freed from
those inflictions they are born as celestials, men and the like;
And those living creatures, as Sastras inform us, perpetually
revolve. I wish to hear from you, performing what pure ac-
tions people are freed from subjection to Yama.

Parasara said :—0 Muni, hear from me what his grand-
father Bhishma said when this question was put to him by
the high-souled Nakula.

Bhlshma said : — 0 my son, there came on a certain time»
h friend of mine, a Brahmin from Kalinga country, to visit me*
He told me that he had put this question to an ascetic who
had the recollection of his previous.births. To which the Muni
replied What is now shall be (the same) in future* What
said by that intelligent sage proved to be true. When
that Iwice-born one was again accosted by me with due rever*


m


VISHNUWIIANAW,


eneei be'said that he had never found otherwise what had heeit
related to him. Once I put to him the same question which
you have asked. And he, remembering the words of the
Brahmin who retained the recollection of his former births,
said— "I shall reveal to you the mystery that was revealed to
me by the Brahmin retaining the recollection of his former
births and I shall describe to you a dialogue that took place
between Yama and one of his ministers.*^

The Brahmin of Kalinga said — ‘‘Beholdidg his own emis-
sary with a noose in hand approach, the Yama said to<his ears
'Never bring here any one who has obtained the sheltKy: of
the slayer of Madhu ; for I am the lord of all spirits but not
of the spirits of those who are devoted to Vishnu. I was ap-
pointed by Brahml,^ honored by the immortals, to ait in judg-
ment upon the good and had conduet of mankind. Hari is
my lord ^ 1 am not indepemient, for he can mete out punish-
ment to me. As gold, though (in reality) it is one substance,
appears diversified as bracelets, tiaras and earrings, so Hari^
Iboifgh |He is one appears many as gods, amimals and man.
As the drops of water, raised by wind from the earth, sink
again into the earth when the wind disappears, so gods, man
and animals created by the agitation of qualities are reunited
with the eternal with the end of disturbance. He, who rever^
entially bows unto Hari, whose lotus-feet are being meditated
upon by the celestials, is freed from all iniquities. Do you
avoid such a man who is freed from* all sinful bonds like
luito fire fed with clarified butter.' '

Having heard these words of Yama, his messenger, with
noose in hand, said ''Tell me, O Lord, how am I to distinguish
the worshipper of Hari, who is the Lord of all beings V* Yams
said—" Consider him* as the worshipper of Vishnu who never
swerves from the* duties asigned to his caste, who regards
with an impartial eye* his own self, his friends and enemkSf
does not steal nor injure any body and whose mind is freed
brom all passions. Know him to be a follower of Hari) whose


VISHNU#^RANAM.


heart is not sullied by iniquities of Kali who meditate |an&r-
dana in his mind freed from illusions. Consider that excel-
)ont man to be a worshipper of Vishnu, who, looking upon
good in secret, holds that which is another’s wealth as grass
and devotes all his thoughts to the Lord.

There is Vishnu as mountain of clear crystal : for how
can he live in the hearts of those men sullied with malice
and envy ? The glowing heat of does not exist in the
cluster of the cooling rays of the moon. VAsudeva always
resides *in his heart whose mind is pure, free from malicey
quialf who has a pure character, is a friend to all^ speaking
wisely and kindly, humble and sincere. The eternal Vishnu
residing in his heart a man appears lovely to all, as a
beautiful young Sal-tree declares that there is the excellent
juice inside it. Depart^ 0 my emissary, speedily from
those men, whose sins have been washed away by self*
control and moral descipline, whose minds are always
devoted to the undecaying and who are freed from avaricCy
tuikindness and malice. If the divine Hari, who is without
beginning or end and is armed with a sword, conch and
Inace, lives in the heart of a man he is freed from all sins : foe
how can darkness exist in the sun ? He, who pilfers another’s
wealth, slays animals, speaks untrue and cruel words, whose
tnind is impure and is addicted to impious actions, does not
get the Endless in his heart. Janirdana does not reside
in the heart of that vile wight who cannot bear the pros-^
perity of another, vrfio vilifies the vious, does not perform
sacrifices and does not make gifts to the pious. Consider
flot that person, engaged in vile actions, as the worshipper
of Vishnu, who by foul means, earns wealth for his dear
Wend, wife, son, daughter, father, mother or servants.

That beast of a man is not a foHower of V&sudeva whose
mind is addicted to foul actions, who is always engaged in
actions, who lives for a long time in evil company and
^ho always endeavours to drown himseU in sins. Do you stand


vishnupurAnam.


190

tiloof from those persons in whose hearts resideSs Ariahta [
from him, who by bis pure understanding conceives the
supreme male and ruler Vasudeva as one with his devotees
and the whole world. Do you depart from those, 0 my
emissary, who are freed from sins and who always invoke
the lotus-eyed VSsudeva, Vishnu, the upholder ‘of the earth,
the immortal weilder of the discus and the shell, the refuge
of the world do not approach him in whose heart dwells
the imperishable soul for he is protected against my power
by the discus of his deity and he is bound for the heaVen of
Vishnu."

The Brahmin of Kalinga said- -0 foremost of Kurus, these
were the instructions given by the king of justice, the
son of the sun, to his servant. That servant communicated
those instructions to me and I have in turn related them
to you.

Bhishma said : — This was communicated to me, 0 Nakula,
by the ^Brahmin, hailing from Kalinga. And I have duly
related that to you, 0 my son, and thus there is no protection
in the ocean of the world but Vishnu. They whose minds
are always devoted to Keshava, have no fear from death/
his servant, his rod, his noose and his tortures.

PaRASARA said : — 0 Muni I have thus described to you
what you desired me to say and what was related by the sort
of Vivaswat. What else do you wish to hear ?


SECTION VIII.


]M[aitREYA said : — 0 reverend sir, tell me how should
they worship the glorious Vishnu, the lord of the earth, who
desire to get af the other end of the ocean of the world. I
wish to hear from you, 0 great Muni, what fruits can be
be obtained by worshipping the glorious Vishnu.

ParASara said : — The question you have put to me,
was puf to Aurva by the high-souled Sagara. Do you hear
froni#me what he said (on this). Having bowed to Aurva,
born in the race of Vrigu, Sagara said — “ 0 foremost of
Munis, tell me the mode of worshipping Vishnu, and the
fruits that a man can obtain by worshipping him.” Heaf
from me, 0 Maitreya, all that he said when thus questioned
(by Sagara).

Aurva said : — Vishnu being worshipped, a man obtains the
consummation of all earthly desires and attains to the regions
of the celestials and of Brahma and even final liberation. 0
king of kings, whatever a man desires, either small, or great,
he gets by the worship of Achyuta. 0 king of earth, !you
have asked me how Vishnu can be worshipped. Hear
I shall relate all that to you. He is the true worspipper
of Vishnu who observes duly the duties of the four castes
and rules of four Asramas, There is no other means of
satisfying Vishnu. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to
him ; he who recites prayers, prays to him ; he who in-
jures living beings injures him; for, Hari is identical with
all living beings. Therefore, he, who observes duly the duties
of his caste, is said to worship the glorious JanSrdana. O
lord of earth, the Brahman, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, the
Sudra by attending to the duties prescribed by his caste,
best worships Vishnu. He, who does not vilify another
Either in his presence, or in his absence, who does not
speak untruth, does not injure others, pleases Kealiava the


VISHNUPURANAM.


19:2

best. Keshava is best pleased with him, 0 king, who does not
covet another*s wife, wealth and who does not bear ill feeling
towards any. 0 lord of men, Keshava is pleased with him who
neither beats nor slays any animate or inanimate thing. 0 lord
of men, Govinda is pleased with that man who is ever intent
upon serving the gods, the Brahmans and his spiritual pre-
ceptor. Hari is always satisfied with him who is ever anxious
for the welfare of all creatures, his children and his own soul.
Vishnu is always pleased with that pure-minded man whose
mind is not sullied with anger and other passions. <*He best
worships Vishnu, 0 king, who observes the duties faid ^^own
by scripture for every caste and condition of life ; there is
no other mode.” Sagara said 0 foremost of twice-born
ones, I wish to hear of the duties of caste and condi-
tion. Relate them to me. Aurva said:— Hear attentively
from me in order the duties of the BrSliinan, the Kshatriya,
the Vaishya and the Sudra. The duties of the Br&hmins
consist in making gifts, worshipping the celestials with
sacrifices, studying the Vedas, performing oblations and liba*
tions with water and preserving the sacred fire. For main-
tenance, he may offer sacrifices for others, teach others
and may accept liberal presents in a becoming manner.
He must advance the well-being of all and do injury to
none— for the greatest wealth of a Brahman consists m
cherishing kind feelings towards all. He must consider
wirh an equal eye, the jewel and stone belonging to another.
He should at proper seasons beget offspring on bis wifci 0
king of earth.

The duties of the Kshatriyas consist in making
to the Brahmins at pleasure, in worshipping Vishnu wi*
various sacrifices and receiving instructions from the pf*
ceptor. His principal sources of maintenance are arms sn
protection of the earth. But his greatest duty consist* *»
guarding the earth. By protecting the earth a king attai®
his. objects ; for he gets a share of the merit of all saertfe**'


*93


If k kin|j by maintaining the order of caste, represses the
wicked, supports the pious he proceeds to whatever region
he desires.

0 lord of men^ the great Patriarch Brahma, has assigned
to the Vaisyas, for their maintenance, the feeding of the
cattle, commerce and agriculture. Study, sacrifice and gift
are also within the duties of the Vaisyas : besides these they
may also observe the other fixed and occasional rites.

The Sudra must maintain himself by attending upofn the
three castes, or by the profits of trade, or the earnings of
niechanical labour. He may also make gifts, offer the sacrij
fices in which food is presented and he may also make
obsequial offerings.

I^esides these, the four castes have got other duties
naitiely— the acquisition of wealth for the support of servants,
co-habitation with their wives for the sake of children, kindness
towards all creatures, patience, humility, truth, purity, content-
ment, decorum of manners, gentleness of speech, friend-
liness, freodom from envy or avarice and the habit of vilifying,
these also constitute the duties of every condition of
life.

In cases of emergency a Brihmin may follow the occupations
of a Kshatriya or Vaishya ; the Kshatriya may adopt those of
Vaishya and the Vaishya those of Kshatriya : but the last two
should never adopt the functions of the Sudra if they could
avoid them. And if that be not possible they must at any
tate avoid the functions of the mined caste. I will now des-
'cribe to you, 0 king, the duties of the several Asramas.


25


SECTION IX,


A.URVA said 0 king, when a yauth is invested with
the sacred thread, he must reside in the house of his precep-
tor and study the Vedas with a concentrated mind, and leading
a life of continence. He must, with pure practices, wait upon
his spiritual preceptor and with the performance of ireligious
rites acquire the Veda. He must, 0 king, with condentraUon,
worship both in the morning and evening, the fire and the
sun and after that he must bow to his spiritual guide. 0
King, he must stand when his preceptor is standing, he roust
move when he is walking and he must sit beneath him when
he is seated ; he must nevet sit nor walk, nor stand when his
teacher does the otherwise. Whatever portion of the Vedas
he shall be taught by his preceptor, he must read that with
undivided mind before him. He must beg whenipermitted
by his teacher and eat the food thus collected. He must
bathe in the water which has been first used by his preceptor
and every morning he must bring for him fuel, water or any-
thing that he may require. Having thus completed his
studies, he must receive dismissal from his preceptor and
then enter into the order of the householder ; and taking to
himself with lawful ceremonies, house, wife and wealth, he
must discharge to the best of his power the duties of his life. He
must satisfy the manes with cakes, the celestials with sacri-
(ices, the guests with hospitality, the Rishis with holy study>
the Patriarch with progeny, the spirits with oblations and ali
the worlds with truthful words. By thus discharging
duties a householder may attain to heaven. A householder
is a refuge to those who depend upon alms for their maio'
tenance and those who lead an itinerant life of self denial*
thus the condition of the householder is the best of all. 0


VISHNUPURANAM,


m


the Brahmins travel all over the earth either for studying the
Vedas or for beholding the holy places ; many of them are
houseless and without food and live for the night at the house
at which they arrive in the evening. The householder is
always a refuge to these people. O king, it is his duty to
welcome them and address them kindly and to provide themi
whenever they come to his house, with a bed, a seat and food,
if a guest goes back disappointed from a house he leaves
behind his iniquities and takes away the accumulated piety
of the householder. In the house of a good man, contumely,
arrqgjinc^f, hypocrisy, repining, contradiction and violence
are strictly prohibited : and the householder, who performs
the principal duty of hospitality, is freed from all chains and
attains to better stations after death.

0 king, having performed all these duties, when a house-
holder is stricken in years, he must proceed to woods, either
with his wife, or leaving her to the charge of his son. He
must live there upon leaves, roots and fruits ; allow his hair
and beard .to grow, and braid the former upon his brows
and sleep upon the ground. His dress must be made of skin
or of KUsa and Kus^ grasses. He must bathe thrice a day,
olfer oblations to the celestials and to fire and treat all his
guests with hospitality. He must beg alms and give food
to all creatures. He must annoint himself with such unguents
as are found in the forest and while carrying on his devout
practices he must endure heat and cold. He, who leading
the life of a hermit, follows these rules, destroys like fire al)
imperfections, and attains to the region of Brahman.

The fourth condition of life, O king, is called by the
s^ges, that of a mendicant. I shall relate the characteristics
thereof ; do thou hear. 0 lord of men, having relinquished

attachments for wife, children and other earthly objects,
leading the life of a hermit, must enter into the fourth
®tage of life. He must forego the three objects of life, namely
pleasure, wealth and virtue either secular or religious. And


ig5 ^SHNUPURANAW.

regarding all with an equal eye, he must be friend to all
living beings. And being devoted, he must not injure any
living creature, human or brute, either in act, word, or
thought and renounce all attachments. He must not live
more than one night in a village and more than five nights
in a city. He must live in all those places where good feeling
iand not animosity is created in mind. He must, for his
maintenance, beg for alms at the houses of the three first
castes at the time when fires have been put out and peoples
have eaten. The itinerant beggar must not call anything
his own and must suppress desire, anger, covetousnhss, ^ride
and folly. The ascetic, who gives no cause of fear to any
living creature, does not apprehend any danger from them.
The Brahmin, who, having placed the sacrificial fire in his
own body, feeds that flame with the butter that is procured by
alms, through the altar of his mouth, goes to his own proper
abode. But the Brahman who longs tor final emancipation,
who has got a pure heart, and whose mind is pefected by
self-investigation, goes to the region of Brahman, which is
quiet and is as bright as the flameless smoke.

SECTION X.


3agara said;— 0 foremost of twice-born ones, yo“
have described to me the duties of the four orders and four
castes. I wish to hear from you the religious observances
of men. Methinks you know every thing, 0 foremost of
Vrigus, tell me all about these observances, either invariable
occasional or voluntary. Whereto Aurva replied,
describe to you all you have asked, the invariable and occa
sional ceremonies ot men : do you hear, 0 king.

As soon as a son is born his father should perform t ^
^rcmonics consequent upon the birth of a child and a


ViSHNUPURANAM.


197


Other initiatory ceremonies as well as a SrUdh which is the
$ource of prosperity. He must feed two BrlLhminis^ seated
with their faces to the east and according to his means
must oiler sacrifices to the celestials and the progenitorsj 0
lord of earth. He must delightedly offer to the manes,
bails ol meat, mixed with curds, barley and jujubes with
the four part of his finger. On every occasion of prosperity,
he must perform this with all offerings and go through
circumambulalations.

Upgn the tenth day after birth the father should give a
name to°lhe child, the first term of which shall be the name
of a god and the second of a man as Sarman or Varman.
The former is the proper designatain of a Brahmin, and
the second of a Kshatriya. And the Vaisyas and Sudras
should have the designation of Gupta and DAsha, A name
should not be devoid of any meaning, should not be indecent,
absurd, inauspicious nor dreadful. It should contain an even
number of syllables ; it should not be too long nor too short,
nor too full of long vowels, but contain a due proportion of
short vowels and be easily articulated.

After going through these initiatory ceremonies and
being purified the youth should acquire knowledge from his
preceptor. And having acquired knowledge from the pre-
ceptor and given him presents, 0 king, he should, desirous of
entering the order of householders, marry. If he desires
to continue his life as a student, he should, taking that vow,
engage in the service of his preceptor and his descendant
or he may, according to his premeditated inclination, Q king,

once become a hermit or adopt the order of the leligious
«tendicant.

He must marry a maiden, who is of a third of his age,
one who has not too much of hair, but is not witout any,
one who is not very black nor yellow complexioned and
is nor from birth a cripple or deformed. He must not
marry a girl, who is vicious or unhealthy, born of a low


198


VISHNUPURANAM.


family, or suffering from any disease ; one who may have been
badly trained, one who talks improperly, one" who inherited
some disease from father or mother ; one who has a beard
and has got a masculine appearance ; one who speaks thick
or thin or croaks like a craven, who has got eyes without
eye lashes, or sufficiently covered with them ; *006 who has
got legs covered with hairs, thick ankles j ond, who has
dimples in her cheeks when laughing. The learned should
not marry a girl who has not got a tender countenance, who
has got white nails, and who has got red eyes. The wise
and prudent should not marry one whose hands and ‘legs.^^re
heavy, who is a dwarf, or who is very tall or one whose eye-
brows meet, or whose teeth are far apart and resemble tusks.
0 king, a householder should marry a girl who is at least five
degrees distant in descent from his mother and seven degrees
from his father.

There are eight forms of marriage— namely, Brihma,
Daiva, the Arsha, PrajSpatyS, Asura, Gandharba, Rakshasa
and Paisacha and the last is the worst. And every one
should marry according to the mode enjoined to his caste by
the s^es and should never marry according to the Paiskcha
mode. Thus entering the order of householders, if a man
takes a wife observing the same religious and civil obligations
and perform all the ceremonies of his orders in her company,
he derives great benefit from such a wife.”


SECTION XI.


SagarA said — ”0 Muni, I wish to hear from you of suck
religious observances, performing which a householder do**
not meet with the wane of piety either in this world or in li**
iiext>


VISHNUPURANAM.


19$


AuRVA said— '‘Hear, 0 lord of earth, an account of all
those religious observances celebrating which a man conquers
both this and the next world. The lem sat means Sddhu )
and they are called S&dhus or saints who are freed from all
blemishes. And their practices are called SAddhachAras. O
lord of earth, -the seven Rishis, the Manus and the Patriarchs
are those who have laid down and observed those practices^
Let the wise, 0 king, get up at Brahma Muhartta,* when
the mind is at rest, meditate upon virtue and wealth not in-*
compatible with the former. He should also meditate upon
demise not conflicting with the other two. And he must
equally meditate upon the three ends of life for the purpose
of counteracting the unseen consequences of good or best
acts. He should renounce, 0 king, such wealth and desire
as stand in the way of virtue, and he should abstain from
such religious acts as give uneasiness, and as are not com-
patible with the rules of society. O lord of men, having got
up from bed early in the morning, he must offer adoration to
the sun and then proceeding to the South-East quarter at
a distance of a bow-shot or more, or somewhere remote from
the village he must void the impurities of nature. A man
should not void the impurities of narue either in the court
yard of his house or in any place where is the print of a
man’s foot. The wise should not pass urine either on his
own shadow, nor on the shadow of a tree, nor on a cow, nor
against the sun nor on fire, nor against the wind, nor on
spiritual preceptor, nor men of the firt three castes. Nor
he should pass excrement in a ploughed field, or a pasturage,
or in the company of men, or on a high road, or in rivers
mid the like which are holy, or on the bank of a river or in
a creination ground. 0 king, the wise should pass
'irine with his face towards the north during the day and to-
wards the south during the night. While passing excrement


* The third Muhurtta about two hours before sunrise.


vishnupuranaM.


he should spread gfass on the earth and cover his head With
cloth and should not wait there long, and should not speak
during that time. To clean his hand he should not take
earth from an ant-hill, not a rat-hole, nor from Water, nor
from what has been left after being used for that purpose,
nof from what has been used to plaster a cottdge, nor that
which has been thrown up by insects, or turned over by the
plough. He must avoid all these kinds of earth for the
purpose of cleanliness ; he should use one handful after pas-
sing urine, three handfuls after passing excreifterft, ten
handfuls are to be rubbed over the left hand and seven^n
both hands. He should then rince his mouth with pure water
which is neither fetid, nor frothy nor full of bubbles. After
that, he should, being composed^ use earth to cleanse his
feet, washing them well with water.

He must then drink water thrice and wash his face twice
with it and then touch with his head, the Cavities of the eyes,
ears and nostrils, the forehead, navet and the heart. Having
finally washed his mouth he must clean and arrange his hairs
and must decorate his body, before a looking glass with
unguents, garlands and perfumes. He, then according to the
practice of his caste, should earn money for maintenance
and should worship the deities with firm faith. Sacrifices
with acid juice, those with clarified butter and those with
offerings of food, may be performed with wealth ; therefore
men should endeavour much to acquire wealths

For performing daily devotional rites a man should bathe
in the water of a river, a natural channel, or a mmitltaini
torrent or he should bathe on a dry ground with the water
drawn from well or he should bring that water to his house if
he had any objection to bathing on the spot. Bathed and
clad in clean clothes, he should, with concentrated mind
offer oblations to the manes and Rishis with that water.
He should offer water thrice for the satisfaction of the celes-
thrice for the satisfaction of the Rishis and once for the


vishnupuranam'


201

patriarchs. He should make three libations for the satisfac-
tion of the manes. He should^ with the part of the hand sacred
to the manes, offer wafer to his paternal grand father, great
grand father, maternal grand father, great grand father and
his father, and according to his plearure to his own mother
and his mother^s mother and grand mother, to the wife of bis
preceptor, to his preceptor, his maternal uncle, and other
relations, to a dear friend and to the king. He should then,
0 king, offer water to the celestials for the benefit of all animals^
recitingfthe prayer. “ May the celestials, demons, Yakshas,.
Sei^nts,* Rfikshasas, Gandharbas, Pis^chas, Guhyakas, Siddas,
Kuslimandas, trees, birds, fish, ail that in habit the waters or
the earth, or the air, be propitiated by the water I have offered
to them. This water is presented by me for the mitigation of
the sufferings of all those who have been put to htll. Let
them be propitiated with this water who are my friends, who
are not my friends, who were my friends in my former birth
and all those who expect water from me. May this water and
sesamum offered by me remove the hunger and thirst of all
those who are suffering therefrom wherever they may live.*’'
The offerings, of water, 0 king, in the manner I have des-
cribed, give satisfaction to all the world. Having offered
water duly and reverentially to all the sinless man obtains
tlie piety that comes from satisfying the world.

Having rinsed his mouth he must offer water to the
sun touching his forehead with folded hands and reciting
the following player — “ Salutation to the radiant Vaivaswat—
fhe effulgence of Vishnu; to the pure illuminator of the
universe ; to Sftvitri, the giver of fruits for all actions.” He
“'ust then go through the family worship, offering water,
lowers, and incence to the tutelary deity. He must then
offer oblations to fire, first invoicing Brahma then Prajapati.
He must then offer water to Guhya, Kashyapa and Anumati
*n succession and then offer the remainder to the earth, to
and to rain in a pitcher at
26


ViSHNUPURAMAM*


he must offer water to DhAtri VidliAtri at the doors of his
house and to BrahmA in the middio of it. Hear from me how
he should then worship the deities presiding over the various
quarters.

He should offer the Bali containing the remaining portions
of the oblations to Indra, Yama, Varuna and Soma on the
four sides of his house. And in the north-east quarter the
wise should offer it to Dhaiiwantarl ; then he should offeij
the remaining portion to Vis wade vas, then in the north-east
to wind then in all directions to the cardinal popits, to,
BrahmA, to the atmosphere, and to the sun, to all rhe celes-
tials, to all beings, to the lords of beings, to the manes,, and
to Yakshas. Thereupon taking other rice the learned should
cast it on a clean spot of ground as an offering to all beings
and with a collected mind should repeat the following prayer
— May celestials, men, animals, birds, saints. Yakshas,
serpents, demons, ghosts, goblins, trees and all those who
desire food from me ; may ants, worms, motljs and other
insects who are hungry and chained in acts, obtain satisfac-
tion from food offeerd by me and enjoy bliss. I offer this
food on the ground for them who have got no mother, no
father, no friends, no food, nor the means for preparing
it. May they be satisfied with the food offered for their
satisfaction. All these aninaU, this food and myself are at
one with Vishnu — for there exists nothing but Vishnu ; I am
not different from all beings, and therefore for their sustenace
I offer this food. May all beings, that belong to the fourteen
orders of existent things, be satisfied and delighted with the
food offered by me.

Having repeated this prayer the householder should
devoutly throw the food on the ground for the benefit of all
beings ; for the liouseholder is thence the supporter of them
all. He should also disperse food on the ground for dog^>
outcasts^ birds and all mean and degraded persona*

Thereupon to receive guests the householder should


VIlSrtNUPUllANAM.


203


wait ift the fcountryard of his house as long as it takes to
milch a cow or for a longer period if he pleases. If a guest
comes he must be received with all hospitality; he must be
offered a seat, his feat are to be washed, food should be
res()ectfully given to him, he must be spoken to with all
kindness atid * civility and when he goes away, the friendly
wishek of the host must accompany him. The householder
should pay attention to that guest who comes from another
place and whose lineage is not known. He should not make
him a ^uest who is an inhabitant of the same village. He
wh(^fee(Ts himself, neglecting a guest, who is poor, who is
not his relation, who comes from another place and is de-
sirous of eating, goes to hell. The householder should re-
ceive his guest regarding him as the golden embryo* without
inquiring his studies, his schools, his practices or his race.

A householder, 0 king, at the SrAdha ceremony of his
father, should feed another BrShmin, who is of the same
village, whose pedigree and practices are known and who
performs the five sacramental rites. He should also pre.sent
to a Brahmin, who is well versed in the Vedas, four hand-
fuls of food, set apart, with the exclamation Hanta. If he
has got means left after making these three sorts of gifts,
the learned should, according to his pleasure, make gifts to
a mendicant and a religious student. These three, with the
addition of the mendicant described before, are to be consi-
dered as guests ; and he, who treats these four sorts of persons
with hospitality, is freed of the debt due to his fellow beings:
The guest, who goes elsewhere disappointed from any house,
transfers bis own sins to the owner of the house and takes
away the house-holder’s merits. BrahmS, PrajApati, Indra fire,.


* The mundane egg floating on the water at creation, 6f that itietal, or
similar colour from which the deity issued according to some legends ; i.#.,
I»e should treat him with all reverence.


904


VtSHNUl»URANAM.


the Vasus, the sun are present in the person oi a guest
share the food that is oflered to him. Therefore a man Should
assiduously satisfy the duties of hospitality ; for a man, who
eats his food without giving any to his guest, feeds only
Upon his own sin. Thereupon the householder must satisfy
with well-seasoned food the damsel living in her father’s
house, those who are illy the pregnant woman, the aged and
the infants of the house and then he should eat himself.
The householder, who eats his food without feeding these,
feeds upon his own iniquity and after his death is condemned
in hell to feed upon phlegm. He, who eats, wifhouUper-
forming ablutions, feeds upon filth; he, who eats without
repeating bis prayers, feeds upon matter and blood ; he, who
eats unconsecrated food, drinks urine; and he, who eats
before the infants and the aged are fed, is doomed in hell
to live upon ordure. 0 foremost of kings, I shall now des-
cribe, do you hear, bow a householder should eat and
for which he would not be sullied with iniquity, his perpetual
health and increased vigour would be secured and all evils
and hostilities would be averted. Having bathed and offered
duly libatiorrs to the celestials, Rishis- and manes and
adorned his hand with precious jewels^ having recited intro-
ductory prayers, offered oblations with fire, food to guests,
to Brahmans, to his elders and to bis family, the householder
should take his meal, wearing unsullied cloth, excellent
garlands and sprinkled with perfumes. He must not eat, 0 lord,
of men, with a single garment on, nor with wet hands and
feet.

He must not eat with his face directed to my intermidiate
point of horizon, but facing the east or the north; and
with a smiling countenance, happy and attentive, let him
lake good and wholesome food boiled with clean water, pi'O'-
cured from no mean person, nor by improper means nor im-
properly cooked. Having given a part to bis hungry campam*
•OS hi should take food without reproach from a elean> hand


VISHNUPURANAW.


205

sortie vessels which must not be placed upon a low stool orbed.
He must not take his food in an unbecoming place ot out of
season or in an unsuitable mood, giving the first morsel to fire.
His food, 0 king, must be consecrated with suitable textd,
must be good and must not be stale except in the case of
fruit or meat< Nor it should be made of dry vegetable^ubstancee
other than jujubes or preparation of molasses. And a man
should never eat that of which the juices have been extracted.
Nor a man should so eat as nothing will be left of his meal
except in the case of flour, cakes, honey, water, curds and
but(gr. Re should with a devoted mind first taste that which
has good flavour j in the middle he should take salt and soufr
things and in the end he should take those which are pungent
and bitter. The person, who begins his food with fluid
things, takes solid food in the middle anti finishes with fluid
things, will ever be strong and healthy. In this wise he
should take such food as is not prohibited, should be silent
at the time of eating and should take five handfuls for the
nutriment of the vital principle. After he has taken his food,
he should, facing the east or the north, rinse bis mouth, and
having washed his hands up to the wrist he should again
sip water. Then with a satisfied and calm mind he
should take his seat, meditate upon his tutelary deity and
pray ‘^May fire excited by air cause this food to digest in
the space afforded by the etherial atmosphere, convert this
Into the earthly elements of this body and give me
satisfaction. May this food, when assimilated, contribute
to the vigour of the earth, water, fire, and air of my body
ftnd afford unmixed satisfaction. May Agasti, Agni and sub-
®sarine fire bring about the digestion of the food 1 have
fiken and may I enjoy happiness consequent thereupon and
w^ay my body be freed from all ills*. May Vishnu, who is the
^hief principle of all senses, of all bodies and souls, be
Pi^opitiated with my faith and may cause such assimilation
the food I have eaten as may invigorate my health. Verily


VlSHNUf^URANAM.


»o6

Vinfinti is the esiteii the food and the nourishment, may the
fbodjd iiave taken, through this faith, be digested/'

Having recited this prayer he should rub his stomach with
hii hhnd, and renouncing idleness should engage in such
action as can easily he performed. He should spend the
day in the reading of sacred writings and in such amuse*
ments as are authorized by the righteous and when the
Sandhya sets in he must engage in devotion. 0 king, he
must perform the morning rites before the stars have dis-
appeared and perform the evening rites before «the sun
has quite set. The morning and evening rites shoBId jpver
be neglected except at seasons of impurity, anxiety, sickness
or alarm. He, who but for illness lies on bed at the hours of
sunrise and sunset, is guilty of iniquity. Therefore a man
should rise before the sun in the morning and sleep not until
after he has set. Those, who sinfully neglect the per-
formance of both the morning and evening rites, go to ihe
hell of darkness after death. And having prepared food
in the evening, the wife, of the householder with a view to
obtain the fruit of the Vigwadeva rite, should give food,
without offering any prayers, to outcasts or unclean persons.
The householder, as his means allow, should again show
hospitality to any guest who may come receiving him with
the salutation of evening and offering him water to wash his
feet, a seat, a supper and a bed. The sin, consequent
upon not receiviug hospitably a guest who comes after sunset,
is eight times greater than that of turning away on0 who
comes during the day. A person should therefore particularly
show respect to him who seeks refuge after sunset, for the
respect, given to his satisfaction, will afford pleasure to all the
celestials. The householder should, therefore, as his means
permit him, give a guest food, potherbs, water, a bed, a mat,
•r if he cannot give any thing more, ground only bn which to
lie.

.Having taken his evening meal and washed his feet n


^ISHNUPURANAM.


ZOf

householder should take rcjst. His bed must be complete aud
made of wood) it must have ample space, must not be cracked
nor uneven, nor dirty nor infested by insects and must have
a bedding. The househQlder must sleep with hjs head cither
to the east or to the south ; any other position is unhealthy.
In proper time, under the influence of an auspicious planet
and in an auspicious moment he should go to his wife if she
is not uobathed, sick, uuwell, unwilling, angry, pregnant,
hungry or over-fed. He should also be free from all these
imperfcctjons and should be neatly dressed and adorned and
excited by^lenderness and affection. Having bathed, wearing
garlands, using perfumes, delighted and animated by desire
he should go to his wife — not being hungry and excited with
anxiety. There are certain days on which the use of unguents,
flesh and women is prohibited as the eighth and fourtbeeth
lunar days, new-moon and full-moon and the entrance of the
sun into a new sign. On these occasions the wise should
control their appetites and engage in the worship of the
celestials as laid down in scripture, in meditation and prayer.,
And he, who acts otherwise, will be doomed to a hell where he
will be constrained to live upon ordure. A man should not
excite his desires by medicines nor satisfy them with un-
natural objects or in public or holy places. A man should
not go to a woman under a huge tree, in the courtyard, in a
: place of pilgrimage, in pasturage, where four streets meet
•n a cremation ground, in a garden or in the waters. Qn all
these occasions mentioned before in the morning or in the
evening qr being unclean the wise should not cohabit withi
'Vomen. If a. man goes to a woman during the Farva be
^oses wealth, if during the day he is visited with sin>, if. he
cohabhs with a woman on ground he loses his fame. A maa-
should not think voluptuously of another’s wife, nor should,
speak tc her for that purpose; for such a wight will be
in hU next life as a creeping insect. The cohabitation*
^‘tli another's wife is a source of fear to him both in this life


VISIINUPURANAM.


208

, and in the next— for in this he loses his longivity and in the
next he is doomed to hell. Considering alt these things a
man should approach hU own wife in proper season or even
at other times.


SECTION XII.

AlURVA said : — ^The householder should venerate, gods,
king, BrShmanas, saints, aged persons and holy preceptors.
He should also observe duly the two Sandhyas and offer
oblations to fire. He should use untorn garments, delicate
herbs and flowers, wear emeralds and other precious stones,
keep his hair neat and clean, perfume his body with delicious
unguents and should always go out handsomely dressed and
decorated with garlands and white flowers. He should not
misappropriate another’s property nor should treat him
unkindly. He should always speak amiably and the truth and
should not speak out publicly another’s faults. 0 foremost of
men, he should not envy another’s prosperity — nor shauld
he create enmity with another ; he should not use a broken
conveyance, nor shsuld he sit under the shadow of a tree on
the banks of a river. The wise should not make friends withi
nor should they wend the same way with, one who is hated,
who is a sinner or a drunkard, who has many enemies, or who
is lousy with a harlot or her gallant, with a pauper or a
with a prodigal, a slanderer or a knave. A man should not
bathe in river when it is ebb-tide, should not enter a house


VISHNUPURANAM.


209


when it is on fire nor climb to the top of a tree ; nor (when
in the company of others) clean his teeth, nor blow his nose
nor grape without covering his mouth, nor clean his throat,
nor cough, nor laugh loudly, nor emit wind with noise, nor
bite his nails, nor cut grass, nor cratch ground, nor put his
beard into his mouth, nor crumble a clod of clay, nor look upon
the planets when he is unclean. He should not see another's
wife when she is naked nor see the sun at the time of its rising
or setting. He should not express disgust at a dead body for
the odouj: of it is the produce of the moon. He should avoid,
during thc^ night, the place where four roads meet, the village
tree* the forest adjacent to a cremation ground and a loose
woman. The wise should not pass across the shadow of a
venerable person, of an image of a deity, of a flag and of a
heavenly luminary. He should not travel alone in a forest
nor sleep alone in an empty house. He should live at a
distance from hair, bones, thorn, filth, remnants of offerings,
ashes, chaff and earth wet with water in which another has
bathed. He should not seek the shelter of a degrarded wight
and should renounce the company of wily persons. He should
not approach voracious animals and should not lie down
on bed long after sleep is broken. He should not, for a too
long time, lie down on bed, sleep, keep up nights, sit and
take exercise. The wise should avoid, even at a distance,
animals with tusks and horns and exposure to frost, wind
and sunshine. A man should neither bathe, nor sleep nor
•■inse his mouth when he is naked; he should not wash
Ms mouth nor perform any sacred rite with his waistband
loosened. Nor he should, with one piece of cloth on, offer
oblations to fire, sacrifice to the celestials, wash his mouth,
salute a Brahman or utter a prayer. He should not associate
With evil companions — the intercourse for half an instant,
the pious is desirable. The wise should not quarrel
men inferior or superior to “them ; dispute and marriage
equals are always desirable. The wise should never
27.


2ia


ViSHNUPURANAM.


enter into dispute and should always avoid useless enmity.
It is beUer to sulTer a trifling loss but he should not acquire
wealth by hostility.

When bathed he should not wipe his limbs \^ith the cloth
he has put on nor with his hands ; he should not shake his
hair nor rinse his mouth before he has risen. He should not
put one foot upon another nor spread out his foot before his
elders but should modestly sit in a posture called Verasana
7. e., on his knees. He should not go round a temple upon
his left hand nor circumambulate any venerable object in
the reverse direction. The wise should not spit I'or void
impurities before the moon, fire, the sun, water, wiiM, or
any respectable person. Nor should he pass urine stands
ing or upon a public way ; he should not pass over phlegm,
ordure, urine or blood ; nor should he spit forth the mucus
of the throat at the time of eating, olTering sacriliccs or obla-
tions or reciting prayers or before a respectable person.

A man should not treat women disrespectfully nor should
he place too much confidence in them. He should not deal
with them impatiently nor should he give them supremacy
in inportant matters. 0 king, wise persons, ever treading
the path of morality, should not issue out of his house
without saluting the chaplets, flowers, jewels, clarified butter
and venerable persons. He should salute the places where
four roads meet, perform sacrifices at proper seasons, relieve
the poor and venerate the learned and good-natured.
who worships the celestials and saints, gives cakes and water
to the manes, and performs hospitality, attains to exalted
stations after death. He who speaks wisely, moderately and
compassionately proceed.s to the regions which are the perpe'
tual sources of bliss. He who is intelligent, bashful, forgiving,
god-fearing and humble, proceeds to the region which is at-
tainable by the learned and those born in a pious race.

The wise should not read the Vedas on the Parva
pn impure sca.‘^nns, upon untimctcly thunder and the occurenC«


VlS^^NUPURANAM.


ill

ot eclipses. I lie atlainineiit of heaven Is a trining thing
to him who allays thei anger of the angry, who is friend to
all and freed, from malice, and who removes the fear of the
pious. A man should use an umbrella to protect him against
the sun and rain ; he should carry a rod when he goes by
tjight or through a forest arid he should use shoes if he wishes
to save his body from being hurl. As he proceeds he should
not look up nor about him. nor afar off but keep his eyes upon
the ground to the extent of a couple of yards.

He, 'vvlto, having controlled himself, puts a stop to the
sousces of all these imperfections, meets with no obstacle
in tlie acquisition of piety, wealth and desire. Final eman-
cipation is in his grasp, who is sinless towards them who
commit mischief by him, who speaks amicably to them who
use harsh words and whose soul melts with the benevolence.
The earth is upheld by the truthfulness of those who have
controlled their passions, and who, always following pious
observances, are not sullied by desire, covetousness and
anger. A man should therefore speak truth when it is
agreeable and he should be silent when that truth would
give pain. He should avoid agreeable words when they
are detrimental and unreasonable, for it is always better to
speak those disagreeable words which would produce salutary
effect, although it would give offence. A prudent man slionhl
always cultivate that, in act, thought and speech, which con-
duces to the well-being of all living creatures both in this
^'orld and the next.”


SECTION XIII.


jAlurva said: — A father, without changing his clotli,
should bathe when a son is born ; he should then go through
the ceremonies consequent upon the birth and perform the
Sraddha which should always be celebrated upon occasions
of prosperity. With a composed mind and thinking on
nothing else, he should worship both the celestials and the
manes and reverentially go rornd keeping Brahmans o?i his
left hand and offer them food. And standing with his face
directed to the cast, he should, with the portions of the
hand sacred to the celestials and Prajapati, offer balls of
food with curds, unbruised grain and jujubes. He should
perform on every accession of prosperity the Sraddha cere-
mony, by which the manes called Nandimukhas are propi-
tiated. On the occasion of the marriage of a son or daughter
on entering a new house, on giving a name to a child on
performing his tonsure and other purificatory rites at the
binding of the mother’s hair during gestation, on first, seeing
the face of a son and on similar other occasions a house-
holder should deligently worship the manes so named, I
have described to you, 0 king, the mode of worshipping the
manes, as laid down by ancient sages j hear, I shall now
describe the rules for the performance of obsequial rites.

“Having washed the dead body with sacred water, adorned
it with garlands and reduced it to ashes outside the village,
the relatives having bathed with their clothes on, should stand
with their faces to the south and offer libations to the dead,
addressing him by name and saying. Whatever thou mayst
be.’' (And if it is burnt during the day,) they should return
to the village along with the cattle coming from pasture,
and when stars appear, should go to rest, sleeping on mats


VISHNUPURANAW;


213


jipread upon the earth. (And as long as the morning lasts)
every dpy a ball of food should be placed on the ground as
an offering to the dead and they should take rice without
flesh. And as long as the mourner wishes he should feed
the Brahmans for the soul of the dead derives pleasure in as
much as his kinsmen are satisfied with their entertainment.
(After the death of a person) on the first day, or the third,
or seventh or ninth, his relatives should change their clothes
and bathe out of doors and offer a libation of water with
sesamum-seeds. On the fourth day the bones and ashes
should bocollected ; after which the body, of one connected
witff the dead by offerings of funeral cakes, should be touched
without thereby incurring impurity. And those who are related
by presentation of water are qualified for any business. The
former class of kinsmen are allowed to use beds but still
they are prohibited from using arguments and flowers and
must observe continence after ashes and bones have been
collected. When a child is dead, or one who is abroad, or one
who is degraded, or one who is a spiritual guide, or when one
commits suicide, or when one destroys himself by water,
fire or by hanging, the period of iincleanliness is over as soon
as the news is received. The food of a family, in which a
relation is dead, should not be taken for ten days. During
the period of uncleanliness, gifts, acceptance, sacrifice and
the study of sacred writtings should he suspended. The term
of uncleanliness for a Brahmin is ten days; for a Kshatrya
twelve days; for a Vaishya fifteen days and for a Sudra
^ whole month. On the first day after the period of impurity
‘s over, the nearest relative of the dead should feed Brahmins
his pleasure, but in uneven number and should offer to the
^oad a ball of rice upon holy grass placed near the
remaining portion of the food * that has been consumed.
After the Brahmans have been fed, the mourner, according
fo his caste, should touch water, an weapon of goad or a
staff— for he is purified by such contact. He should then


VISriNU^URANAM.


resume the dulies assigned to his caste and maiiitaini Iii^
livelihood by the acquisition of wealth.

He should then perform the Sraddha of his deceased
relative on the day of his death in each month (for a year).
And then feeding the Brahmins in an uneven riUmberhe should
offer balls to the deceased. The Brahmins should then be
accosted by the sacrificer if they are satisfied and after they
have declared their satisfaction he should relate the prayer,
“May this ever satisfy such a one.”

The Sraddha, which is called Ekoddistha, should, be per-
formed monthly for one year after the death of a pejson.
And at the expiry of one year the ceremony called Sapindana
should be observed, Hear, 0 king (I shall describe) how shall
that be celebrated. This ceremony should be celebrated in
the same way as monthly obsequies— onlg four vessels should
be placed with water perfumes and sesamum. 0 king, (of
these four) one should be dedicated to the deceased and three
to the manes, and the contents of the former should be
transferred to the latter three. After the deceased has been
included in the list of manes, 0 king of earth, the ancestors
should be again worshipped with all the ceremonies of the
Sraddlia. The persons connected by the offering of cake,
who are competent to celebrate the obsequial ceremonies, are
the son, grandson, great grandson, a kinsman of the dead, the
descendants of a brother or the prosperity of one connected!
by funeral offerings. And when all these relations are want-
ing, the ceremony may be performed by those allied by the
offerings of water only or those allied by offerings of cakes
or water to maternal ancestors. When males, both in the
maternal and paternal families, are extinct, the funeral obse-
quies may be performed by women or by those who are
connected with the deceased in social and religious institutions
or by him who inherits his property.

And even when friends and those, who will inherit bis
property, arc wanting the king may have, his obsequia


VISHNUPURANAM.


215


rites, initiative intermediate and subsiqucnt, celebrated.
Hear, I shall now describe the difference of these three
classes of rites. The first are those which are performed
after the burning of the dead body until the touching of
water, weapons &c. The Sraddhas, called Ekoddistha
which are performed every month, are called intermediate
rites; and the ceremonies, which follow Sapindakarana when
the deceased becomes one of his ancestors, are called subse-
quent rites — from this time the ceremonies become general
and ancestral. The initiative ceremonies should be perform*
ed by the«relative of the father or mother whether allied by
the Sffering of the cake or of water by the companions of the
dead man or by the king who inherits his property. Both
the intermediate and subsequent rites should be celebrated
by sons and other relations, and by daughter’s sons and their
sons. In every year, O king, the obsequial ceremonies should
be performed either by males or females, in the same way as
the ceremonies of month by obsequies are enjoined. Hear
0 king, I shall now describe, at what seasons and in what
manner those ceremonies arc to be performed,”


SECTION XIV.


jAlurvA said:— “When a man celt-brates reverentially
ff’ft Sraddha of his ancestors, Brahma, Indra, Rudra, two
Aswinis, the sun, fire, Vasus, Maruts, Vigwadevas, Rishis,
^^irds, men, beasts, reptiles, manes and all other creatures,
become propitiated. This should be performed, 0 king,
^'^ery month, on the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, or
the eighth day of the same p< liod in some months or


2i6


VISHNUPURANAM.


at particular seasons. Hear, I shall now explain them. A
householder should celebrate it when he will find all requisites
ready, when a learned Brahmin has come to the house for w^hich
ancestral ceremonies are appropriate. He should voluntarily
offer sacrifice upon any atmospheric portent, at the equinoctial
and solstitial periods, at eclipses of the sun and moon, on
the sun's entrance into a Zodiacal sign, upon unpropitious
aspects of the planets and asterisms, on dreaming unlucky
dreams and on eating the grain of the year's harvest. The
manes obtain satisfaction for eight years from ancestral
offerings upon the day of the new moon when the star of the
conjunction is Anuradha, Visakha or Swati and for tW%lve
years when it is Pushya, Ardra or Punarvasu. He, who
desires to satisfy the celestials or the manes, very seldom
gets an opportunity on a day of new moon when the stars
are those of Dhanistha, Purvabhadrapada or Satabhisa,
Hear alos the description of another class of Sraddhas which
give special delight to the manes as explained by Sanat-
kurnSra the son of Brahma, to the noble Pururavas when
brimful with faith and devotion to the manes he asked how
he might please them. The third lunar day of the month of
Vaisakha (April, May) and the ninth of Kartika (October,)
November) in the light fornight ; the thirteenth of Nabha
(July, August) and the fifteenth of Magha (January, February)
in the dark fornight are called by the sages of yore the
anniversaries of the first day of Yuga and are regarded as
most sacred. On these days water mixed with sesamum-seed
should be duly offered to the progenitors as well as on every
lunar and solar eclipse ; on the eigth lunations of the dark
fortnights of Agrahayana, Magha and Falgunaon the two
days beginning the solistices when the mights and clays
alternately begin to diminish ; on the days which are the
anniversaries of the beginning of Manwantaras ; when the
sun is in the path of the goat and on all these occasions
when meteors appear. A Sraddha, performed on these


VISHNUPURANAM.


217


occasions, gives pleasure to the manes fora thousand years;
and this is the secret which they have given. The fifteenth
day, of the dark fortnight in the month of Magha when united
with the conjunction of the asterism over which Varuna
rules, is also a sacred season when offerings particularly
afford delight to the manes. When the asterism Dhanishtha
is united with the day of new moon, food and water, offered
by mem hers of respectable families, satisfy the manes for
ten thousand years. And on the day of new moon when
Ardra if% in the ascendant they rest satisfied by offerings for
a whole age.

He, who after having offered food and libations to the
manes bathes in the Ganges, Satlaj, Vipasa Saraswati or
the Gomati at Naimisha, is freed from all sins. The inaues
also sing — After having obtained gratification for a
twelve month we shall derive further satisfaction by liba-
tions offered by our descendants at some place of pilgrimage
at the end of the dark fortnight of Magha. (The songs of
Pitris) confer upon men purity of mind, prosperity, pros-
perous seasons, perfect riles and firm faith and all other
things which they desire. Hear, O king, I shall repeat
some verses as suhg by the manes, hearing which, you will
follow them with a controlled mind. “ That wise man who
does not shrink from spending his wealth and presents us
with cakes shall be born in an illustrious family. He should,
he is rich, give to Brahmans in our honour, jewels, cloths,
^and, conveyances, wealth and various other eatables. If he
not got so much wealth he should feed with faith and
humility excellent Brahmans according to his means. If he
cannot afford to give them food even he should according
his might, present them with unboiled grain or with some
gifts however trifling they may be. Should he utterly
enable even to do this, 0 king, he must give to some ex-
cellent Brahmin, bowing before him sesamum-seeds, adher*
to the Ups of his fingers. Or he should sprinkle water
28


VISHNUPURANAM.


^l8

Ifnixed with seven or eight sesAinum -seeds to us upon the
ground ; or he should gather, as he may, fodder for a day
and give it to a cow, by which he will, if firm in faith, give
us satisfaction. And if it is impossible for him to go through
any of these he should go to a forest raise up his arms to
the sun and other planets and say aloud — “ I have no money,
nor property nor grain nor any thing whatever which I may
give as an ^offering to my ancestors. So I reverentially bow
unto ipy ancestors ; may they be propitiated with my devo-
tion only — I throw up my arms in the air.” Thes^ are the
words of the progenitors. 0 king, he who endeavours
to satisfy their desires, performs the ancestral rite called
^r^ddha.


SECTION XV.


^URVAsaid: Hear, 0 king, what description' o(
prabman should be fed at ancestral ceremonies. He must
be Trinachiketa, Trimadhu and Trisuparna*; or one who is
versed in the six supplementary sciences of the Vedas ]_ one
who is well acquainted with the Vedas ; one who practises
the duties laid down in the Vedas, t one who is, yogi,t one

* The Bn^hmans here are classed into Trinachiketa, Trimaidhu **“1
Tdsuparna. The hrst is so called from reciting three AnuvafcasoftheKatba-
Ka branch of the Yajur-veda, beginning with the term Trinachiketa
second from three Anuvakas pfthe Same Veda beginning and the

third from a similar portion commencing Bfofmavan namami,

t There is some difference between veda vit and Sroirya^Th^ fijst studfp*
the V«das only and the second practises the rites thereof.,
t Yogi is one who practUes strieteit penances.


VISHNUPURANAM.


219


who is Jestha Samaga ; * an officiating priest, a sister’s son^
a daughter’s son, a son-in-law, a falher-in-Iaw, a maternaf
uncle, an ascetic, a Brahman who keeps up the five fires, a
pupil, a kinsman ; one who respects his parents. 0 king, a
man should employ the Brahmans first mentioned in the
performance of the SrAddha ceremony of his ancestors ; and
in the subsidiary rites performed to please his manes he
should engage the others. He should not invite at a SrSddha
ceremony a false friend, one who has got ugly nails, one who
ia eunuch, one who has got black teeth, a ravisher, a Brahman
who neglodts the service of fire and secred duty, a vender of
Som*a plant, a man accused of any crime, a thief, a calum-
niator, a Brahman who performs the religious ceremonies
for degraded persons, one who gives instructions to his
servants in sacred writings ; or one who is instructed in it by
his servant, the husband of a woman who has been formerly
betrothed to another, a man who has neglected his parents,
the protector of a Sudra, the husband of a Sudra woman, and
a Brahman who worships idols. On the first day of the Sraddha
a wise mart should invite eminent teachers of Vedas and other
Brahmins, and according to their instructions he must settle
what is to be dedicated to the celestials and what to the
Rlanes. And in the company of the Brahmins he should
abstain from anger, continence and hard work. He, who
having eaten himself in a SrSddha and fed Brahmans and
appointed them to their sacred offices, is guilty of in-
continence, thereby dooms his progenitors to shameful suffer-
ing* Therefore on the day before the SrAddha, eminent
Brahmans should be invited. If a Brahman, who has
controlled his senses, comes to the house uninvited he should
also be entertained with food. The Brahmins are to be
Respectfully received with water for their feet and after they
have rinsed their mouths and washed their bands they

A chante/ of the principal Sama-veda. Portions of it contained in the
Aranyaka are called the Jyestha ‘elder’ or principal Samao,


230


VISHNUPURANAM.


should be oflered seats. An uneven number of BrShmins for
the manes and an even number for the gods, as many as he
can, should be employed ; or one only on each occasion.

Thus the householder, with faith, should ofier oblations
to the maternal grand father along with the worship of Viswa-
devas or he should perform the Viswadevas* ceremony. He
should feed the Brahmins, who are for the gods and maternal
ancestors with their faces to the east. And there who are
for the paternal ancestors and ancestors in general should
be fed with their faces to the north. Some say, 0 king,
that seperate Sraddha should be performed for tliese two
classes of ancestors and others hold that they should bofh be
entertained with the same food. The wise should spread
Kusa grass for the seats of the Brahmans and then worship
them with libations; and having received permission from
them he should then invoke the deities. Then the man who
is acquainted with the ritual should offer a libation to the gods
with water and bailey and then flowers, perfumes and incense.
Then he should offer libations to the manes placed upon his
left ; and having first provided seats of KusS grass, he, with
the permission of the Brihmans, should invoke with the
usual prayers, the manes to the ceremony, offering libation
on his left hand of water and sesamum. If any guest arrives
at the time who is desirous of eating or wlw is passing along
the road he should worship him with the permission of
Brahmans ; for the saints, for the behoof of mankind, travel
over the earth disguised in various shapes and forms. Itis-
fortbisreason,Oking, that the wise worship a person who
comes at such an hour— and if a guest is neglected— the fruito
of an ancestral offering are baffled.

With the permission of the Brahmans assisting in the
ceremony the householder should offer food without salt and

• It is a ceremony which comprehends offerings to both paternal anil
tnaternai ancestors or ancestors in general.


VISHNUPURANAM.


221


seasoning to fire three several times, exclaming first, “Tb
fire, the Conveyance of oblations ; to the progenitors Swaha.’*
Next addressing the oblation to Soma, the lord of the pro-
genitors and giving the third to Vaivaswat. He should then
place the residue in the dishes of the ancestors. He should
then offer to Brahmanas choice viands well dressed and sea-
soned and profuse and request them most gently to partake
of it at their pleasure. The Brahmanas should atten-
tively, in silence and with smiling faces eat that food.
The saq;ificer not hungrily, nor in haste but with devout
hiilh sholild offer that food. Thereupon repeating the
prayers that slay Rakshas and scattering sesamuin-seeds on
the ground he should regard these eminent Brahmanas as hh#
ancestors and addressed them (saying). “May my father,
grand father and great grand father enter the persons of
these Brahmans and be propitiated with (my offerings). May
my father, grand father and great grand father derive satis-
faction from these oblations to fire. May my father grand
father, great grand father derive gratification from the balFs
of food placed by me upon the ground. May my father,
grand father, gaeat grand father be propitiated with what
I have offered them, this day, in faith. May my maternal
grand father, his father and his father derive gratification
from my offerings. May all the celestials derive satisfaction
and evil beings die. May the imperishable Harr the lord of
sacrifice accept the oblation offerered to the manes or to the
celestials and may all malignant spirits and enemies of the
celestials depart from the ceremony.^^

When the Brahmans have been entertained with food to
fl^eir satisfaction he should scatter a portion of the food on
the ground and present them individually with w^ater to rinse
their mouths. And then obtaining their permission he shonld
place upon the ground, balls made up of boiled rice and
condiments along with sesamum-seeds. He should then offer
hbation along with sesamum-seeds with the part of the hand


. 322


ViSHNUPURANAM<


•acred to the manes : and ntrilh the samri pArt of the hand he
should offer cakes to his maternal ancestors. He should
diligently make gifts on all these occasions in lonely place*,
naturally plctures(|ue and by the side of streams. Upon Kus3
grass the tips of which are directed to the south and lying
near the remnants of meats the householder .should present
the first ball of food consecrated with flowers and incense
to his father ; second to his grand father and the third to his
great grand father ; and then wiping his hands with the roots
of KusSl grass he should satisfy them who are c 9 htented
with the wipings thereof. Then having satisfied the*maternal
ancestors with balls of food consecrated with inceilse and
flowers he should offer water to the principal Brahmans to
rinse their mouths. And then giving presents to the

Brahmans with attention and piety according to his means
soliciting their benedictions accompanied with the exclama-
tion “Swadha” and having distribute d those presents to the
Brahmans he should address the gods saying "May the
Viswadevas be propitiated’ and receive the reply thereto
from the Brahmans. The Brahmanshaving said ‘So be it,'
and granted him blessings he should first send away his
paternal ancestors and then the celestials. The same order
as regards food, gift and dismissal should be observed with
the maternal ancestors and the gods. Beginning with the
washing of the feet and ending with the dismissal of the gods
and Brahmans all the ceremonies should be first performed
for paternal ancestors and then for matefnal artceators^

Thereupon he should dismiss the Brahmans with sweet
words and reverence, follow them to the pte and then come
back with their permission. The wise will then perform the
invariable ceremony called the worship of Viswadevas
and then wifh a controlled mind he should take his meals lU
the company of revered persons, friends and servants.

The learned should then celebrate the ancestral cere-
mony— for the ancestors being propitiated all his desires ar*


VISHNUPURANAM.


223


tf

(u)tillecl. The things are specially considered sacred at
obsequies namely a daughter’s son, a Nepal blanket and
sesamum*seeds ; the gift or naming or seeing of silver is
also auspecious. 0 king, the person performing a Srftddba
ceremony should abstain from anger, walking about and
hurry and those who take their meals at the SrSlddha should
also avoid them. 0 king Viswadevas, paternal ancestors,
and maternal ancestors are pleased with him who performs
these obsequial rites.

0 ki^jg, the moon is the supporter of the manes and he is
sustained ty acts of austere devotion. Hence one, who prac-
tises austerities, should be appointed at the performance of a
SrSddha. 0 king, if there is one Yogi in the midst of a
thousand Brahmans, he liberates both the sacrificer and all
those who take their meals there.


SECTION XVI.

A.URVA said — Ancestors are gratified for a month with
Havishya, * fish, or the flesh of the hare, of birds, of the
the goat, the antelope, the deer, the gayal, or the sheep,
or with the milk of the cow f and various preparations
thereupon, They are perpetually pleased with flesh in

* Havishya e, offerings made of rice or other grains with clarihod butter,
t The expression Gavya literally means all that is derived from cow. But
being associated with flesh readers may mistake it for the flesh of cow.
Though the sacrifice of a cow or calf formed part of the ancient Sradda it is
pi'escribed in the present ago. So it must mean here milk’ or any preparation
«fU.


224


VISIINUPURANAM.


general and with tliat of the long-eared white goat in parti-
cular, The flesh of the rhinoceros, the KSlasSlka, potherb and
honey, give special satisfaction to those who are adored at the
obsequial ceremonies. Blessed is he, and the king who per-
forms at the due time the Sraddha ceremony of h\s ancestors
at Gya and that affords special delight to his ancestors. Grains
that spring up spontaneously, wild-rice, white and black Panic
forest vegetables, barely, wheat-rice, sesamum, various kinds
of pulse and mustard are considered specially fit for ancestral
offerings. 0 king, a householder should not offer any* kind of
grain that is not rendered sacred by religious rites noj the
pulse called RajamSsha, nor millet, nor lentils, nor gourds,
nor garlick, nor onions, nor nightshade, nor camel’s thorn,
nor salt, nor the efflorescence of salt deserts, nor red
vegetable extracts, nor any thing that looks like salt, nor any
thing that is hated by people. He should not offer that water
at a SrSddha that has been brought by night, or has been left
off, or is so little as cannot satisfy a cow, or smells badly or
is covered with froth. He should not offer milk of animals
with undivided hoof, of a camel, a ewe, a deer, or a buffalo.
Neither the celestials nor the manes vvill partake of the food
if a Sraddha is looked at by a eunuch, a foundling, an out-
cast, a heretic, a drunken man, or one diseased, a cock, a
naked ascetic, a monkey, a village hag, by a woman in her
courses or pregnant, by an unclean person, or by a carrier of
corpses. The ceremony should be celebrated on a plot of
ground carefully enclosed. The performer should scatter
sesamum on the ground and drive away evil spirits. He
should not offer food that is fetid, or spoiled by hairs or
insects, or mixed with acid gruel, or stale. Whatever pure
food is offered to the manes, with faith and mentioning their
names and race, gives them nourishment. 0 king, in th^
days of yore, in the forest of Kalapa the Pitris said to
Ikshwaku, the son of Manu ‘‘Those, who shall respectfully
offer to us cakes at Gya, shall follow a righteous path. May


VISHNUPURANAM/


S2i


lie be born in our family^ who shall give us on the thirteenth
of Bhadrapada and Magha milk, honey and clarified butter,
who shall marry a maiden, shall liberate a black bull and
shall liberate a horse sacrifice accompanied with liberal
presents.


SECTION XVII.


Parasara said : — In the days of yore the glorious Aurva,
when accosted by the illustrious king Sagara, said thus regard-
ing the usages to be practised by mankind. I have described
to you all those observances which no one should violate.

Mai^reya said 0 venerable Sir, I know all those who
are called Sanda,* Apabidhaf and Udakeet but I wish td
know who is called Nagna ; doing what he is called so, and
what is the character of such a person to whom you have

referred.

Parasara said The Rig, Yajur and Sama Vedas are the
three-fold covering of the several castes and the sinful wight
who throws off this is called nacked or apostate. The three
Vedas constitute the dress of all men and when people
®®6lect them they are left bare. Hear, what my grand father
^ ® pious Vasishtha said about this to the noble Bhishma.

I heard what my grand-father said about this.

Eunuch, t Ono ejected from the society, J A woman in her co urse.

29


226


ViSHNUPURANAM.


There took place in the days of yore a battle between the
gods and demons for the period of a divine year in which the
gods were defeated by the demons under the command of
Hrada. The celestials, who were defeated, fled away to the
northern shore of the milky ocean, where being engaged in
devout practices, they thus prayed to Visluiu— “ May the
glorious Vishnu, who is without beginning, the lord of all beings,
be propitiated with the words that we are going to address
to him. Who can sing the glories^of that great God from whom
have originated all beings and in whom they cease ^0 exist?
Thoug thy true greatness is not within the reacH of words
still we have been engaged in glorifying thee being discom-
fitted by our enemies. Thou art earth, water, fire, air, ether,
mind, Prakrit i and Puriisha. 0 thou at one with all souls,
thy form, visible or unvisible, pervades all from Brahml to a
stock diversified by time and place. Salutation to thee,
who art Brahma originated from the lotus springing from
thy navel for the purpose of creation. Salutation to thee
who art Indra, the sun, Rudra, the Vasus, fire, the winds and
even also ourselves. Salutation to thee, 0 Gavinda, who
art at one with all demons, who are the creature of arro-
gance and want of discrimination uncontrolled by jgatience
and self-control. Salutation to thee who art at one with the
Yakshas, whose minds have no idea of perfect knowledge
and who are accordingly of unmitigated prowess and whose
nature is charmed with sounds. Salutation to thee, 0 fore-
most of Purushas, who are at one with all night-rangers,
originated from the quality of darkness, fierce, fraudulent and
cruel. Salutation to thee, 0 JanSrddana, who art that virtue
that gives rewards for the virtuous actions of those w*ho
live in heaven. Salutation to thee who art at one with the
saints of accomplished piety, who are always contented ^
and who traverse unobstructed all permeable elements. Salu-
tation to thee who art at one with the serpents, double-
tongued, . impulsive, cruel, not satisfied with enjoyment and :


VISHNUPURANAM.


227


having immense wealth. Salutation to tlice who art at one with
the Rishis who are freed from sins and imperfections and
at one with wisdom and tranquility.

Salutation to thee, O thou having lotus-eyes, who art at one
with time that devours, without any compunction, all created
beings at the end of Kalpa. Salutation to thee who art at
one with Rudra, who dances with delight after devouring all
beingS'i^gods and men. Salutation to thee, JanSrddana,
who art at one with men, who, actuated by the quality of
foulness, ^gage in actions. Salutation to thee who art at one
with4}rute animals — the spirit that leads to perversity, which
proceeds from the quality of darkness and is encumbered
with twenty-eight kinds of obstruction. Salutation to thee
who art that chief spirit that appears diversified in the
vegetable world and which are the substance of sacrifice is
the agent of accomplishing the perfection of the universe.
Salutation to thee who art identical with every thing and
whose first form is the objects of perception and heaven and
animals and men and celestials. Salutation to that form of
thine, which is the cause of causes and which is distinct
from and superior to the endless universe composed of in-
telligence, matter and the like and with which nothing can
be compared. Salutation to thee, 0 great God, who hast
neither colour nor extent nor dimensity and which is beyond

qualities and whose essence, purest of the pure, can be
conceived only by sages. Salutation to the BrahmS form of
thine, who pervades in our bodies, who exists in all objects,
who is without birth or decay and distinct from whom
*^othing exists. Salutation to thee, Vasudeva, the supreme
Jord of all, who is unsullied, the root of all things, freed from
dissolution, unborn, eternal, who in essence is the supreme
^<)ndition of spirit and in substance the whole of the unU
vcrse.^'

Having thus recited the prayer the celestials beheld
Hari the supreme lord of all) seated on Garuda, armed with


vishnupuranam:


^28

the shell, the discus, and the mace. And having placed
themselves before him they addressed him and said “ Have
pity upon us, 0 lord, and save us, who have come to thee
for help, from the Daityas. 0 supreme lord, transgressing
the commands of Brahma, the demons headed by Hrada, have
taken possession of the three worlds and appropriated the
offerings which are our portion. Though thou art atone
with the endless creation and we are a portion of thyself,
we, impressed by illusions, behold all things of the nniverse
as distinct. Our enemies are engaged in the duties of their
respective orders, follow the paths laid down by sacred writ-
ings and practise religious penances so we cannot lay them.
0 thou of immeasurable wisdom, do thou so instruct us that
we may root out the enemies of the celestials.^*

When the glorious Vishnu heard their prayers he emitted
from his person an illusory form which he gave to the celes-
tials and said. ^'This illusory form shall so deceive the
Daityas, that being led astray from the path of the Vedas,
they shall be slain ; for all gods, demons and others, who
shall transgress the authority of the Veda, shall perish by my
prowess which I exercise for the preservation of the universe.
’Go then j be not affraid ; this illusory form shall go before
you. 0 celestials, it shall be of great service to you, this
day.’*


SECTION XVIII.


Parasara said: — Maitreya, having proceeded to th®
Daityas the illusory form beheld them engaged in austere
penances on the banks of the river NerbudS. And
ing them in the guise of a naked mendicant, with ws «


VISHNUPURANAM.


229


shaven and carrying a bunch of peacock's, feathers he ad-
dressed them gently “ 0 lords of Daitya race— why do you
practice these devout penances ? Do you expect rewards in
this w'orld or in the next? The Asuras said:— “0 thou of
great mind, we have been engaged in these penances with a
view to reap ’fruits in the next world. Do thou tell us if thou
hast got anything to say on this." The deceptive figure said:—
“If you are desirous of final emancipation hear my words, for
you will obtain the revelation which is the door to final happi-
ness. IRl^e instructions, superior to which there is nothing,
I will give you, are the secret path to final emancipation. If
you follow them you shall either obtain heaven or exemption
from future births. O ye gifted with mighty strength, you are
worthy of these instructions.’^

Parasara said : — There did the illusory figure mislead the
Daityas from the teachings of the Vedas by various persua^
tions and many spacious arguments, teaching that the same-
thing might be for the sake of virtue and of vice; might be
and might not be ; might or might not lead to final emancipa-
tion; might be the supreme object and not the supreme
object; might be effect and not be effect; might be manifest
and not be manifest ; might be the duty of those who go
naked and who go richly dressed. And thus were the
Daityas led astray from the path of their duties by the con-
tinued teachings of their illusory teacher, keeping up the
€qual truth of contradictory teachings. And those were called
Arhatas from the phrase he had employed of " Ye are worthy
(Arhatha) of this great teaching" that is of the false teachings
^hich he induced them to follow. Thus did the illusory
figure lead away the Asuras from the teachings of the Vedas.
And being impressed by those teachings the Asuras initiated
others in all those doctrines. They in their turn became
teachers of the same false doctrines and converted others.
And thus communicating their doctrines to each other, they
were all led away from the teaching of the Vedas.


230


VISH>IUPURANAM.


Then pulling on garments of red colour, with collyrium
in his eyes, the illusory figure again addressed others of the
same family in sweet and mild accents—” 0 ye demons,
gifted with strength, if ye wish for heaven or final rest desist
from the sinful massacre of animals and hear from me what
you should do. The whole universe is cortiposed of dis-
criminative knowledge ; understand my words well for they
have been uttered by the wise. The world is without stay
and is perpetually revolving in the straits of existence
being engaged in the pursuit of erroneous knowledge and
sullied by passion and others. •

Parasara said : — In this wise exclaiming to them ” Know
(Budhyadwam) and they saying (Budhyate), it is known,”
those Daityas were led away from their own religion. They
thus renounced their respective duties being impressed by
the reasonings and arguments of that illusory figure. 0
Maitreya, they, impressed, pursuaded others to do the same
and thus the heresy spread and many abandoned the prac-
tices laid down by the Vedas and Smritis. 0 twice-born
one, with various other erroneous teachings, the illusory figure
converted many other Daityas. Being thus deluded, the
Asuras, in no time, abandoned the doctrines and rites laid
down by the three Vedas. Some of them, 0 twice-born one,
spoke ill of the Vedas and others villified the celestials. Some
spoke against the Vedic rites and sacrifices and others calum-
niated the Brahmans. ”The precepts” they preached *‘that
lead to the sacrifice of animals, are highly culpable. To
lay that throwing clarified butter in fire produces rewards is
simply childishness. If any one, after having obtained
god head by multiplied ceremonies, is fed along with Indraupon
the wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is lower than a
brute which feeds upon leaves. If a beast, being sacrificedi
attains to heaven, why does not the sacrificer slay his father
in a sacrifice ? If a dead person is satisfied if another is
fed at a Srlddha then why does not the food offered by bis


VISHNUPURANAM*


23i


son reach him who resides at a distance ? All these words
therefore depend upon individual respect so it is better for
you to neglect them and appreciate mine. The words of
authority, 0 mighty Asuras, do not fall from heaven ; reason-
able words only are to be acknowledged by me and persons
like yourselves. ” By these and similar reasonings the Dai-
tyas were led away and none of them any longer acknow-
ledged the authority of the Vedas.

After the Daityas have thus been led astray, the godS|
with careful preparations, addressed themselves for fight#
And ther^ again began a terrible encounter between the
gods and demons. And the demons were now defeated and
slain by the gods who had adhered to the righteous path.
Formerly the Daityas were protected by the armour of their
own religion and they were now slain for the desertion of that
armour of religion.

For that time, 0 Maitreya, those, who have followed
the religion preached by the illusory figure, are called nacked
for they following a wrong track have thrown off the garment
of the Vedas. There arc four orders of men, namely ;
the religious student, the householder, the hermit and the
mendicant; there is no fifth order. The sinful man, who
after relinquishing the order of the householder, does not
become either a hermit or a mendicant, is said to be naked. The
*^an, who, although able, does neglect his parmanent observ-
ances for one day, commits sin for one day ; and if he neg-
kets them, not being in trouble, for a fortnight he can be.
purified only by arduous expiation. The virtuous must see
fi'e sun after looking upon a person who has neglected

permanent observances for a year ; if they have touched
they must bathe with their clothes on— but that vicioua


®uehas no individual expeation for himself. There is no
Sinner on earth, more culpable, than one in whose house the
^®^«8tials, progenitors and spirits are left to sigh unworship-
P^d. No man should associate, in residence, sitting or society


VISilNUt^URANAM.


^ 3 ^

with him on whose perswi or in whose house the gods, proge-
nitors and spirits sigh. Conversation, exchange of civilities
or association with a man is equally reprehensible who fora
year has not observed pious observances* And the man,
who eats in the house of such a man, or sits down with him or
sleep on the same couch with him, becomes instantly in the
same way culpable.

He who eats himself without satisfying the gods, manes,
spirits and guests feeds upon his own iniquity and there is
BO salvation for such a person. The Brahmans arj^ men of
other castes who neglect their respective duties or tak^ up
a degraded profession are said to be naked. To live in a
plate where there is an intermixture of four castes is detrimental
to the character of the righteous. Those who converse with
him who eats without offering a portion to the gods, the
sages, the manes, spirits and guests, are doomed to hell. A
wise man should not therefore talk with or come in contact
with these heretics who are rendered impure for renouncing
the three Vedas. A Sraddha ceremoney, although performed
with great care and devotion, if looked upon by these heretics
does not please the gods or progenitors.

As described, there was in the days of yore a king named
Satadhanu whose wife *Saivya was a woman of great piety.
She was faithful to her husband, kind, sincere, pure, and gifted
with every female accomplishment, humility and discretion.
The king, with his wife, worshipped with great devotion
Janarddana the lord of gods. He daily worshipped Him
with whole-mindedness, oblations to fire, prayers, gifts and
fasting. One day when they had fasted on the full moon o
Kartika and had bathed in the Bhagirathi, they saw as they
came up from the river, a heretic to approach them who was th®
friend of the king’s military preceptor. The king, out of W®
respect for the preceptor, entered into conversation with him
but his devoted wife Saivya did not utter a single wor ♦
And thinking that she was fasting she turned from him an


VtSUNUPURANAM.


23s


fooked towards the sun* Having arrived at home, the hus-
band and wife as usual performed the worship of Vishnu*
After a time the king, who had defeated all his enemies, died
and the ()ueen ascended the funeral pile of her husband.

On account of the sin committed by Satadhanu for speak«
ing to a heretic*while fasting he was born again as a dog. His
wife was born as the daughter of the king of Kasi having
a knowledge of her former birth, versed in every science
and gifted with every virtue. Her father was anxious to
marry with a good husband, but she always opposed and
the Jting was prevented from celebrating the nuptials. The
daughter of the king of Kasi, by the knowledge of her pris-
tine birth, saw that her huband was born as a dog in the city
of VisidhS. And having gone there she saw her husband in
that plight. And knowing that animal to be her husband she
placed upon his neck the bridal garland going through the
marriage rites and prayers. And being pleased with the excel-
lent food offered, the animal expressed his joy after the manner
of his species. He thus sporting as a dog, she was greatly
ashamed and bowing unto her husband, born as a dog, she
said king, remember the civilities shown by you (towards
your preceptor's friend) for which thou hast been born as
^ dog and art fawning upon me. Dost thou not remember, 0
My lord, that by conversing with a heretic after bathing in a
sacred river, thou hast been born as a dog ?”

Parasara said:— Being thus remided the king called
lo his memory his former condition and was wrapt in medita-
hon and felt humiliation. With a broken heart he went away
kom the city and falling dead in a desert he was again born
a jackal. In the following year the princess, again by
knowledge, perceived that he was born as a jackal and
to the mount Kotahala to find him out. Finding him
there the beautiful daughter of the king thus spoke to her lord
as a js^ckal-— ^'0 king, dost thou not remember thy cofi-
'^®r»atbn with the heretic which ! called to thy memory,
30


vishmupuranam:


wheh thou wast a dog ? Thus accosted the king perceived
what the princess had said was true. Thereupon he abstained
from eating and died. He was then born as a wolf but his
wife repairing to a lonely forest again called back to the recoh'
lection of her husband his former state 0 noble lord, thou
art not a wolf but the king Satadhanu. Thou * wast born as
a dog, then as a jackal and thou hast been born as a wolf.^^

Parasara said : — Upon thus recollecting his former state
the king renounced his life and was born again as a vulture.
His loving queen again found him in that state called
back to his memory his former condition. king”^she
cried out, “ remember thy true self — do thou renounce this
ugly form to which thou Hast been condemned by the sin
consequent upon thy conversing with a heretic.’* The king
was next born as a crow and the princess making him out by
virtue of her knowledge of the pristine birth thus spoke to
her lord “ 0 lord, thou art now being born as a crow eating
the tributary grain, to whom, in a previous birth, all other
kings paid tribute. ”

Parasara said Being thus reminded of his former birth
the king renounced the body and was born again as a peacock.
Thereupon the beautiful princess began to pet him and feed
him with such food as is agreeable to the peacocks. There-
^on the king, Janaka, undertook the celebration of a mighty
horse sacrifice. In the ablutions with which it ended the
princess caused his peacock to be bathed, bathing also herself*
She then reminded Shatadhanu how he had been successively
born as various animals. One recollecting this he renounced
his life. He was then born as the son of the hrgh-souled king
Janaka.

Then the princess, having a slender person, expressed her
desire to her father to be wedded. Her father too announced
for aSwayambara. When all had assembled at that meeting
that chaste damsel found out her (former) lord and ag^*^
tfected him as her husband. The prince lived happily


VISHNUPURANAM/


235


iter and on the death of her father ruled over the country
of Videha. He celebrated many sacrifices and distributed
many gifts and begot sons and defeated many enemies in
war. Having ruled duly and cherished the earth that king
renounced his life in battle as became the warrior caste. The
princess again* followed him in death and in agreement with
sacred precepts once more mounted cheerfully his funeral
pyre. Thereupon the king, with the princess, attained to the
regions beyond the region of Indra, where all desires are
for ever ^satisfied, obtaining eternal and unequalled bliss in
heaven, th2 consummate happiness that is the reward of con*
jugal fidelity which is hardly attained.

I have thus describle to you, 0 Maitreya, the sin conse-
quent upon conversing with a heretic and effects of bathing
after the solemn sacrifice of a horse. A man should therefore
carefully avoid the conversation or coming in contact with a
heretic especially at seasons of devotion and when engaged
in the performance of the religious rites before a sacrifice. The
prudent should look at the sun after seeing a person in whose
house domestic ceremonies have been neglected for a mouth.
And there is the greatest need of expiation if they meet
persons who live upon other’s rice and who have wholly
abandoned the Vedas and who dispute the doctrines of sacred
writings. A man should not even talk with heretics, those
who do forbidden acts, pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics
and hypocretes; communication with such sinful wretches
ever at a distance, all association with schismatics pollutes a
aian ; a man should therefore carefully avoid them.

These are the persons, O Maitreya, called naked, the
meaning of which term you wanted me to explain. If they
'vitness a SrAddha ceremoney that becomes fruitless— com-
munication with whom spoils the piety of one day. These
are the heretics with whom the wise should not converse-*«*and
^P^aking to whom destroys the virtue he might have obtained

that day. Men fall into hell if they convese with them


VISHNUPURANAM.


*36

who uselessly assume the twisted hair and shaven head, who
eat without offering food to gods, spirits and guest and
those who do not offer cakes and. libation of water to their
manes.


END OF PART III.


PART IV.


— — :o:

SECTION I.


]M[aitreya said : — 0 venerable sir, you have described
to me the permanent and occasional observances to be ob-^
served by those pious individuals who are diligent in their
devotions. You have also described to me the duties which
appertain to several castes and several orders of men. I
wish you to relate to me now the dynasties of the kings wha
have ruled over the earth.

ParsaRA said Hear 0 Maitreya, I shall describe to
you the family of Manu beginning with Brahma and com-
prising a number of pious, high-minded and heroic princes;
It is said, that never does his family become extinct^ who
daily calls to his mind the family of Manu springing from
BrahmA. Hear, therefore, 0 Maitreya, an account of the origin
his family, hearing which all sins shall be removed.

From the mundane egg originated Brahma, who was
Hiranyagarbha, the form of that supreme BrahmA which
consists of Vishnu as ideptical with Rig, Yajur and Sama
Vcdas--4hc first, uncreated cause of all worlds. From the
^ight thumb of BrahmA originated the Patriarch Daksha
^hose daughter was Aditi, who was the mother of the san.
Pfom the sun sprang Manu whose sons w'ere Ikshawaku,
Nriga, Dwrisbta, Saryati, Narishyanta, Pransu, Nabhaga,
Nfidishta Karusha, and Prishadhra. Being desirous of having
offspring formerly. Manu celebrated a sacrifice in honour of


838


ViSHNU^URANAM.


Mitra and Varuna; but the ceremony being unsuccessful
on account of some irregularity from the presiding priest
daughter llA was born. But by the mercy of the two deities
however^ her sex was changed and she became a man under
the name of Sudyumna. And he again became a woman under
an imprecation (from Siva) near the hermitage of Buddha,
the son of the moon.

One day while she was walking near the hermitage of
Buddha, he became attached to her and begot on her a son
named Pururavas. After his birth, the noble Rishis^ desiring
to restore Sudyumna to his sex, prayed to the glorious Vi§hnu
who is the essence of the four Vedas, of mind, of every thing
and of nothing and who is the sacrificed male. By his mercy
I lA once more became Sudyumna, in which character be bad
three sons, Utkala, Gaya and Vinata.

On account of his having been formerly born a female he
did not receive any portion of his paternal kingdom. His
father however at the request of Vasistha conferred upon
him the city of PratishtA, and he gave it to Pururavas.

Of the other sons of Manu, Prishadhra, on account df the
sin consequent upon slaying a cow, was degraded to the
condition of a Sudra. Prom Karusha sprang the heroic persons
named KArushas. The son of Nedistha, named NAbhaga
became a Vaisya ; his son was Bhalandana, whose son was
the well-known Vatsapri ; his son was Pransu, whose son was
Prajani, whose son was Khanitra, whose son was the brave
Chakshupa, whose son was Vinsa, whose son was Vivin**
sati, whose son was Khaninetra, whose Son was the powerf
ful, rich, and heroic Karandhama, whose son was Aviksbiti
whose son was the powerful Marutta, regarding whom this
celebrated verse is recited—** Who else on this earth has
been able to celebrat a sacrifice like one celebrated by
Marutta ? All the implements and utensils were mads
Cif gold. Indra was intoxicated with the drinking of Soma
juice and all the BrAbmans were greatly pleased , on bav*»


VISHNUPURANAM.


^39


Ing liberal presents. In his sacrihce the winds were the
guards and the other celestials were the courtiers. Marutta
was a lord paramount ; he had a son named Narishyanta ;
his son was Dama ; his son was Rayavarddana ; his son
was Suddhriti ; his son was Nara, ; his son was Kevala ;
his son was Banduhmat ; his son was Vegavat ; his son was
Budha; his son was Trinavindu, who had a daughter under
name of Ilavila. Being enermoured of Trinavindhu, the
nymph Alambush^ bore him a son named Visala by whom
the city VaisSli was founded.

^Jinata had a son whose name was Hemchandra; his
son was Suchandra ; his son was Dhumraswa ; his son was
Srinjaya ; his son was Sahadeva ; his son was Krisaswa ; hiS
son was Somadatta, who performed ten times the sacrifice
of a horse ; his son was Janemajaya, whose son was Sunati*
These kings are known as Vaisalas, of them it is said -“By
the mercy of Trinavindhu all the kings of VaisSli were long-
lived, magnanimous and just and brave.”

Saryati had a daughter named Sukanya. Chyavana
marritd her. He had a pious son named Anartta, who had a
son called Revata who governed the country called after the
name of his father Anartta and lived at the capital called
Kusasthali. The son of this king was Raivata or Kakudniin,
the eldtfst of a hundred brethern. He had a daughter named
Revati. He repaired with her to the region of BrahmA to
consult with the god springing from lotus upon whom to
confer her. When he reached there the Gandharhas, Haha
nnd Huha, were singing before BrahmA and Raviata waited
till they had finished. And the ages passed away during

performence seemed to him as a moment. When they had
finished singing Raivata laid himself low before BrahmA and
®®ked him about a fit bridegroom. BrahmA said— '‘Whom should
you wish for a son-in«Iaw ?” And bowing again Raivata men-
boned to him various persons whom he liked. Nodding his head
smiling graciously BrahmA said to him—'* Of those whoiw


VtSIlNUPURANAM.


04 $

you have mentioned there is no trace of their family on earth
Many ages have passed away whilst you were listening to
the songs of Gandharbas. Now the twenty-eighth great age
of the present Manu is well-nigh gone. Kali is fast approach-
ing. You alone give away this jewel of a daughter to some
body; all thy friends ministers, servants, 'wife, kinsmen^
armies, wealth have along since been taken away by the
hand of Time/*

t That king, being terrified again, said, bowing, to Drahmi
lord, such being the circumstance, upon whom sh^l I confer
this daughter ?** Thereupon nodding, the preceptor o{ the
seven worlds-— the god, whose throne is lotus, said to the
king, standing humbly before — “ The being, whose beginning,
middle or end we donot know, who exists in all> who is the
creator, whose real and infinite nature and essence we do
not know is (Vishnu), flis power cannot be measured by time,
consisting of moments and hours and years ; he has no birth
or death — all objects are his form— he is eternal— he has no
form or name. By the mercy of that imperishable being I am
the agent of creation— Rudra is the agent of destructioff and
Vishnu is the agent of preservation. He, assuming my form
creates the universe ; in his own essence he provides for its
juration; in the form of Rudra he devours all things ; and
with the body of Ananta he upholds them, In the person of
Indra and other celestials he protects mankind and as the
fun and moon he dispells darkness. Assuming the nature
of fire he bestows warmth and maturity, and in that of earth
he nourishes all beings. In the shape of air he give activity#
in the shape of water he gives satisfaction and in the shape of
sky he provides space for all objects. He, being creator,
creates himself ; he, being preserver, preserves himself ; he,
being destroyer, destroys his own universal form. He is imperi-
shable ; there is nothing distinct from him. In him is the world;
be is the world j and he, the primeval self-born, is again pf®'
iCftt itt the world.. O king, the glorious Vishnu has incarnatei*


VISHNUPURANAM.


241;


a portion of himself on earth. 0 king, your picturesque city
Kusasthali, like the city of Indra, is now called Dwarka.
There reigns a portion of Kesava in the person of Beladeva.
0‘king, confer this daughter of thine upon him, who appears
under the.gMise of a man. He is an excellent bridegroom for
this gem of a daughter and she is a fit bride.’^

PaRASARA said : — Being thus advised by the deity spring-
ing from lotus, the king returned to earth and beheld mankind,
greatly reduced in size and vigour and weakened in intellects
Therenpon that king, having incomparable wisdom, repairing
to his owif city Kusathali which he saw greatly changed,
gave his daughter to Baladeva whose breast was as fair and
radiant as crystal. And beholding that damsel of excessive
height the king, whose banner is a palm tree, shortened her
with the*end of his ploughshare. Being thus shortened she
became like other women. Balarama thus married duly
Revali, the daughter of Raivata. And the king, too giving
away daughter, retired to the mountain Himalaya and en-
gaged in penances with a subdued mind.


SECTION It-


HILST Kakudmin Raivata was absent in the region of
brahma, RSkshasas named Punyjanas devastated his capital
^^sasthali. His hundred brothers, afraid of the enemies^
in different directions and their descendants the Kasha-
^“yas settled all over the country .

3 *


VISHNUPURANAM.


942

From Dhristha originated the Kshatryarace of Dharshtakaj
the son of Nabhaga was Nlbbaga> his son was Ambarisa;
his son was Virupa; his son was Prishadaswa; his son
was Ratbinara, of whom it is said— -'Uhese princes of
Rathinara family, although Kshatryas by birth, were caiU
ed Angerasas or sons of Angera and were Brahmans and
Kshatryas.

As Manu was sneezing Ikshawku was born from bis
nostril. He had a hundred sons of whom the three well-
known were Vikukshi, Nimi and Danda. These and fifty
under Sakuni were the rullers of the north. Forty^ight were
the rulers of the south.

Being engaged in the celebration of an ancestral rite
upon Ashtaka day Ikshawku ordered Vikukshi to bring
him flesh suitable for the offering. The prince, therefore,
went into woods and slew many a deer and other wild animals
for the purpose. Being exhausted with hunting he was
hungry; accordingly he sat down and ate a hare. And
being refreshed he carried the rest of the game to bis father.
Vaisishtha, the family priest of Ikshawakus, was invited to
consecrate the food; but he said that it was impure on
account of Vikuksh’s having eaten a hare from amongst it.
Being thus informed by his spiritual preceptor the father
abandoned his son who, in consequence thereof, received the
epithet Sasada (hare-eater) On the dimise of his father he
piously ruled over the earth. A son, Puranjaya by name,
was born to him.

There took place a dreadful conflict in the Treta yog*
between the gods and demons in which the former were
defeated. They accordingly repaired to Vishnu for help and
propitiated him by their adorations. Being propitiated the
primeval deity, the eternal ruler of the universe, NSrSyana
said totbem— “ What you have desired is known to me. Hear
how your desires shall be fulfilled. There is a foremost
Ksbatryra king named Puranjaya, son of the W**


ViS^NUPliftANAM.


SasSda. Infusing a portion of myself into his body I shall
descend on earth and slay all the demons. Do you so cn*
deavour that Putanjaya might engage in the work of the
destruction of Asuras/* Hearing those words the celestials
bowed unto the glorious Vishnu and went to Paranyaja and
addressed him,* saying, '‘0 feremost of Kshatryas, we have
come to thee to secure thy help in the destruction of our
enemies iu which we have been engaged. It will not behove
thee to neglect our friendship who have come here.'^ Being
thus addr«|sed Puranjaya said — If Indra, the lord of the
threei worlds, the king of you all, who is known as the
performer of hundred sacrifices, agrees to carry me upon his
shoulders, I shall then fight with your enemies and help you.’^
The celestials and Indra immediately said “ so be it.”

Thereupon Satakratu assumed the shape of a bull and
the king mounted upon his shoulder. And being invigorated
by the power of the undecaying God, the lord of all move-
able and and immoveable things, he slew all the Asuras in the
battle between the gods and demons. And in consequence
of his destroying the Asura army whilst seated upon the
flump of the bull he obtained the appellation Kakutstha. The
son of Kakutstha waa Anenas, whose son was Pritha, whose
son was Viswagaswa, whose son was Arda, whose son was*
Yuvanaswa, whose son was Sravasta, by whom the city of
Sravasti was founded. The son of Sravasta was Vrihadawa
whose son was Kuvalayaswa. This prince, invigorated by
^he energy of Vishnu, slew the Asura Dhundhu, who had
^iiturbed the pio,us sage Uttanka, and he was accordingly
*iamed Dhundhumara (slayer of Dhundhu. Whilst fight-
with the demon he was attended by his twenty one
thousand sons, who all, with the exception of three, were
consumed by the fiery breath of dhundhu. These three
Were DhridhAswa, Chandraswa and Kapilaswa. The son
tihridhaswa was BarySswa, whose son was Nikumbha^
^hose son was Sanhataswa, whose son - was KrisAswa,


VlSimUPURANAM,


'*44

whose son was Baseoajit, whose son was another Yuva.
niswat

Being aggrieved in consequence of having no -son he
lived in the hermitage of saints. And being worked up with
compassion of sages engaged in the performance of a reli.
gious ceremony for this offspring. When half the night had
passed away they finished the ceremony and having placed a
vessel of consecrated water upon the altar they slept.

When they had slept the king, distressed with thirst, en-
tered the cottage and did not like to disturb the ^shis. He
then drank the water in the vessel consecrated and renjjered
efficacious by sacred texts.

When the Rishis got up in the morning, they said-~‘^Who
has drunk this consecrated water? Drinking this the wife
of the king Yuvanaswa would have given birth to a valiant
son.^’ Hearing this the king said — I have unknowingly
drunk this water.''

Accordingly a child was conceived in the belly of Yuva-
nSiswa; it grew and in proper time it ripped open the right
side of the king and was born. But the king did not die. The
son being born the Rishis said — *^Who will be its nurse.'*
There appeared the king of the celestials and said He shall
have me for his nurse (mamayan dhasyati)." He was thence
called Mandhata, Indra put his fore-finger into the mouth of
the infant, who sucked it and drew it from heavenly nectar*
And he grew up and became a powerful king and brought the
seven continents into his subjection. It is said of him
From the rising of the setting sun all that is lighted by hi®
rays is the land of MandhSta the son of Yuvanaswa.

Mandhata married, Vindumati, the daughter of SasSvindu
end begot on her three sons Purukutsa, Ambarisba and
Mnchukunda; he had also fifty daughters.

An ascetic, named Saubhari, versed in Rig Veda
In the waters for twelve years. There lived a huge
^'ho was thft / s<jvereign, named Sammada, He ^


VISHNUPURANAM*


numerous progeny. His children and grand children used to
sport around him in all directions and he lived happily
amongst them, playing with them day night before the ascetic.
Being disturbed in his devotions that ascetic, in the
waters, beholding the sport of the king of fish with
his children and grand children, thought within himself
— Blessed is the being, who, although born in a degraded
state, is sporting with his children and grand children.
This has created envy in me and I wish to sport with my
children and grand children.’* Having thus made up his
mind the* ascetic speedily came up from the water and
being desirous of becoming a householder went to MAndhAtA
to demand one of his daughters as his wife.

Thereupon hearing of the arrival of the sage the king
rose up from his seat and worshipped him with libation.
Having taken a seat Saubhari said to the king — 1 have
made up my mind to marry. Do you, 0 king, give me one
of your daughters as a wife. DonT disappoint my love. If
any one comes to the race of Kakutstha with a desire he
does not go back disappointed. 0 king, there are many
other sovereigns on this earh who have got daughters ; but
diy family is renowned above all in granting liberal gifts to
them who come with that purpose. 0 king, you have got
fifty daughters — confer one of them upon me so that I may
be relieved from the anxiety I feel in consequence of the
fear that my request may not be granted.

Parasar/v said — Hearing the words of the sage and
beholding his body worn out with infirmities (he did not
bke to satisfy his desire) — but afraid of an imprecation he
much disturbed in mind and lowering his head thought
some time. The Rishi said — What .are you meditating
^pon, 0 king ? I have not asked for any such thing which
you cannot give. Your daughter must be given to some
•wdy. But if you fulfill my desires what is there that cannot
obtained by you?’' Thereupon the king; afraid of his


246


VISHNUPURANAM.


displeasure, said— "0 illustrious sir, such is the practice irt
our family, that daughters must be given to such fitting per-
sons as they shall themselves selects I did never expect
that such a request would corOe from you — I do not know
why such a desire has taken place in your mind. This has
created perplexity in me and I am at a loss what to do/'
Hearing that the sage thought within himself — ^‘This is
merely an indirect way of not yeilding to my request, I am
an old man, having no attractions for women and his daughters
Will not accept me. Whatever it may be, I shalUo that."
Thinking thus, the sage said to MandhAta — “ If such be ihe
Custom of your family — give orders that I may be admitted
into the interior of your palace. If any one of your daughters
selects me I shall take her as my wife — if none of them be
willing, I shall desist from such an attempt considering
that I am too old for it." Having said this the sage was
silent.

Being afraid of the imprecation of the sage, the king
ordered the eunuch to conduct him to the inner apartment.
As he entered, he assumed a form of beauty far exceeding
that of men or gods. Addressing the princesses his guide
said to them — “ Your father, young ladies, sends this pious
sage to you who wanted of him a bride. And the king has
promised that he will give her to him who will select him."
Heating these words the princesses were all excited with
desire and passion, and like a troop of female elephants
encircling the lord of the herd, they all contended to have
him as their husbaud. They said to one another — " Away
away, sister, I shall take him as my husband. He has already
been selected by me ; he is not a meet bridegroom for you. He
has been purposely created by BrahmA for me as I have been
created to become bis wife. As soon as he entered the house
I selected him as my husband ; why do you prevent him fron*
becoming so?" Thus there arose a conflict amongst the
^ugi^ers'of the king, each contending that I have selected


VISHNUPURANAM.


him as my husband. While that bJameless sage was thus
selected by all the princesses the eunuch went to the king
and with down cast looks reported to him what had takeiv
place* Having received all information^ the king, perplexed
the more, thought — “ What is all this i What I am to do now f
What is it that 1 have said’’ and then with extreme reluctance
gave away all his daughters to the sage.

Thus the wished-for marriage of the great sage was
accomplished and he took away all the princesses to his
hermitage. Thereupon he ordered ViswakarmS like second
Br^hmS, Ihe inventor of art, to construct separate palaces
for each of his wives, to furnish each palace with elegant
couches and seats and furniture and to attach to tliem spacious
yard, groves with reservoirs of water where the wild duck
and swan should sport amidst beds of lotuses. Thereupon
the celestial architect carried out the orders of the sage.
And at the behest of the great sage, Saubhari, the divine
and inexhaustible treasure Nanda lived there permanently.

Thereupon the princesses entertained there day and night
all their guests and dependant with richest and choicest viands*

Once on a time the king, attracted by his allection for the
daughters, went to the hermitage of the great ascetic to learn
whether his daughters were in poverty or happiness. Repairing
there he beheld a number of crystal palaces, brilliant as the
*'ays of the sun and picturesque gardens and tanks. Entering
one of the palaces and embracing his dangliter, the king said
to her with tears of affection and delight in his eyes — “ Dear
child, tell me how are you here. Are you happy here or
not ? Does the great sage treat you kindly ? Do you remem-
her thy early home” ? Being thus addressed the daughter said
to her father — “ 0 father, this palace is picturesque surroun*
ded by charming gardens with birds emitting sweet notes, and
tanks abounding in full-blown lotuses. I have got here rich
'^•ands, fragrant unguents, precious ornaments, costly clothes,
^Itbeds and every other thing that wealth can give- But stiH


ViSHNUPURANAM.


148

then, why should I not remember my early home. By thy
favour 1 have obtained all these thingS4 But there is one source
of my grief— my husband never goes out of my house. He is
solely attached to me and is always at my side; he never
goes to my sisters; for this my sisters are sorry ; this is the
only cause of my uneasiness/’ Being thu.s • addressed he
went to the second palace and embracing his daughter and
taking his seat he put the same question. The same account
of the enjoyment of palaces and other things was given by
her ; she also made the same complaint that the sage was
solely attached to her and paid no attention to h?r sisters.
Hearing this the king went round all the palaces, put the
same question to all his daughters and received the same
reply. Having his heart filled with satisfaction and wonder
he repaired to the glorious Saubhari who was alone and
reverentially said to him — 0 illustrious sage, marvellous is-
thy power— I have never seen this in any other person. Oh
great is the reward of thy austere penances.” Having bowed
unto the sage and been welcomed by him with great re-
verence the king lived with him for some time and enjoying
the pleasures of the place returned to his capital.

As time went on the daughters of MindhSta bore to
Saubhari one hundred and fifty sons. Gradually he became
more and more attached to his children and his mind was
wholly engrossed with selfish thoughts. He always used to
thiuk— When will these sons of mine speak to me in sweet
accents ? When will they learn to wglk? When will they attain
to youth? When shall I see them wedded? When shall!
behold them with their sons?” With these anticipations, he
spent some time and at last thought” What exceeding
folly is mine I There is no end of desires even in ten thou-
sand or a hundred thousand years. With one desire gratified
another springs up. I have seen my infants walk— I
seen their youth, their manhood, their marriage, their chi!*
4ren, still iny desires are not gratified and mind longs sfte^


vishnupuranam:


249 ‘

seeing tHe descendants of their descendants. When I shall
see them another desire will spring up. When that is satis-
fied another wish will be engendered.

How can the growth of desires be prevented ? I have
now learnt that there is no end of desires till death. His
mind can never be devoted to the supreme spirit who is a per-
petual slave of desires. My devotions, whilst I was in
the waters, were thwarted by my attachment to my friend,
the fish. The outcome of that connection was my marriage
and the result of that marriage is the cycle of worldly desires.
Birtji with'one body is a source of many ills. By my mar-
riage with the princess I have got one hundred and fifty
sons so my miseries have been multiplied to that extent
And they will be infinitely multiplied by their children, by
their wives and their progeny — thus a married life is a source
of individual anxiety. My devotions, which I practised in
the waters, have been thwarted by my worldly wealth and
I have been beguiled by the desire for the progeny which
was created in me by the association with Samrnada. For
the ascetics separation from the world is the only way to
Hberation; association with others is a source of many evils.
Even the most accomplished ascetic is degraded by worldly
attachments what to speak of those whose observances
are incomplete. Though my intellect has been possessed
hy the desire of married life still I shall exert myself for
the salvation of my soul so that freed from human infirmities
I may be released from human sufferings. For that purpose
by austere penances I shall propitiate Vishnu, the creator of
the universe whose form cannot be ascertained, who is
smaller than the smallest, larger than the largest, the source
oi darkness and light— the king pf gods. May my mind,
Ifced from sins, be devoted to his body which is both des-
Cfete and indescrete substance, boundlessly mighty, at one
^ith the universe so that I may not be born again. I seek
tbe refuge of that Vishnu, who is the teacher of teachers,
32


vishnupuranam.


ajo

who « identical with, all beings, the pure eternal lord qf
all, without beginning, middle or end and besides whom there
exists nothing.


SECTION III.


P ARASARA said— Having thus thought within himself
Sauvari renounced his children, his home, his splendour
and wealth and repaired with his wives to the forest. Having
daily perfor.tied there the observances of the ascoties
called VaikhRnasas (or ascetics having families) he cleansed
himself from all iniquities. When bis mind was ripe and
freed from passions he concentrated in his spirit the sacramen-
tat fires and became a religious mendicant. Then having
made over all his actions to the glorious god he attained
to the condition of Achyuta which is above change, the
vicissitudes of birth, transmigration or death. Whoever
shall read, hear, remember, or understand this story of
Sauvari and his marriage with the daughters cl MSndhlta*
shall never, for eight successive births, be addicated to
evil thoughts nor shall he act unrighteously, nor shall he thiah
of improper objects — nor shall he be subject to selfishness >
shall now describe to you the progeny of MSndhSta.

The son of Ambarisha^ the son of MSndhlta, was Yuvana-
swa ; his son was Harita from whom sprang Angir^®
Htritasw


VISHNUPURANAM*


251


In the regions below the fearth, the Gandharbas nimed
Mauneyas, six million in number, had defeated the snake-
gods, usurped their kingdom and stolen away all their pre*
cious jewels- Defeated by the Gandharbas the serpent
chiefs addressed the lord of celestials, sleeping on the sur-
face of the ocea'n of milk as he awoke from his sleep ; and the
blossoms of his lotus eyes opened as he listened to their
hymns.

They all bowing said — ^^How shall we be relieved fromthe
fear of these Gandharbas 7 ” Where to the glorious god re-
plie4— shall enter into the person of Purukutsa, the son
of MSndhata, the son of Yuvanaswa and slay all the Gan-
dharbas/* On hearing these words the snake-gods bowed
and went away and returning to their country sent NarmadA
to secure the help of Purukutsa.

Accordingly NarmadA went to Purukutsa and led hint
to the regions belovV the earth, where, being filled with the
energy of Vishnu he slew all the Gandharbas. He then returned
to bis own house. And the snake-gods conferred upon
NarmadA a boon that whosoever should think of her,
Mention her name, should never have any fear front
the snakes. This is the invocation : ^‘Salutation unto
Narmada in the morning ; salutation unto Narmada at night,
*4lutation to thee O NarmadA, save me from this serpent’s
poison/* Whoever shall repeat this day and night shall riot
^6 bitten by a serpent in the dark or in entering a room.
Nor shall he, who shall remember this, suffer from poison,
^ben he eats even food mixep with it. They also
^^ttferred a boon on Purukutsa that none in this family
be bitten.

Purukutsa begot on NarmadA a son, named Trasa-
whose sort was Sambbuta, whose son was AnA-
killed by RAvana when he traversed
country for conquests. Anaranja’s son was Prisbadaswa;

** son was Haryyaswa j his son was SumanAs ; his sod Was


VISHNUPURANAM.


252

Tridhanwan ; his son was Trayyaruna ; his son was
was Satyavrata who received the name of Trisanku
and was degraded to the state of a ChandAla or
outcast. Once on a time there was a famine for
twelve years. He used to suspend flesh upon a fig-tree on the
banks of the Ganges for the wife and children of
Viswamitra— he did not give it with his own hands for he
might not accept the present of a Chandala. For this Viswa-
mitra was highly pleased and took him in his living body to
heaven.

The son of Trisanku was Ha;is Chandra, whose son was
Rohitaswa, whose son was Harita, whose son was Chunchu,
who had two sons named Vijaya and Sudeva. Ruruka was
the son of Vijaya and his son was Vrika whose son was Bahu,
This king was defeated by the tribes of Haihayas and
TSilajanghas and his country was devastated by them for
which he fled intowoods with his wives. One of those was
pregrant and the rival queen being jealous gave her poison
to prevent her delivery and the child was confined in the
womb for seven years. And Bahu, being striken in years,
died near the hermitage of the sage Aurva. Having con-
structed the funeral pile the queen was about to ascend it when
the sage Aurva, who was cognisant of past, present and future
came out of the cottage and prevented her saying— “Hold,
hold 1 This is sinful 5 there is in thy womb a heroic king— the
sovereign of many kingdoms, the offerer of many sacrifices,
the slayer of his enemies and a lord paramount. Do not
commit such an unrighteous act.“ Being addressed thus the
queen gave up her intention. The sage then took her to his
own cottage and after some time she gave birth to a valiant
son— and with him the poison came out. And after perfor-
ming ceremonies consequent upon birth, Aurva gave him;
that, the name of Sagara (from sa with and gara^ poison). He
then invested him with the sacred cord, toughthiin the Vedas
and the use of all weapons and especially those of fire callc<i


VISHNUPURANAM.


253


after BhSrgava. When Sagara grew up he one day asked
his mother, saying — “ 0 mother why are we living here ? Who
is my father? Where is he? “ Being thus questioned his
mother related to him everything. Hearing this he was
greatly enraged and promised to recover his father’s kingdom
and destroy the Haihayas and Talajanghas by whom it had
been devastated. When he grew up he destroyed all the
Haihayas and would have also destroyed the Sakas the
Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas, and Pahnavas, had they not
solicited the protection of Vasishtha, the family priest of
Sagjarau ^

Vasishtha, making them deprived ot their power, although
living, thus said to Sagara — 0 my child, these, are already
dead. What is the use of pursuing them ? To keep up your
vow I have made them renounce their own religion and th&
company of twice-born ones.” Sagara reverentially obeyed
the request of his spiritual guide and imposed upon them pecu-
liar distinguishing marks. He made the Yavanas shape their
heads entirely and the Sakas partially. The Paradas wore
their long hair and the Pahnavas allowed their beards to.
grow according to his command. He withdrew from these and
other Kshatrya races the privilege of offering oblations to fire
and studying the Vedas. And being thus deprived from the
performance of religious rites and having been abandoned by
the Brahmins they all became Mlechasas. Having thus
recovered his kingdom Sagara ruled over the earth having
seven continents with undisputed sway.


00 -


SECTION IV.


]P araSARA said : — Sagara had two wives Sumati, the
daughter of Kasyapa and Kesini, the daughtdf of king
Viderbha. Having no offspring the king earnestly solicited the
help of the sage Aurva who conferred upon him a boon that
one wife should bear him a son who would keep up the race
and the other sixty thousand sons ; but he allowed them to
make their election. Kesini chose to have one son and the
other chose to have sixty thousand. Within a few days Kesini
gave birth to a son named Asamanjas who upheld the family
and Sumati the daughter of Vinata gave birth to a sixty thou**
sand sons. Asamanjas had a son whose name was Ansumat.

Asamanjas was very wicked from his boyhood. His
father hoped that with manhood he would reform his conduct.
But be continued same even with age so his father renounced
him. The sixty thousand sons of Sagara followed the example
of their brother Asamanjas. The sons of Sagara having
thus trodden the paths of virtue and piety in the world the
celestials went to the ascetic Kapila, who was free from guilt,
versed in learning and in whom was a portion of Vishnu.
Having bowed unto him they said— These sons of SSgara
have followed the conduct of Samanjas. If they continue
so how will the world be upheld ? Thou art incarnate for the
.protection of the world.'* Hearing this Kapila said— “They
shall soon be destroyed.”

Thereupon Sagara undertook the celebration of ahorse
sacdfi^. They were all engaged to look after the horse.


VISHNUPURANAM.


2S5


Nevertheless some one stole the horse and earned it to the
region below the earth. He then ordered them to search
out the steed. Then following the impressions of its hoops
with preseverance they dug downwards each for a league*
And coming to the region beneath they saw the horse walking
freely. They saw at a distance Kapila, illuminating with the
radiance of his person all the quarters, np and down like unto
the autumnal sun freed from clouds. Then with uplifted
weapons they rushed towards him, saying— “Slay him, slay
him ; this villain has spoiled our sacrifice ; he has stolen out
liorsf.” Tiien turning his eyes a little Kapila looked towards
them and with the sacred flame that came out of bis body, the
sons of Sagara were in no time reduced to ashes.

When Sagara came to know that all his sons, whom be
had sent in puest of the horse, had been destroyed by the
might of the sage Kapila he sent Asamanja's son to bring
the animal. Ansumat, proceeding by the path which Sagara^s
sons had dug, arrived where Kapila was and reverentially
bowing unto him so pleased him that he said — “Go my son
and gave over the horse to your grand father ; ask of me a
boon; thy grand-son shall bring down the river of heaven
on earth.” Ansumat begged of the glorious Rishi a boon
that bis uncles, who had died on account of his displeasure
although unworthy of it, might be raised to heaven. The
Rishi said-»-“ I have told you that your grandson shall bring
^wn the Ganges upon earth. When the ashes and bones
Sagara's sons shall be washed by her waters they shall
be raised to heaven. Such is the glory of the stream that
jssues from the. toe of Vishnu that they all, who bathe in it
intentionally or accidentally, go to heaven. Even those shall
8® to heaven whose bones, skin, fibres, hair or any other
P^rt shall be left after death upon the earth which is con-t
^iguous to the Ganges.” Thereupon reverentially hawing
^nto the sage and taking the steed, he went where his grand-
^^iher was celebrating the sacrifice^ On receiving back the


ViSHKUPURANAM.


^5S6

horse Sagara completed the sacrifice and in memory of
his sons he gave the name of Sagara* to the chasm which
they had dug.

The son ef Ansumat was Dilipa ; his son was Bliagiratha
who brought down the Ganges on earth, whence she is
called Bhagirathi. The son of Bhagiratha waS Sruta, whose
son was Nabhaga, whose son was Ambarisha, whose son was
Sindhudwipa, whose son was Ayutaswa, whose son was
Rituparna, the friend of Nala, well-skilled in dice ; the son
of Rituparna was Sarvakama, whose son was SudAsa whose
son was Sandasa named also Mitrasaha. ,

Once going out on hunting, the son Sudasa met with
a couple of tigers who had cleared the forest of the deer.
He killed of these tigers with an arrow. At the time of
dying the form of the animal was changed and it assumed
that of a dreadful and hideous fiend. And the second dis-
appeared saying— shall take vangeance upon* you.”

After some time SaudSsa celebrated a sacrifice which was
conducted by Vasishtha. At the end of the ceremony
Vasishtha went out when the Raksha assuming the shape of
Vasishtha said— The sacrifice is finished to-day. You must
give me flesh to eat ; I shall just now come back.” Having
said this he went away and transforming himself into the
shape of the cook prepared some human flesh. SaudSsa
placing it on a dish of gold, waited for Vasishtha. As soon as
the sage came back the king offered to him the dish. Thereat
the sage thought— “ Alas j what improper conduct on the part
of the king that he is offering me flesh ! " Then by virtue of
his meditation he came to know that it was human flesh.
Being worked up with ire accordingly he imprecated the king


* Sagara is still the name of the Bay of Bengal at the mouth of the Gaog^
which is held in great reverence by the Hindus. There is an island there
the 'same name where there is a pilgrimage of Kapila where still now takes
place an'Oiinoal.fair.


VISHNUPURANAM.


as?

— Since you have offered, though you know it, to such
holy men as we are what should not be eaten, hencefertb,
your appetite shall be excited by similar food.’'

The king said — It was yourself who commanded this
food to be prepared.’' Vasishtha said — By me, how could that
have been.” Aud being engaged in meditation again he found
out the whole truth. Being pleased with the king he said
— The food to which I have doomed you shall not be your
sustenance for ever ; it shall be only so for twelve years.*^
And the king, taking water in his palms addressed himself
for j:ursing the sage but gave up his intention, being remind-
ed by his queen Madayanti that it ill became him to imprecate
a curse upon a holy teacher who was the guardian divinity
of the family. Unwilling to throw the water upon the earth lest
it should wither up the grain for it was filled with malediction
and being equally unwilling to throw it up into the air lest
it should blast the clouds and dry up their contents, he threw
it upon his own feet. Scalded by the heat which
was in the water on account of his angy imprecation the
feet of the king became spotted black and white and
he therefore obtained the name of Kalmashapada {t.e. having
spotted feet).

On account of Vasishtha’s curse the king used to become a
cannibal every third night and travelling through the fore.sts
• devoured many men. Once on a time he saw a pious sage
engaged in dalliance with his wife. And beholding that
terrible Rakshasa form they fled away in fear but he got
f'old of the husband whilst they escaping. Thereupon the
of the Brahman begged of him her husband again and
3gain — “ Thou art the great king Mitrasaha, the pride of
Ikshwaku race — not the Rakshasa. It is not proper for
thee who knowest the nature of wemen, to carry off my’
f'usband and devour him.” In vain deed she lament in
•^^ny ways ; he devoured the Brahman as a tiger devours
Being worked up with ire the Brahman’s wife
33


VISHNUPURANAM.


%iS

addressed the king and said — Since, you have devoured
my husband before I was satiated in his company, you
shall die as soon as you shall associate with your queen.’^
Having thus cursed him she entered the dames.

After the expiration of twelve years when he was freed
of the curse, he, being desirous of dallying with his wife,
thought of Madayanti who reminded him of the curse of
Brahmani. He, therefore, abstained from conjugal inter-
course. Being childless he solicited the help of Vasishtha
and Madayanti became pregnant. The child was not born
for seven years, and the queen devided the womb tf’ith a sharp
stone and a son was born who was named Asmaka. The
son of Asmaka w’as Mulaka. When the Kshatriyas were rooted
out from the earth, he was concealed by a number of women,
hence he was called Narikavacha (having woman for
armour). The son of Mulaka was Dasaratha; his son was
Ilavilej his son was Viswasaha; his son was Kliatwanga,
called also Dilipa, who, being invited by the gods in a war
with the Asuras, destroyed a number of them. Being pleased
thereby the celestials asked him to pray for a boon.
Dilipa said — If you press me to accept a boon, tell me what
is the duration of my life.” The god said ” The length of
your life is but an hour.” Thereupon Khatwanga, who was
gifted with great velocity, came down, in his easy-coursing
car to the world of mortals. Having reached there, he -
prayed and said — '' If my soul has never been dearer to
me than the sacred Brahmans ; If I have never deviated
from the satisfaction of duty ; if I have never looked upon
gods, men, animals, vegetables, and all created things as differ-
ent from the imperishable, may I then attain unswervingly
to that divine being, upon whom the holy sages meditate.

Having thus spoken he was united with that supreme being
— Vasudeva who is the preceptor of all the gods, who **
abstract existence and whose form cannot be described#
Thus he was united with YSsudevS and obtained absorption.


VISHNUPURANAM;


259

A stanza was cited by the seven rishis in the days of
yore — There shall be no king on earth like Khatwanga.
He came from heaven, dwelt an hour on earth, and became
united with three worlds by means of his liberality and
knowledge of truth.”

The son of Khatwanga was Dirghabahu, whose son was
Raghu, whose son was Aja, whose son was Dasaratha. The
glorious god, from whose navel the lotus springs, was born
for the protection of the world, as the four sons of
Dasaratha — ‘namely Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna.
WIgle a boy Rama was taken by Viswamitra to protect his
sacrifice and slew Tadaka. In the sacrifice, Maricha was
slain and thrown away. Suvahu and others were also
slain by him. He removed the iniquity of Ahalya by merely
looking upon her. Arriving at the palace of Janaka he easily
broke the bow of Maheswara, and received Sita, self-born
daughter of the king Janaka as the meed for his prowess.
He humbled the pride of Parusharama — the Ketu of the
Haihaya race and the slayer of all Kshatryas. At the behest
of his sire and not being sorry for the loss of kingdom he
went to w^oods accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his
wife, where he destroyed in battle Viradha, Kara, Dusana
and other Rakshasas, the headless demon Kavandha and
Vali the king of monkeys* Having constructed a bridge
across the deep and slain all the Rakshasas, he brought
back his spouse Sita who had been carried away by the
Ten-necked Ravana. Having purified her by the fiery ordeal,
and accordingly her virtue chanted by the celestials, he
returned with her to Ayodhya.

Having slain a number of Gandharbas, Bharata became
tbe master of their country and having slain the Rakshasa
chief Lavana, the son of Madhu, Satrughna took possesion
of thoir capital Muthra*

Having thus by their unequalled might and strength
the world from the grasp of the wicked, Rama, Laksl^


26 o


VrSHNUPURANAM.


fn^nS; Bharata and Satrughna went back to heaven and were
followed by those inhabitants of Kosala who were one-
mindedly devoted to those incarnate portions of Vishnu.

Rama had two sons one was named Kusa and the other
Lava. Lakshmana too had two sons by the name of Angada
and Chandraketu. The sons of Bharata werd Taksha and
Pushkara. Subahu and Surasena were the sons of
Satrughna.

The son of Kusa was Atithi, whose sort was Nishadha,
whose son was Nala, whose son was Nabhas, whose son was
Pundarika, whos son was Ksheraadhanwan, whose son «was
Devanika, whose son was Ahinagu, whose son was Paripatra,
whose son was Dala, whose son was Chhala, whose son was
Uktha, whose son was Vajranabha, whose son was Saukanatha,
whose son was Abhyuthitaswa, whose son was Viswasaha
whose son was Hiranyanabha, who was a pupil of the great
ascetic Jamini and imparted spiritual knowledge upon
Jajnawakla. The son of this pious king was Pushya whose
son was Dhruva Sandhi, whose son was Sudarsana, whose
son was Agniverna, whose son was Sighra, whose son was
Maru who, by virtue of his power of devotion, is still living
in the village called Kalpa and who in future will be the
restorer of the Kshatrya race in the solar dynasty. Maru^s
son was Prasusruta, whose son was Susandhi, whose son was
Amarsha, whose son was Mahaswat, whose son was Visrutavat,
whose son was Vrihadbala, who was slain in the great war by
Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna. These are the most illustrious
kings ia the race of Ikshawku. Whoever hears of
account of them will be freed from all sins.


SECTION V,


-:o: —


The son of Ikshawku, by name Nimi, instituted a sacrl*
fice for a thousand years and appointed Vasishtha as the
presiding priest. Vasishtha said to him— I have been already
appointed b^ Indra for presiding at a sacrifice for five hun-
dred* years. Wait for some time, I shall come and officiate
as a priest at your sacrifice.” Being thus addressed tho
king did not answer. And Vasishtha went away supposing
that he had agreed, Nimi in the meantime engaged Gautama
and other ascetics and conducted the sacrifice. After the
sacrifice of the king of celestials had been finished, Vasishtha
hurried on to celebrate Nimi’s sacrifice and found that it waa
being conducted under the superintendence of Gautama^
Vasishtha then imprecated a curse upon the king who was
asleep, saying ‘ .Since the king, not informing me, has entrus-
ted Gautama with the charge of the sacrifice^ he shall ceaser
to exist in a corporeal form. When Nimi got up he came
to know what had happened and in return imprecated a
curse upon his unjust preceptor that he should also cease
to exist in a corporeal form as the punishment of uttering
^ curse upon him without previously communicating withr
Nimi then gave up his bodily form. The spirit of
Vasishtha, also renouncing his body, was united with the
spirits of Mitra and Varuna for some time, when at last on
account of their lustful desire for the nymph Urvasi he was
born again in a different body. Nimi's body continued to be
handsome and being emi. lamed with fragrant oils and resina
Was not decomposed and remained like the. corpse ol
just dead. . When the gods arrived there to teceive their
Portion on the completion of the sacrifice the priests requested


VISIINUPURANAM.


262

them to confer blessings upon the celebrator of the sacrifice*
And being ordered by the celestials for the same Nimi

said ** 0 celestials, you remove all ills from the world. There

Is not in the world a greater cause of distress than the
separation of soul and body. 1 therefore wish to dwell in the
eyes of all beings and not to take up a corpbreal form any
more.’* The celestials agreed to this and Nimi was placed
by them in the eyes of all living beings and therefore their
eye-lids are ever opening and shutting. As Nimi had rio son
the sages were afraid that the earth would have no ruler. So
they churned the body of the k’ng and a son was born *who
was named Janaka. As his father had no body Janaka was
also called Videha. He also received the name of Mithi for
having been produced by mathana or agitation. The son
of Janaka was Udavasu, whose son was Nandivarddana,
whose son was Suketu, whose son was Devarata, whose son
was Vrihaduktha, whose son was Mahavirya, whose son was
Satyadhristi, whose son was Dhrishtaketu, whose son was
Haryyaswa, whose son was Maru, whose son was Pratiban-
dhaka whose son was Krisaratha, whose son was Krita, whose
son was Vibudha, whose son was Mahadhriti, whose son was
Kritirata, whose son was Mahadhriti, whose son was Suvarna-
roman, whose son was Haraswaroman, whose son was
Siradhwaja.

Siradhwaja ploughing the field, to make it ready for a
sacrifice which he undertook in order to obtain progeny^
there sprang up in the furrow a damsel who became his
daughter Sita. The brother of Siradhwaja was Kusadhwaja
who was king of Kasi, His son was named Bhanumat
whose son was Satadhyumna, whose son was Suchi, whose
son was Urjjavaha, whose son was Satyadwaya, whose
son was Kuni, whose son was Anyana, whose son was Retujd^
whose son was Arishtanemii whose son was Srutaya*/
whbse son was Sanjaya, whose son was Kshemari, wbos®
son was Anenas, whose son was Minaratha, whose son was


VISHNUPURANAM.


263


Satyaratlia, whose son was Upagu, whose son was Sruta,
whose son was Saswata, whose son was Sudhanwan, whose
son was Subhasa, whose son was Susruta, whose son was Jaya,
whose son was Rita, whose son w^as Sunaya, whose son was
Vitahadya, whose son was Dhriti, whose son was Bahalaswa,
whose son was’Kriti with whom ended the family of Janaka,
These are the kings of MithilS who shall be principally well-
versed in spiritual knowledge.


SECTION VI.


— :o —


Maitreya said : — 0 reversed sir, you have described to
me the solar dynasty but I wish to hear now of the kings
of the lunar dynasty, who are still wcll-knowm for their
glorious deeds. It behoves you to relate it gladly to me.

Parasara said : — 0 foremost of Munis, hear from me, a
description of the illustrious family of the moon which has
produced many well-known kings of the earth. This family
is adorned with many kings gifted with regal qualities of
strength, valour, magnificence, prudence and energy such
Nahusha, Yayati, Kartavirya, Yaryuna and others. Hear
1 shall describe this family to you.

Atri was the son of BrahmA, the creotar of the universe, '
originated from the lotus that grew from the navel of
Narayana; The son of Atri was Soma whom Brahm& made the
of plants, Brahmans and of the stars. Some celebrated*
^ Rajshuya sacrifice and on accobnt of the glory derive^


VtSHNUPURANAM.


264

therefrom and the vast sovereignty which he had acquired
he grew haughty and licentious. lie carried ofF TAra, the wife
of Vrihaspati, the preceptor of gods.

Soma did not give up Vrihaspati’s wife though he was
again and again requested by him. commanded by Brahm^
and remonstrated by the holy sages. Usanas, who was an enemy
of Vrihaspati, took the side of Soma. Riidra, who was a pupil
of Angiras, the father of Vrihaspati, assisted his fellow student.
Because their preceptor Usanas joined Soma, Jambha,
Kujambha, all the Daityas, Danavas and other enemies of the
celestials came to his help. Indra and all other celestials
assisted Vrihaspati.

Thus there took place a terrible combat which being
on account of TJiraka was called TarakSmaya or Taraka
war. In this the celestials led by Rudra hurled their weapons
upon the Asuras and the Asuras equally overwhelmed the
gods with weapons. Thus in the conflict between the gods
and demons the universe, greatly overwhelmed, sought pro-
tection of BrhmJ. Thereupon the glorious God asked
Usanas with the demons and Rudra with the celestials to
desist from lighting and give back Tard to Vrihaspati.
Finding that she was pregnant Vrihaspati desired her no
longer to keep her burden and in satifaction of his orders
she was delivered of a son whom she kept in a clump of
long Munja grass. And the child as soon as it was born
proved its character of divinity by its radiance. Beholding
both Vrihaspati and Soma fascinted by the beauty of the
child the celestials, to know whose son it was, asked TSrS,
saying * 0 damsel whose son is he ? Is he Vrihaspati’s or
Sorba’s.* Being thus addres.sed TdrSl was ashamed and
did not answer.

Though she was repeatedly asked by the celestials she
was still mute and the child, being enraged, wa$ about to
CUlrse her, saying— “ Unless, 0 vile woman, you immediately
ii^ieak out, who is my father, I shall so punish you for your


VISHNUPURANAM,


265


useless shame that no woman in uture shall speak the truth
Brahma again interfered and pacifying the child said,
addressing Tara '‘Tell me my daughter, is this the child of
Vrihaspati or of Soma? “Of Soma,,* said TarA flushing.
Thereupon the countenance of the king of constellations
became bright, and expanded with joy. He at once em-
braced his son and said— “ Well done my boy, forsooth
thou art wise.” And accordingly the boy was named
Budha.

I have already described how Budha begot Pururavas
on Ila. Paruravas was a prince famous for liberality, devo-
tion, magnificence, love of truih and beauty. Having in-
curred the curse of Mitra and Varuna Urvasi made up her
mind to live in the land of mortals and descending there
saw Pururavas. As soon as a she saw him she forgot all
reserve and not caring for the comforts to heaven became
greatly attached to him. And finding her far superior to
all other females in beauty, elegance, symmetry, and delicacy,
Pururavas was equally enamoured of her. Both the
man and the woman were equally attached to each other and
thought no more of any other object. The king then
boldly said — “ Fair woman, I love youj have pity on me
*nd return my affection.*' Urvasi turning her face a
little through modesty said— “ I will do so, if you satisfy the
conditions I propose to you.”

‘What are they** ? asked the king '‘speak them out’^

I have two rams*’ said the mymph “which 1 love like my
children ; they must be kept by my bed-side and shall not be
allowed to be carried away. You must not be seen by me
undressed and clarified butter alone shall be my food.” The
^iog readily agreed to these terms.

After this Pururavas and Urvasi lived together for sixty
^**0 thousand years in AlakA, sporting amidst the groves and
i^kes of Chaitraratha abounding in lotuses and the other
By these enjoyments Urvasi’s attachment increased
34


VISIINUPURANAM.


266

every day and she forgot all desire for residing in the region
of immortals. In the absence of Urvasi heaven appeared
devoid of beauty to the celestials, nymphs genii and quiris-
ters. Knowing the engagement that Urvasi had contracted
with the king, Viswasvasu was appointed by the Gandharbas
to bring about its dissolution. And coming {by night to the
room where they were sleeping he carried off one of the
rams: Urvasi got up by its cries and exclaimed — Ah me|
who has stolen one of my children : Had I :got a husband
this would not have taken place. To whom shall I go for
help?” The king heard the lamentations but coflld not go
lest he might he seen undressed. The Gandharbas then
took away another ram. Again hearing the sound of its
being stolen away in the sky she lamented saying— **Aias
1 have got no husband. I have taken the shelter of a das-
tardly person.” Thinking “ it is darkness” the [king took
up a dagger and pursued them, saying— “ stop, 0 wicked
I shall soon slay you.” Immediately the Gandharbas created
a flash of brilliant lightning in the room and the king was
seen undressed by Urvasi. The contract was broken and
she instantly disappeared. And leaving behind the rams the
Gandharbas too went to the region of the celestials. Taking
the rams, the king, delighted came back to his bed-room but
found no Urvasi. Not finding her he wandered naked all
over the world like a maniac. At length arriving at Kuruk-
shetra he saw Urvasi sporting with four other nymphs in a
lake abounding in lotuses. Like a mad man the king neared him
and exclaimed — ” 0 my wife, wait, speak with me, 0 thou of
an iron heart.” Urvasi replied — ” 0 great king useless is
this inconsiderate attempt. I am now pregnant, go away
just now and come here again after a year when I shall g»ve
you a son and remain with you for one night.^* Being thus
ac^Iaced Pururavas came back to his capital. Urvasi theft
said to her mates. '‘This king is that excellent man bring
drawn by w hose aliachment I lived for such a long


VtSHNUPURANAM. 267

ffearing this the other nymphs said, Great is . his beauty;
we too with him could live happily for ever.”

After the expiration of a year the king again came to
that place and Urvasi gave him a son by the name of Ay us.
Living with him for one night she again became pregnant to
bear to him five sons. She then said to the king — 0 king
all the Gandharbas, on account of their regard for me, |ire
ready to confer upon thee a boon. Do thou pray for it.''
The king said — I have slain all my enemies — my faculties
are all very powerful ; I have friends, relations, armies and
treasures ;^»o there is nothing which I want but living with
my Urvasi in the same region. So I wish to live with her
always.”

After he had spoken this the Gandharbas brought to him
a vessel with fire and said,— “ Take this fire and accor-
ding to the precepts of the Vedas divide it into three parts:
then offer oblation to it for Urvasi and your desires shall
tliusbe gratified.’' The Gandharbas having said this, the
king took the vessel and went away. Then coming to a
forest he thought—” Oh, what stupid I am ; I have brought
this vessel but not Urvasi.” Then leaving the vessel there
he came back to his capital. When half the night had passed
he awoke and thought — “The Gandharbas conferred upon me
this vessel of fire to enable me to live with Urvasi. I have
Wtthat in the forest. I shall go there to bring it.” 4 Having
said this he went there but did not find the vessel Then
beholding a young Ashwattha tree growing out of a Sami plant
he argued within himself — ” I left here a vessel of fire and
^ now see a young Ashwattha tree growing out of a Sami plant
^ shall take this type ot fire to my capital and having created
hre by their attrition I will wbrship it.”

Having thus made up bis mind he took the plants to his city
^nd made their wood for attrition with pieces of as many inches
as there ate syllables in the Gayatri. He recited tliat
verse and rubbed together slicks of as manjr inches as


«68


VISHNUPURANAM.


he recited syllables in the Gayatri, Having created 6re there-
from he divided it into three portions according to the precepts
of the Vedas and offered oblations to it with the view of obtain-
ing re-union with Urvasi. Having performed many sacrifices
with this fire he attained to the region of the Gandharbas and
suffered no more separation from his beloved- Urvasi. Thus
fire, that was at first one, was made three-fold in the present
Manwantara by the son of 115.


SECTION VII.


PuRURAVAS had six sons— Ayus, Dliiinat, AmSvasu,
Viswavasu, Satayus, and Srutayus. The son of AmSvasu
was Bhima, whose son was Kanchana, whose son was
Suhotra, whose name was Jahnu. Whilst celebrating a
sacrifice this king beheld the whole of the place over-flowed
with the waters of the Ganga. Being offended therefore
with his eyes red with anger he united the spirit of sacn c*
with himself and by the power of his devotion drunk up t e
river. Thereupin the celestials and the sages pleased him and
got back Gangi in the capacity of his daughter.*

The son of Jahnu was Sumanta, whose son was Aja a,
whose son was ValakSswa, whose son was Kusa, who a
four sons, Kusamba. KusanSbha, Amurttaya and AmSyasu.

Kusambha engaged in devout penances with the o je
of having a son equal to Indra. Beholding the intensity

his devotions, Indra himself took birth as his son
iwince equally powerful like him might be born. * —

^Fot this the Gangi is called Jibnavi U iisnisg from Jahnu.

A


VISHNUPURANAM.


2^9


accordingly born as Gadhi or Kausika. Gadhi had a daughter
called Satyavati. Ricbika, one of the descendants of Bhrigu,
wanted her in marriage. The king was reluctant to give
his daughter in marriage to a peevish old Brahmin and
wanted from him as the bridal present a thousand fleet
steeds whose •colour should be white with one black ear.


Having propitiated Varuna, the god of ocean, Richika ob-
tained from him, at the holy place called Awatirtha a thou-
sand horses. And giving them to the king he married his
daughter.

In ordo to have a son he prepared a dish of rice, barely
and pulse with butter and milk for his wife to eat. And
being requested by her he made a similar mixture for her
mother, by partaking of which she should give birth to a
martial prince. Keeping both the dishes with his wife and
giving her instructions which was intended for her and which
for her mother, the sage went to the forest. At the time
of taking the food her mother said to Satyabati — ‘^Daughter,
every one wants to have a son gifted with great qualities—
and no body wishes to be excelled by the qualities of his
mother's brother. It is therefore desirable for you to give
me the food which your husband has set apart for you and
to partake of that intended for me ; for my son shall be the
sovereign of the world. What is the use of wealth, strength
and prowess for a Brahmin.” Being thus addressed SatyaVati-
gave her own food to her mother.

When the sage came back from the forest and saw
Satyavati he said to her — ^‘Sinful woman, what hast thou r
tlone? Your body appears as very fearful to me. Surely thou
^ast taken the food which was intended for thy mother.
Thou hast committed a wrong. That food I had consecrated
^ith the properties of power, strength and heroism; where-
as your food was consecrated with the qualities of a Brahman


'gentleness, knowledge and resignation. As you have
exchanged mes$e$ your son shall propcsi-


V1SHKfLlt»URANAM.


Bities aixl ase weapons, and fight and slay \ your mother’s son
Bhall be born with the desires of a Brahmin and shall be
devoted to peace and piety.” Hearing this Satyavati fell
at her husband’s feet and said—** 1 have done this through
my ignorance. Be thou propitiated so that I may not have
such a son. If this is inevitably let my grand son be such, not
my son.” Being thus addressed the sage said — ** So be it.”

Thereupon she gave birth Jamadagni and her mother
brought forth Viswamitra. Satyavati afterwards became the
Kausiki river, Jamadagni married Renuka the daughter of
Renu, born in the race of Ikshwaku and begot ot[ her a^son,
Parusar&ma the destroyer of the Kshatrya race, who was a
portion of NarSyana, the preceptor of the universe. Suna-
Bepha was conferred upon Viswamitra by the celestials as his
Bon, who became known as Devarata. Viswamitra had other
sons — Madhuchandra, Yaya, Kritadeva. Devashtaka, Kachapa
and Hareetaka. These founded many families, all of whom
were known by the name of Kausikas, and inter-married with
tile families of various Rishis.


SECTION VIIL


A.YUS, the eldest son of Pururavas, married the daughter
t)f Rahu upon whom he begot five sons, Nahusha^ Kshatra-
vridha, Rambha, Raji and Anenas.

The son of Kshatravridha was Suhotra, who had three sons,
ICash, Lesa, and Ghritsamanda. The son of Ghritsamnada
was Saunaka who first inBtrtoted the distinction of the


VISHNUPURANAM.


271


castes. The son of Kasst was Kasiraja, whose son was
DirghatamaSi whose son was Dhanwantari, who was not
subject to human infirmities and who had been master of
universal knowledge in every birth* In his past life NarHyana
had conferred upon him the boon that he should be, in
his next life, born in the race of Kshatriya, should be the
author of the eight fold system of medical science and should
be entitled to a share of offerings made to the celestials^
The son of Dhanwantari, was Kesumat, whose son was Bhi-i
maratha, whose son was Devadasa, whose son was Pratard-
dana, so c.%Iled from destroying the race of Bhadrasrenya*
He !iad various other names — as Satrujit. The victor of
enemies’ on account of his having defeated all his enemies
Vatsa or * child' for his father used to call him often times by
that name ; Ritadhwaja * whose emblem was truth’ for he was
a great observer of truth ; and Kuvalayaswa for he had
ahorse called Kuvalaya. His son was Alarka of whom this
verse is recited in the present day — ” For sixty thousand and
sixty hundred years, no other youthful king except Alarka
governed the earth.” The son of Alarka was Santati,
whose son was Sunitha, whose son was Suketu, whose son
was Dharmaketu, whose son was Satyaketu, whose son was
Vibhu, whose son was Suvibhu, whose son was Sukumar^,
whose son was Dhristaketu, whose son was Vainahotra whose
son was Bharga, whose son was Bhargabhumi, who laid down
the rules of the four castes. These are the descendants of
Kasa. We shall now enumerate the descendants of Raji*


SECTION IX.


R.J, had five hundred sons who were all gifted with
great power and heroism. Once on a time there arose a
conflict between the gods and the demons, and they, all
desirous of slaying the other party, inquired pf BrahmS,
saying ”0 glorious god, which of the parties shall be
victorious? The deity said— « that for whichr Raji shall
take up arms.’. The Daityas immediately went to Raji to
secure his help, which he agreed to give if they would make
him their king after defeating the celestials.’' Hearing this
the Asuras said— We cannot say one thing and do the
otherwise. Prahlada is our king and for him we wage war.”
Having said this they went away and the celestials came to
him for the same purpose. Raji proposed to them the same
conditions and the gods agreed and said. ** We shall make
you our Indra.” Thereupon Raji assisted the army of the
celestials and by his various weapons destroyed the Asuras.
When all the enemies were defeated, Indra the king of the
celestials placed Raji's feet on his crown and said. ‘‘Thou
art our father since thou hast released us from fear ; thou art
the supreme lord of all the worlds, because, I, who am the lord
of the three worlds, have acknowledged thee as my father.

The king smiling said— ** So be it. Even if the enemies
admit humiliation by flattering speeches that cannot be resis-
ted." Saying this he repaired to his own city. Satkratu

too continued to rule as Indra.

A few days after the king went to heaven, and his sons,
being incited by the sage NftrSida, demanded the rank of
Indra as there hereditary right. When he refused to give
them the station the highly powerful princes reduced h>***
to Submission and usurped his rank. When some tune


VISHNUPURANAM.


273


had passed, Fndra, deprived of his share in the sacrifices
of the three worlds, spoke to Vrihaspati in a retired place,
“ kiive me a little of the sacrificial butter not bigger
even than a jujube for I am in want of sustenance.”

Vrihaspati said:— "Had you applied to me before I
could have done any thing for you; however I will now
try to gain back for you your position.” Saving this he
undertook the celebration of a sacriRce for increasing the
power of Indra and bringing about the downfall of Raji’s
sons by leading them astray. When their understanding
wasjjewildered the princes became haters of the Brahmins,
negligent of their duties and regardless of the teachings
of the Vedas ; when they became devoid of religion and
morality, Indra slew them and gained back his sovereignty by
the help of the priest of gods. Whoever shall hear of
fndra’s acquirement of the position, shall always keep his
proper place and shall not be guilty of iniquity.

Rambha, the third son of Ayus, had no offspring.
Kshatravriddha had a son named Pratikshatra, whose son
was Sanjaya, whose son was Vijaya, whose son was Yajna-
krit, whose son was Harshavarddhana, whose son was
Sahadeva, whose son was Adina, whose son was Jayasena,
whose son was Sankriti, whose son was Kshatradbarma.
These were the progeny of Kshatravriddha. I will now
^numetate those of Nahusha.


SECTION X.


Nahusha had si* brave sons namely, Yati, Yayati, 9an-
Ayati, Viyati and Kriti. Yati declined the thrbne ahd
^•j^fore Yayati so'ccdeded. He had two' wives; Devayani,
We daughter of UsanAsj and Sarmishthl, riie dati^fe t bf
35


274


VISHNUPURANAM.


Vrishaparvan. His genealogy is thus recited— Devayant
gave hirth to two sons, Yadu and Tarvasu. SarmishthS, the
daughter of Vrishaparvan, gave birth to three sons, Druhya,
Anu and Puru, Owing to a course of Usanas Yayati became
untimely old and decripit. Having propitiated his father-in-
law however he got the permission to transfer his old age to
any one who would agree to take it. He first called his
eldest son Yadu and then said, — Your maternal grand-father
has caused this untime decripitude of mine. By his per-
mission I may transfer it to you for a thousand years, I am
not still satisfied with worldly jnjoyments and wisfl to eajoy
through your youth. Do not refuse compliance with my
request.’* Being thus addressed he did not agree to take
the decay upon him for which the king imprecated a curse,
saying—^* No one in your prosterity shall be the king.** He
then successively requested Druhya, Turvasu and Anu to give
him their youth. They 211 refused and were accordingly
cursed by the king. Lastly he called his youngest son Puru
—the son of Sarmistha and requested him for the same.
That youth, of ripe understanding, at once agreed and bowing
unto his father said — I have been highly honored.** He
then took upon himself his father*s infirmities and gave him
his youth in exchange.

Being thus gifted with renewed youth Yayati governed
the kingdom for the good of his people enjoying such
pleasures as were suited to his age and strength and were in
consonance with piety. He enjoyed in the company of a
nymph Vishwachi day and night thinking that there would be
an end of all desires. By continued enjoyment all things
began to appear more pleasant to him and he then said—
Desire is never satiated by enjoyment as fire, fed with
oil, becomes the more intense. No one is satisfied with
barley, gold, cattle or women ; therefore renounce excessive
desire. When a man does not cherish any sinful feeling
towards creatures and looks on all with, an equal eyc-^he


VISHNUPURANAM.


V$


then finds everything full of pleasure and delight. The-
wise become happy by renouncing that desire which the
feeble-minded cannot abandon and which grows not old with
the aged. With age the hair becomes gray, the teeth fall off
but the love of wealth and life is never gratified. A thousand
years have expired and still my mind is attached to worldy
enjoyments: my desires are excited every day by new
objects. I shall therefore renouncce all enjoyments of sense
and devote myself to the culture of spiritual truth. And
renouncing all attachments and not influenced by the alter*
nativies of pleasure and pain I shall roam in the forest with
the deer.

Having thus made up his mind Yayati returned the youth
to Puru and took up his own decrepitude. He th^n made his
youngest son the sovereign and went to Tapovana (the wood
of penance). He appointed as viceroys — Turvasu of the
south-east districts, Druhya of the west, Yadu of the south
and Anu of the north— and made Puru the supreme monarch
of the earth.


SECTION XI.


PaRASARA said:— I will first enumerate to you th^
descendants of Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati — one of whom
an incarnate portion of Vishnu — of whom golry cannot
described though chanted for ever to confer the fruit of
their desires — whether for virtue, wealth, plearure or final
**Oancipation— upon all created beings, upon men, saints,
®®ndharbas^' spirits of evilj nymphs, centaurs, serpents, birds^


VISHNUPURANAM.


07 ^

demons, sages, Brabmanas and ascetics. Whoever shall
bear, of the descendants of Yadu shall be freed from all iniqi.
tie^, for the supreme spirit— devoid of any form— Vishnu vifss
Incarnate in this family.

Yadp had four sons Sahasrajit, Kroshti, Nala and Raghu.
Sasajit was the son of the eldest brother and bad three sons
r-Haihaya, Venu and Haya. The son of Haihaya was
Dharmanetra, whose son was Kunti, whose son was Sabanji,
^hpse son was Mahishmat, whose son was Bhadrasona, whose
spn was Dardama, whose son was Dhanakaj who had
four sons, Kritaviryya, Kritagni, Kritayarman' and ^rita-
uyyas. Kritaviryya’s son was Aryunu, who was the king
pf the seven insular continents and the master of a thou-
sand arms.^ This king propitiated the sage Dattatreya, the
descendant of Atri who was an incarnate portion of Vishnu
and obtained from him these boons — a thousand arms,
acting always justly, governing the world with justice, pro-
tecting it impartially, victory over his emenies and death
by the hands of a person renowned in the three worlds. By
these means he governed the earth powerfully and justly
celebrated ten thousand sacrifices. Of him this verse is
said— The kings of the earth shall never equal him in
sacrifices, liberaltiy, in devotion in good manners and in self*
control. In his reign nothing was lost or injured, so he
governed the whole earth with undecayed health, prosperity,
power and strength for eighty-five thousand years. Arriving
at the city of Mahismati, on his tour of conquests whilst its
king was sporting in the waters of Narmada excited with wine,
Havana, proud for defeating the gods, demons, Gandharbas,
and their king, was taken prisoner by Karthaviryya and con-
fined like a tame beast in a corner in his capital. At the
end of a long reign Karthaviryya was slain by ParashurSma
Who, was an incarnate portion of Vishnu. The king
l(t^ndred sous of which five were principal, namely
Sttrasena, Vnshana, Madhu, and Jayadwaja. The son ^


yiSHNUPURANAM.


277

Ibe last was TAUjangha who had a hundred sons named
after him TSilajanghas. The eldest of these was Vilipotra,
another was Bharata who had two sops— Vrisha apd Sujati.
The sons pf Vrisha was Madhu; he had a. hundred sonS) the
chief pf whom was Vrishna and from him the family obtained
the name of Vrishnu From the name of their father Madhu
(hey were called Madhavas and from the name of their
common ancestor Yadu they were all called Yadavas.


SECTION XII.


ParaSaRA said—Kroshtri, the son of Yadu, had a son
named Vrijinvat, whose son was Swchi, wliose son was Kusha-
Jra, whose son was Chilraratha, whose son was Sasa-
vindu, who was the master of the fourteen great gemF. He
had a hundred thousand wives and a million of sons.
The most famous of them were Pryihuyasas, Prithu-
harman, Prithujaya, Prithukirtti, Prithudaha and
Prithusravas. The spn of the last of these s\% w^s Tamas,
>rhose son was Usanas who performed a hundred horse sacri-
hces. His son was Siteyus, whose son was Kokmakavacha,
whose son was Paradrit, who had five sons, Rukmesbu, Prithu-
fukman, Jyamagha, Pahta, and Harita. In the. present period
^he following verse is recited of Jyamagha— Of all the
k'tsbands obedient to their wives, who have been or pho will.
^ the most famous is the king Jyamagha, who was the
i>«8band pf Saivya.” Saivya was barren— but Jyamagha
so much afraid of her that he could not, take any Pt|»er
?ifc. Once on a tipae after a hard fighting with Iiors® and


ViSimUPURANAM.


dephants the king defeated a powerful enemy who^ leaving
behind his wife, childrefii relations, army, treasure and king<
dom, fled. When the enemy had fled Jayamagha saw a
beautiful princess, exclaiming. Save father, save me, brother*^
while her expansive eyes rolled wildly with fear. The king
was much attracted by her beauty and cherished love for
her and said to himself — **This is accidental ; I have no
children and am the husband of a barren lady. This maiden
has fallen in my hands to keep up my family. I will marry
her. But I must take her j‘n my car to my palace, where
1 must have the permission jf my queen for the marriage.’^
So he took the princess into his car and went back to his
capital.

To welcome the return of the victorious king, Saivya
came to the palace-gate with the ministers, courtiers and the
citizens. And beholding a damsel on the left hand of the king
Saivya with her lips swollen and trembling in jealousy
said to the king— '‘Who is this fickle girl ^lat
is sitting with you in the chariot ? ” The king was not
prepared with a reply and maid answer, all on a sudden
through fear of his queen — “ This is my daugeter-in-law?’^
I have never had a son said Saivya “ and you have no other
children ; of what son of yours then is this girl the wife ?*' The
king bewildered by the jealousy and anger which the words
of Saivya displayed, gave this answer to avoid further con-
tention. The king said,— “ She is the young bride of the
future son whom thou shalt give birth.’^ Hearing this Saivya
gently smiled and said “ so be it ” and the king entered into
his great palace.

This conversation regarding the birth of a son having taken
place in an auspicious conjunction, aspect, and season, the
queen, although she was greatly advanced in years, became
pregnant and bore a son. His father named him Vidarbha
and married him to the damsel he had bronght home. He
Klxf three sons, Kratha, Kaisika'and Romapid^i. The son


ViSHNUPURANAM*


379


of Romapada was Dhriti. The son of Kaisika was Cliedi
whose children were the Chaidya kings. The son of Kratha
was Kuntii whose son was Vrishni, whose son was Nirvriti,
whose son was Dasarha, whose son Vyoman^ whose son was
Jimuta, whose son was Vikriti, whose son was Bhimaratha
whose son was.Navarathe, whose son was Dasaratha, whose
$on was Sakuni, whose son was Karambhi, whose son was
Pevarata, whose son Devakshatra, whose son was Madhu,
whose son Anavarathu, whose son was Kuruvatsa, whose son
son was Anaratha, whose son was Puruhotra, *, whose son was
Ansu, whos€%son was Satwata, from whom the princes of this
famiTy were called Satwatas. This was the progeny of
of Jyamagha. He, who will hear of the account, will be freed
from sins.


-;o>


SECTION XIII.

— :o: —

PARASARAsaid — ^The sons of Satwata were BhajinA
Bhajamana, Divya, Andhaka, Devavriddha, Mahabhoja and
Vrishni. Bhajamana had three sons, Nimi, Krikana, and
Vrishni by one wife and as many by another, Satajit, Sahas**
rajit and Ayutajit. The son of Devavridha was Babhru
of whom this verse is recited — “ We hear, when we are
at a distance and we see when we are near that Babhru is
the foremost of men and Devavriddha is equal to the celes-
tials: sixty six persons who were the disciples of one and
thousand and eight who were disciples of the other
obtained im mortality Mahabhoja was a virtuous king
descendants were the Bhojas, the kings of MirttikSvati-

^hence denominated Mirttik&vAttas. Vrishni bad two scflts


VISHHUPURAMAM.


m

dtimftra and Yudhajit : from the former Anamitra and SinI
were born. The soir of Anamnttra was Nighna who had
two sons Prasena and Satrajit. The god Aditya or the sun
was the friend of the latter.

Once on a time arriving at the banks bf the oceanj Satra-
jit began to hymn the praises of the sun, with his mind solely
devoted to him, upon which the deity appeared and stood
•before him. Seeing him in an indistinct shape he said to
to the Sun—** I see thee in this sky as a globe of fire— *1 be-
hold thee just now in the same shape and do not perceive any
distinction as a matter of favojr.’^ Being thus ^Tddresse^ the
divine sun took the jewell called Syamantaka from off his neck
and placed it at a distance and Satrajit saw him of a dwarfish
from, with a body like burnished copper and with slightly red-
dish eyes. While he bowed unto him the divine Sun said to
Satrajit — " I wish to confer upon thee a boon ; do thou pray
for it.'^ He then wanted that jewel. The sun gave it to
him and then resumed his place in the sky. Satrajit placed
that precious gem round his neck and lighting up all the
quarters with his radiance like the sun entered the city of
Dwarka. Beholding him approach the inhabitant of Dwarka
went to that excellent Purusha, without beginning, who, to
carry the burden of the world, assumed a mortal form, and
baidr-” 0 lord, forsooth, the divine sun is coming to visit
you.^^ But Krishna smiled and said* It is not the sun

but Satrajit. He is coming here >Vith the Syamantaka gem
conferred upon him by the sun. You. all see him with a
fearless heart.’ ^ Hearing this the inhabitants of Dwarki
repaired to their respective habitations. Satrajit too having
gone to his house placed that jewel which gave daily eight
loads of gold and through its uncommon power removed
all fear of portents, wW beasts^ fire, fobbers* and fAt*****^‘
Krishna thought that the gem wA$ worthy of the kirtg
Bff^ and desired to take it bvit did not do so lest it dnght
some disturbance in the family. JJndbtitandl*® !*’?^


VISHf^UPURAMAM.


aif

Krishna would ask of him the jewel Satrajit transferred it
to his brother Prasena. It was the peculiar virtue of that
gem, that if worn with all purity it would yield gold and
prosperity of the kingdom but if worn by a man of bad
character it would bring on his death. Prasena having taken
the jewel and ‘placed it round his neck mounted his horse
and went to the forest to hunt. While thus hunting he
was killed by a lion. The lion taking the }ew,el in his mouth
was about to go when was seen and killed by Jamvabat the
king of the bears, who taking the jewel went to his cave
and gave if to his son Sukumara to play with.

When sometime had passed and Prasena did not come,
the Yadavas began to whisper, one to another, This must
be Krishna’s doing; being willing to get the jewel and not
obtaining it he has committed the murder to get this into
his possession.’^

When these calamities reached the ears of Krishna he
gathered some members of the Yadu family and in their
company followed the course of Prasena by the impressions
of his horse's hoops. And having found it by this way that
he and his horse had been destroyed by the lion he was
acquitted by all people of any share in the death. Desirous
of getting back the jewel, he thence followed the foot-marks
of the lion and at no great distance came to the place
where the lion had been killed by the bear. Pursuing the
foot-prints of the latter he arrived at the foot of a mountain
where having kept the Yadavas he pursued the course.
And following the impressions of the feet he found out a
cavern and before he entered it he heard the nusre of
Sukumara saying to him **The lion killed Prasena; the lion
has been killed by Jamvavat: weep not Sukumara the
Syamantaka is your own.” Having thus ascertained the
truth Krishna entered into the cavern and espied the jewel
*** the hands of the nurse who was giving it as a plaything
to SukumUra. The nurse in no time found out his approach
36


VISHNUPUHANAM.


2Sf

and seeing his eyes eagarly fixed upon the jewel called aloud
for help. Hearing her cries, Yamvabat, worked up with
anger, came to that place and an encounter took place
between him and the Achyuta which continued for twenty,
one days. The YAdavas who followed Krishna waked
there for seven or eight days expecting his return but as
the slayer of Madhu did not come they arrived at the
conclusion that he must have been destroyed in the cave.
“ It could not have taken so many days” they thought “ to
defeat a foe.” They therefore went away, and came
back to Dwarka and announced that Krishna^ had been
killed.

His relatives too performed ceremonies necessary for the
occasion. Food and water offered reverentially to worthy
persons tended to support his life and invigorate his strength
in the conflict in which he was engaged. While his enemy
being exhausted by daily combat with a powerful enemy,
bruised in every limb by heavy blows and enfeebled by want
of food became unable to resist him. Being thus defeated
by his powerful enemy Jamvabat prostrated himself before
him and said “ O mighty being, thou art, for sooth invincible,
by the spirits of heaven, earth or hell, thou canst not be
defeated by man and powerless creatures in a human shape—
what to speak of such as we are — who are of brute origin.
Methinks thou art a portion of my lord NarSyana the pro-
tector of the universe.” Being thus addressed by the lord
of bears Krishna explained to him fully that he had incar-
nated himself to take upon himself the burden of the earth.
And delightedly touching him with his palms he relieved him
of the pain which he had suffered from the fight. Jamvabat
again laid himself low before Krishna and presented to him
his daughter Jamvabati as a suitable offering to a guest.
He also handed over to him the Syamantaka jewel. Although
k was not becoming to accept a present from such a«
individual still he took the gem with a view to clear hk


ViSHNUPURANAM. 283

reputation. He then came back with his bride Jamvabati
to Dwarka.

When the inhabitants of Dwarka saw Krishna come back
alive they were filled with joy so that even those who were
greatly stricken in years were filled with youthful strength ;
and all the members of the Yadu family, men and women,
gathered round Anakadundubhi, the father of the hero and
congratulated him. Krishna described to the assembled Yada-
vas ail that had taken place exactly and giving back the
Syamantaka jewel to Satrajit was cleared off the charge of
mujder. fie then conducted Jamvabati to the inner apart-
ments. ^

When Satrajit thought that he had been the instrumental
of the false charge against Krishna he was terrified and to
satisfy him he gave in marriage with hirn his daughter Satya-
bhamS. She had ere been sought in marriage by many
illustrious members of the Yadu family as Akrura, Kritaver-
man, and Satadhanwan, who were greatly worked up with
anger on account of her being married to another, and
formed a common cause of enmity against Satrajit. Th«
most leading man amongst them with Akrura and Krita-
varman said to Satadhanwan — “By given her daughter to
Krishna this caitiff Satrajit had insulted you and us grossly
who wanfed her : why do you not kill him and take the
jewel ? Should Achyuta on that account enter into conflict
with you we will take your part.’^ Having secured this pro-
mise Satadhanwan undertook to destroy Satrajit.

When the intelligence reached Krishna that the Pandavas
lad been burned in the house of wax, he, who was acquainted
with the real truth, immediately started for Baranavata to
allay the enmity of Duiyodbana and perform the necessaiy
duties of bis relationship. Taking advantage of his absence
Satadhanwan killed Satrajit while asleep and secured the
jewel for himself. When Satyabham^ came to know this,

highly angered on account of her father’s murder, at once


VISllNUPURANAM.


ascended the chariot, went to BaranSvat and told her husband
how Satrajit had been killed by Satadhanwan in anger on
account of her being married to another, and how the jewel
had been taken away by him. And she requested him to
take immediate steps to avenge such a henious crime.

Being thus informed Krishna, though pleased at heart,
said to Satyabhama, assuming an indignant look— “ This is an
insult to me i I shall never brook it. One cannot destroy the
birds that have built their nests on a tree without assailing
it. Remove excessive grief therefore ; you need not lament
to excite my wrath." Immediately coming back Ao Dwyki
Krishna took Baladeva apart and said to him. “ A lion slew
Prasena while hunting in the forests ; and now Satrajit has
been killed by Satadhanwan. As both these are gone, the
jewel which belonged to them, is now our common right,
Up then, ascend your car and destroy Satadhanwan.”

Being thus excited by his brother, BalarSma engaged
in the work ; but Satadhanwan being aware of their hostile
intention went to Kritavarman and prayed for his help.
Kritavarman did not agree saying that he was not able to
fight with both Krishna and Baladeva. Being disappointed
he again solicited Akrura for help who said— “ You must
go to some body else for help. How should I be able to
defend you ? Even none, amongst the celestials whope glories
are chanted throughout the universe, is capable of fighting
with the holder of the discus, trodden by whose foot the
three worlds tremble, whose hand makes the , wives of the
Asuras widows, whose weapons, — no army, however powerful
can resist no one is able to fight with the wielder of
^ploughshare, who by his very looks, nullifies the prpwess of
bis enemies, whose eyes roll with the joys of wine, and whose
huge ploughshare manifests his prowess by destroying the
most powerful enemies.” Whereto Satadhanwan replied
''V While such is the case and you are unable assist me, yoj*
may at least help me by keeping this jewel in your possession.


VISHNUPURANAM.


28^


*‘| can keep it Akrura said ** if you promise that even in the
last extremity you won’t give out that the jewel is in my
possession.” Satadhanwan agreed to this and Akrura took
the jewel. And mounting a fleet mare that could run hun<
dred leagues a day Satadhanwan fled from Dwarka.

When this intelligence reached Krishna, he made reafly
his four horses, Sarvya, Sugriva, Meghapushpa, and Balahakai
sd them to his car and accompanied by Balarama, started
in his pursuit. The mare went on speedily and flnished her
hundred leagues but when she reached the country of
Mithill, her strength was exhausted and she dropped down
and died. Having got down, Satadhanwan continued his
flight on foot. When the pursuers came to the place where
the mare had died Krishna said to Balarama — “ Do you remain
in car; I shall follow the villain on foot and kill him ; the
ground here is bad ; and the horses will not be able to carry
the car accross it.” Accordingly Balarama remained in the car
and Krishna followed Satadhanwan on foot. When he had
pursued him for two Koshe discharged his discus and although
Satadhanwan was at a considerable distance the weapon
dissevered his head. He then searched his person and
clothes very attentively but did not find the jewel. Then
coming back he said to Balarama — “ I have for nothing
destroyed Satadhanwan — for I have not found on his person
the precious gem — the quintessence of all worlds.” When
Balarama heard this, he was excited with anger and said
to Vasudeva — “ Shame upon you — so greedy of wealth. I
don’t acknowledge you as my brother. Here his my path,
Go wherever you like, I have done with Dwarka, with you
^ith all our house. It is useless for you to try to decieve me
these perjuries.” Having remonstrated with his brother
thus, who in vain tried to please him. Balarama went to the
of Videha, where Janaka recived him hospitably and
there he remained. VSlsudeva came back to DwarkA. While
BalarAma stayed in the house of Janakaj Duryodhana, the


38 $


ViSHNUPURANAM.


son of Dhritarastra learnt from him the art of lighting with
the mace.

In this way three years passed away. Babru, Ugrasena
and other Yadavas then repaired to the city of Videha and
convinced Balarama that Krishna had stolen the jewl.
ITiey then brought him to Dwarka.

Akrura too, to utiliste the gold produced by the jewel,
continually engaged in the celebration of sacrifices.
Considering that the murderer, of a Kshatrya or Vaisya
engaged in religious duties, is the slayer of Brahmin, Akrura
spent sixty-two years being protected by thd armoyr of
devotion. And by virtue of that gem there 'was no dearth,
nor pestilence in the whole country. At the end of that
period, Satrughna, the great grandson of satwata was killed
by Bhojas. As they were connected with Akrura he accom*-
panied them in their flight from Dwarka. From the time of
his departure various calamities, portents, snakes, dearth
plague and the like began to take place. Thereupon the
illnstriousKrishnacalied together Baladeva, Ugrasena andother
YSldavas and consulted with them to ascertain why so many
prodigies should have taken place at the same time. On
this Andhaka one of the elders of the Yadu family spoke—
Wherever Swaphalka the father of Akrura lived, there
famine, plague, dearth and other visitations were unknown.
Once when there was want of rain in the kingdom of
KasirSja, Swaphalka was brought there and immediately
there fell rain from the heavens. It also happened that the
queen of Kasiraja concieved and was big with a child but
when the time of delivery came the child did not come out of
the womb. Twelve years went away and still thegirf'*^^
unborn. Then the Kasiraja spoke to the child, saying
Daughter, why is your birth thus delayed? Come out,

I wish to see you ; why do you inflict this continued suffering
upon your mother?*' Thus addressed the infant said—
father, if you will present a cow daily to the Brahmans


VISHNUPURANAM.


287


shall be born at the end of three years/^ Accordingly the
king presented a cow every day to the Brahmans and at the
end of three years the girl came out of the womb. Her
father called her Gandini and he afterwards gave her to
Swaplialka when he came to his palace to help him.
Gandini as long as she lived, gave a cow to the
Brahmans every day. Akrura was her son by Swaphalka.
And he is thus born from a combination of extraordinary
excellence. When such a person is absent from us it is
likely that famine, pestilence and prodigies should take
placet Let h\j then be requested to come back ; the weak
points of men of excellence, should not be too severely
criticized.^'

In accordance with the advice of Andhaka the elder, the
Yadavas sent a mission headed by Kesava, Ugrasena and
Balabhadra, to assure Akrura that no notice of bis fault
would be taken. And having convinced him that he would
expect no danger they brought him back to DwarkS. As
soon as he arrived on account of the virtue of the jewel, the
plague, dearth, famine and every other calamity and portent
disappeared. Seeing this Krishna thought that the birth of
Akrura from Gandini and Swaphalka could not bring
fibout such an effect and he must have some other more
powerful virtue to arrest pestilence and famine. Certainly''
fbought he within himself the great Syamantaka jewef
be in his keeping, for these, as I have heard, are the
properties of the jewel. Akrura too has been performing
"'any sacrifices ; his own means are not sufficient for the
purpose, undoubtedly he has got tlie jewel in his possession."
Having arrived at this conclusion, he called together all
^ Y4davas at his house under the plea of celebrating some
After they had all taken their seals and the object
meeting had been explained to them and the business
^"'shed Krishna began to converse with Akrura and
laughing and joking, said to him—" Kinsman, you


VISHNUPURANAM.


are a prince in your liberality and we know very well
that the valuable gem which was stolen by Sudhamvart
was given to you and is now in your possession, to the
great benefit of this kingdom. 9o let it remain ; we all
derive advantage from its virtues. But Bhalabhadra sus-
pects that I have it and therefore, out of kindness to me
shew it to the assembly.’* When Akrura, who had the
jewel in his possession, was thus taxed he hesitated what he
should do. He thought — “ If I deny that I have the jewel,
they will search my person and find the gem hidden amongst
my clothes. I cannot submit myself to a searrli.” Thinking
thus Akrura said to Nar^iyana, the cause of the universe
‘*It is true, Syamantaka jewel was given to my care by
Satadhanwan when he left this place. I expected every day
that you should ask me for it and with great inconvenience
to myself I have retained it. The care of this has put me to
so much anxiety that I have not been able to enjoy any
pleasure or a moment's rest. Being afraid lest you might
think, that I am unfit to keep this jewel which is the source
of welfare to the kingdom I did not mention to you that it is
in my possession. Now take it yourself and give ks charge
to any body you like.” Having said this Akrura got out
of his clothes a small gold box and took from it the jewel.
When it was shown to the assembled YSdavas the
room in which they sat, was illuminated with its radiance,
**This” said Akrura is the Syamantaka jewel which
was left to my care by Satadhanwan. Let him t®*
whom it belongs now take it.”

When the Yldavas saw the jewel they were filled with
surprise and loudly expressed their joy. Balabhadra imme-
diately claimed the jewel as his property jointly with Achyuta
as was formerly settled ; whereas SatyabhamS wanted it
as her rightful property for it belonged to her father. Be-
tween these two Krishna considered himself as an ox between
the two wheels of a cart, and thus said to Akrura in


ViSHNUPURANAM.


289

presence of the Yadavas— ‘This jewel has been shown to you
all in order to clear my reputation ; it is the joint-property
ofBalabhadra and myself and is the paternal property of
SatyabhamSl. But as a source of advantage to the king-
dom this jewel must be consigned to the charge of one who
leads a life of perpetual continence ; if worn by an impure
man it will prove the cause of his death. As I have sixteen
thousand wives I am not qualified to use it. It is not proba-
ble that Satyabham^ would agree to the conditionsi satisfying
which she may possess it And as regards Balabhadra, he
is greatly addicted to wine and sensual pleasures. We are
therefore all (^t of question. All the Yadavas, Balabhadra,
Satyabhama and myself request you, most liberal Akrura, to
keep this jewel in your possession, as you have done up to
this time for the general behoof ; for you are qualified to
keep it and in your hands it has proved beneficial to the
country. You must comply with your request.”

Thus requested Akrura took the jewel and thenceforth
wore it publicly round his neck where it shone with dazzling
radiance and he moved about like the sun wearing a garland
of light.

He, who remembers the vindication of Krishna’s character
from false charges, shall never be subject to any false charge
in the least degree and living in the full display of senses,
shall be freed from every sin.


37


SECTION XIV.


P ARASARA said The younger brother of Anamitra was
Sini, whose son was Satyaka, whose son was Yuyildhana,
otherwise known as Satyaki, whose son was Asanga, whose
son was Yuni, whose son was Yugandhara. These princes
were named Saineyas.

Prisni was born in the race of Anamitra, vvhose son was
’ Swaphalka the purity of whose character has been desctibed ;
the younger brother of Swaphalka was named Chitraka.
Swaphalka had by Gandini, besides Akfura, Upamadgu,
Mridura, Sarimejaya, Giri, Kshatropa, Kshatta, Satrughna.
Arimarddana, Dharmadhris, Dhristasarman, Gandha, Mojavaha
and Prativaha. He had also a daughter, named SutSrA.

Devavat and Upadeva were the sons of Akrura. The
sons of Chitrika were Pritha and Vipritha and many others.
Andhakahad four sons, Lukkura, Bhojamana, Suchi, Kambala*
varhish. The son of Kukkura was Vrishta, whose son was
Kapotaroman, whose son was Viloman, whose son was Bhava,
who was otherwise named Chandanodakadunbubhi; he
was a friend of the Gandharba Tumburu; his son was
Abhej it, whose son was Punarvasu, whose son was Ahuka ;
he had also a daughter called Ahuki. The sons of Ahuka
were Devakji and Ugrasena. The former had four sons
Devavat, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devarakshita And seven
daughters— VrikadevS, Upadeva, DevarakshitI, SridevS,
SantidevA, Sahadeva and Devaki j and all the daughters were
married to Vasudeva. The sons of Ugrasena were Kansa,
Nyagroddha, Sunaman, Kanka, Sanka, Subhumi, Rashtrapala-
Yuddhamushthi, and Yushtimat and her daughters
kansa, Kausavati, Sutana, Rashtrapali and Kanki.


VISHNUPURANAM.


The son of Bhajamana was Viduratha, whose son was
SurS} whose son was Samin, whose son was Pratikshatra,
whose son was Swayambhoja whose son was Hrideka, who
had Kritavarma, Satadhana, Devamidusha and others.
Sura, the son of Devamidhusa, was married to Marisha
and had by her ten sons, When Vasudeva, who was one
these sons, was born, the celestials, to whom future is known,
foresaw that the divine being would be born in his race and
they therefore joyously sounded the celestial drums and ac-
cordingly Vasudeva was named Anakadundubhi. His brothers
were DevaWiaga, Devasravas, Anadhristi, Karuhdhaka, Vatsa
balaka, Srin^ya, Syama, Samika and Gandusha. They had
five sisters who were named Pritha, Srutadeva, Srutakirti
Srutasrava and Rajadhidevi.

Sura had a friend named Kuntibhoja who had no son.
And to him he presented duly his daughter Pritha. She
was married tb Pandu and bore him Yudhisthira, Bhima and
Arjuna who were in reality the sons of the deities Dharma,
Vayu and Indra. And whilst she was a maiden she had a
son named Kama begotten by the divine sun. Pandu had
another wife named Madri who had by the twin sons of
Aditya, Nasatya and Basra, two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva.

A Karusha prince by name Vriddhasarman married
Srutadeva and begot on her a dreadful Asura named Danta-
vaktra. Dhristaketu king of Kaikeya, married Srutakirti
and had by her Santarddana and four others sons known as
the five Kaikeyas. Jayasena, king of Avanti married Raj5-
dhidevi and had two sons, Vinda and Anavinda. Damaghosa,
the king of Chedi, married Srutasravas and^ begot on her a
son named Sisupala. This prince in his pristine birth, was
the wicked and valiant king of the Daityas, Hiranyakasipu,
who was killed by the divine guardian of creation. He was
in another birth was born as the ten-headed Ravana, whose
unequalled, strength, prowess and power were overcome
hy Rima, the lord of the three worlds. Having been


VISHNUPURANAM.


^91

<kiirtfoyed< by the deity in the shape of Raghavai he was
exempted from an embodied state for a long time as a
tfpard of bi$ virtues but had now been born once more as
l&isupala the son of Damaghosa, king of Chedi, In this
character he began to show greatest hostility towards Krishna
an incarnate portion of the glorious Pundarikaksha to carry
the burden of the world. He was killed by the great God.
And on account of his thoughts being entirely devoted to
him Sisup^Ia was united with him after death ; for the lord
giveth to those with whom he is propitiated what they desire
and he confers a heavenly ‘and exalted static rjr even uj)on
those whom he destroys in displeasure.


^ SECTION X V.

said : — Being killed by Vishnu as Hiranya-
kasipu and Havana he obtained enjoyments which are not
attainable even by the immortals. Why did they not obtain
absorption albeit slain by Vishnu ? And why as Sisupala
were they absorbed into the eternal Hari? 0 foremost of
those conversant with religion, 1 wish to hear of all these ;
1 am greatly striken with curiosity ; do thou relate them.

ParasARA said: — When the creator, preserver and
destroyer of the universe killed Hiranyakasipu, the king of
Daityas, he assumed the figure of a lion and man, he was
not aware that his slayer was Vishnu. He thought this wonder-
full figure was but the creation of his accumulated piety*


VISHNUPURANAM.


m

And the quality of passion being predominant in his mind
he obtained destruction from man-lion. And in consequence
of hia death at the hands of Vishnu be obtained sovereignty
over three worlds and immense riches and enjoyments as
pas^sana. He was not absorbed into the supreme spirit
that is without* beginning or end because his mind was not
wholly devoted to that object. Dasfisana, thus being entirely
subject to love and being entirely taken up by thoughts of
Janaki, could not perceive that the son of* Dasaratha whom
he saw, was in fact the divine Achyuta. At the time of his
death he wai^umpressed with the idea that his enemy was a
mortal and therefore the fruit he obtained from being slain
by Vishnu was his birth in the illustrious family of th^e kings
Chedi and the possession of extensive dominions. And he
was known as Sisupala. In this birth many circumstances
occured by which he was constrained to utter the name of
the great God and on all these occasions the enmity, that
had accumulated through successive births, influenced his
mind. And always speaking disrespectfully of Achyuta he
repeated all his names. Whether walking, eating, sitting,
or sleeping his enmity was never at rest and Krishna was
always present to his mind in his ordinary form, having eyes
like lotus-petals, clad and bright yellow raiment, adorned
'vith a garland, with bracelets on his arms and writs and a
diadem on his crown ; having four stalwart arms bearing the
conch, the discus, the mace and the lotus. Uttering his names
always although in malediction Krishna was always present
'0 his mind, and while inflicting his death SisupSla saw him
radiant with shining weapons and in his true Brahma form
'roid of passion and enmity. Being slain by the discus of
Vishnu at this moment all his sins were removed by hU:
divine enemy and he was united with him by whose might be
destroyed.

I have thus related ip yon everything. He, who names

Remembers the glorious Vishnu even in the enmity obtains


m


VISHNUPURANAM.


final emancipafion which is not attainable by the gods or
demons. It is useless to say that he, who reverentially names
or remembers him, obtains final liberation.

Vasudeva, otherwise named Anakadundubhi, and Rohini,
Pauravi, Bhadra, Madira, Devaki and several other wives.
His sons by Rohini were Balabhadra, SArana, Saru, Durmada,
and others. Balabhadra married Revali and had by herNisatha
and Ulmaka. The sons of Sarana were Marshti, Marshtimat,
Sisu, Satyadhriti, and others. Bhadraswa, Bhadrabahu,
Durgama, Bhuta and others were born in the race of Rohini.
The son of Vasudeva by MadirA were Nanda^, Upananda,
Kritaka and others. By his wife Vinsali Ire had one son
named Kausika. Devaki before him six sons Kritimat,
Sushena, Udayin, Bhadrasena, Rijudasa and Bhadradeha all
of whom were killed by Kansa.

When Devaki was again big with a child the seventh time,
YoganidrA (the sleep of devotion), despatched by Vishnu,
extricated the embryo from maternal womb at the mid-night
and transferred it to that of Rohini; and from having been
thus taken away, the child (who was Balarama) received the
name of Sankarshna. Being desirous of relieving the world
of the burden, the divine Vishnu, the source of the vast
universe, beyond the understanding of all gods, demons sages,
and men, past, present or future, worshipped of Brahma
and all the celestials, who is without beginning, middle or
end, descended into the womb of Devaki and was born as
her son Vasudeva. YaganidrA, always proud to satisfy bis
orders, removed the embryo to Josoda the wife of Nanda,
the cow-herd. At this birth the earth was relieved of all
sins; the sun, moon and plahents shone with unclouded
brilliance ; all fear of evil portents was removed aud universal
happiness prevailed. And from the time of his birth people
were led into the righteous path.

Whilst this powerful being lived in the land of mortals
be had sixteen thousand and one hundred wives of :


VISHNUPURANAM.


29S

the Principal were Rukmini, SatyabhamA, Jamvabatii Jala-
hasini and four others. The divine Krishna, the universal
form without beginning, begot on all these wives a hundred
and eighty thousand sons, of whom thirteen were most cele-
brated, Pradyumna, Charudeshna, Samba and others. Prady-
umna, married ’Kakudwati, the daughter of Rukmimi and had
by her Aniruddha. Aniruddha married SubhadrS, the grand-
daughter of the same Rukmni and she bore him a son named
Vajra. The son of Vajra and Balm and his son was
Sucharu.

hi this way the members of the Yadu family increased and
were many Hundreds of thousands of them so that it would
be impossible to repeat their names in hundreds of years.
Two verses regarding them are recited. “ The domestic
teachers of the boys in the use of arms numbered three
crores and eighty lacs. Who shall enumerate the powerful
members of the Yadava family who were tens of ten thou-
sands and hundreds of hundred thousands in number? Those
powerful Daityas, who were slain by them in the encounter
between the gods and demons, were born again on earth
as men, as tytants and oppressors. With a view to arrest
their violence the gods also descended to the land of mortals
and became members of the hnndred and one branches of
family of Yadu. Vishnu, was their teacher and ruler and
all the members were obedient to his commands.

Whoever hears often times of this account of the origin
of the heroes of the race of Vrishni shall be freed from ail
Iniquities and shall attain to the region of Vishnu.


SECTION XVI.


Parasara said I shall now briefly give you an account
of the descendants of Turvasu.

The son of Turvasa was Tab«i, whose son was Gobhanu,
whose son was Traisamba, whose son was Karandhama,
whose son was Marutta. Marutta had no issue and he there-
fore adopted Dushyanta of the race ol Puru by which the
line of Turvasa merged into that of Puru. Thi^was brought
about by the curse imprecated on his son by Yaiyati.


SECTIION XVII.


The son of Druhya was Babhcu, whose son was Setu,
whose son was Aradwat, whose son was Gandhara, whose son
was Dharma, whose son was Dhrita, whose son was Durya-
man, whose son wfts Prachetas, who had a hundred sons
and they were the princes of the lawless MIechehhas or
barbarians of the north.


SECTION XVIII


Anu, the fourth son of Yayati, had three sons, Sabhanara,
Chakshusha and Paramekshu. The son of the first waa
Kllanara, whose son was Srinjaya, whose son was Puranjaya,
whose son was Janamenjaya, whose son was MahSlmani,
whose son^^'as MahSmanas, who had two sons, Ushinara and
Titikshu. ushinara had five sons, Sivi, Trina, Gara, Krimi,
Darvan. Sivi had four sons Vrishadarva, Suvira, Kaikeya
and Madra. Titikshu had one son Ushadratha, whose son
was Hema, wdiose son was Sutapas, whose was Bali, on
whose spouse five sons were begotten by Dirghatamas—
namely Anga, Banga, Kalinga, Sauhma and Pundra and
their progeny and the countries they inhabited were known
by the same names.

The son of Anga was Para, whose son was Divaratha,
whose son was Dharmaratha, whose son was Chitraratha,
whose son was Romapida also called Dasaratha^ to whom
on account of his having no offspring, Dasaratha, the son
of Aja gave his daughter Santi to be adopted. After this
Bomap^da had a son named Chaturanga, whose son was
Prithulaksha, whose son was Champa who founded the city'
of Champft. The son of Champa was Haryyanga, whose
son was Bhadraratha, who had two sons, Vrihatkatnian and
Vrihadratha. The son of the former was Vrihadbhanu, whose
son was Vrihanmanas, whose son was Jayadratha, who by a
'vife, who was the daughter of a Kshatrya father and Brah-
man mother, had a son named Vijaya.

Vijaya had a son whose name was Dhriti, whose son was
I^ritabrata, whose son was Satyakarman, whose son was
Adiratha who found a son in a basket on the banks of the

38


VISIINUPURANAM.


298

Ganges. This was Kama, the son of Pritha in her maiden*
hood. Kama’s son was Vrishasena. These were the Anga
kings. I shall now describe to you the descendants of Poru.


SECTION ZIX.


PakASara said:— The son of Pnru was Janamenjaya,
^hose son was Pradiinvat, whose son was Pravira, whose son.

Manasyu, whose son was Bhayada, whose son was
Sudyunnai whose son was Bahugava, whose son was
Samyati, whose son was Ahamyati, whose son was Raudra*
swa, who had ten sons, Riteyu, Kaksheyu, Sthanditeyu,
Ghriteyo, Jaleyu, Sthaleyu, Santaleyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu,
Oiod Vrateyu. The son of Riteyu was Rantinara, whose
80D9 were Tansu, Apratirtha and Dhruva. The son of the
syecond of these was Kanwa, whose son was Medhatithi, from
whom the Kanwayana Brahmanas were sprung. Antla was
the ^pn Tansu, who bad four sons of whom Dushyanta was
the elder. The son of Dushymanta was the Emperor
EbaratSi regarding whom a verse is recited by the celestials.
“The mother is merely the reccptable j it is the father by whom
a son is begotten. Rear up thy son, Dusbyamanta, treat
•not SakuntalA with disrespect. Sons, who are born from the
Jpins of their father, save their manes from hell. Thou art
father of this boy ; Sakuhtalh has spoken the truth.’’
Bbarata begut on his wives nine sons, beholding whom


VlSHMUPUltANAM.


m

said that they were not after him. The qiieens, beihg
afraid lest he might desert them, destroyed those sotis. The
birth of sons being thus useless the king celebrated a sacri-
fice in honour of Maruts. They gave him Bharadwaja, the son
of Vrihaspati by MamatS, the wife of Utathya, expelled
untimely by the ^kick of his half brother Dirghatamas. The
following verse explains the meaning of the name — ** Silly
woman’* said Vrihaspati ** cherish’* this child of two fathers^t
(Bhara-dwa-jam) “ No, Vrihaspati** replied MamatSl **you take
cart of him.'* So saying they both left him and from these
expressior\s the boy was named Bharadwaja. He was stiso
called Vita\ha for both the sons of Bharata proved fruit-
less. The son of Vitatha was Bhavanmanya, who had many
sons, the principals among whom were Vrihatkshatra, Maha-
viryya, Nara and Garga. The son of Narn was Sankriti,
whose sons were Ruchiradhi and Rantideva. The son of
Garga was Sini and their progeny were respectively called
Gargyas and Sainyas ; although Kshatryas by birth they became
Brahmans. The son of Mahaviryya was Urukshaya, who had
three sons Trayyaruna, Pushkarin and Kapi, the last of whoiti
became a Brahman. The son of Vrihatkshatra Was Suhotta,
whose son was Hastin, who founded the city of Hastinapur
The sons of Hastin were Ajamidha, Dwimidha, Purumidha.
One son of Ajamidha was Kanwa, whose son was Medha-
tithi;bis other son was Vrihadishu, Whose son was Vrihad-
vasu, whose son was VrihatkarmUn, whose son was Jayadratha,
whose son was Viswajit, whose sort was Senajit, Who^fe sons
were Ruchiraswa, Kasya, Dridhadhanusha and Vasahana.
The son of Ruchiraswa was Prithusena, whose son Was Pjtra,
whose son was Nipa, who had a hundred sons, of whom the
chief Samara was the king of Kampilya. Samara hdd three
sons Para, Sam para Sadis wa. The son of Para wAS
Pritha, Whose son was Sukriti, whose son wds Vibhrata,
whose son was Anuha, Who married Kritwi, the daughter
of Suka and had by her Brahmadatta, whbse soir wai


VISHNUPURANAM;


300:

Viswaksena, whose son was Udaksena and whose son wai
Bhallata.

The son of Dwimidha was Yavinara, whose son was
Dhrtimat^ whose son was Satyadhritij whose son was Dridha-
nemii whose son was Suparswa, whose son was Sumatij whose
son was Sannatimat, whose son was Krita, who was taught by
Hiramyanabhai the philosophy of Yoga and who compiled
the twenty-four Sanhitas for the use of the eastern Brahmanas
studying the Sama Veda. The son of Krita was Ugrayudhas,
who by his power destroyed the Nipa race of Kshatryas,
His son was Kshemya, whose son was Suirra whose son was
Nripanjaya, whose son was Baharatha. These we<^ all called
Pauravas.

Ajamidha espoused Nilini and by her had a son called
Nilaj whose son was Santi, whose son was Susanti, whose
son was Purujanu, whose son was Chakshu, whose son was
Harryaswa, who had five sons, Mudgala, Srinjaya, Vrihadishu,
Pravira and Kampilya. Their father said--“ These five sons
of mine are capable of protecting the countries’’ and hence
they were g lied Panchalas — {/>., Pancha— and alam— »
able). From Mudgala sprang the Maudgahya Brahmans.
He had also a son called Bahwaswa, who had two children,
twins, a son and daughter — ^Divodasa and Ahalya. The son
of Saradwat or Gautama by Ahalya was Sitanands, whose
son was Satyadhriti, who was well versed in military science.
Being enamoured of the nymph Urvasi, Satyadriti begot on
her two children, a boy and a daughter. The king SAntanu,
a-hunting, fouud their children in a clump of long Sara grass
and feeling pity for them took them and reared them up. As
they were brought up through Kri§i^ pity, they were called
Kripa and Kripi. The latter became the wife of Drona and
the mother of Aswathftman.

The son of Divodasa was MitrSyu, whose son was
dhyavanna, whose son was Sud&saj whose son Was SaudAsa,
atao . called Sahadeva, whose son wai Somaka, wtib had a


VISHNUPURANAM.


30 ^

hundred sons of uhono the eldest was Jantu and the youngest
^as Prishata. The son of Prishata was Drupada, whose sou
was Dhrishtadyumna, whose son was Drishtaketu.

Another son of Ajamidha was called Riksha, whose son
was SamvarUnai whose son was Kuru, who gave his name to
the holy district Kurukshetra. His sons were Sudhanush, Jahnu,
Parikshit, and many others. The son of Sudanush was Suhotra,
whose son was Chyavana, whose son was Kritaka, whose son
was Uparichara the Vasu, who had seven children Vrihadratha,
♦Pratyagra, Kusamba, Mavella, Matysa and others. The son
of Vrihadratha ^was Kusagra, whose son was Rishabha, whose
son was Pushpavat, whoso son was Satyadhrita, whose son
was Sudhanvvan, whose son was jantu. Vrihadratha had
another son. He was born in two parts which were joined
together by a female fined named JarA and accrodingly he was
named JarSsandha. His son was Sahadeva, whose son was
Somapi, whose son was Srutasravas. These were the kings
of Magadha.


SECTION XX.


—00


P ARASARA said : — Parikshit had four sens— -Janame jay
Stutasenai Ugrasena and Bhimasena. The son of Jahaii
Was Surathai whose son was Viduratha, whose son was
Sarvabhauma, whose son was Jayasena Aravin, whose son
was Ayutayus, whose son was Akrodhana ; one of his sons
Was D^yatitbi and another was called Riksha, whose son


302 VISHNUPURANAM.

was Uilipa, whose son was Pratipa, who had three sorjj,
Devftpii SIntanu, and Bahlika. The first took to a forest
life in childhood and SAntanu became the king. Regarding
him this verse is recited throughout the earth— *^Sftntanu is Ms
name because if he places his hands upon an old man he
restores him to youth and by him men obtain tranquility/’

In SSintanu's kingdom there was not rain for twelve years,
When he perceived that the whole kingdom was about to
be devastated he called together all the Brahmans and said
to them — “ Why docs not the God pour rains in my kingdom?
What fault have I committed ?” They told him that he was
aa it were a younger brother married before sm elder lor he
was governing the kingdom which was the rightful property
0f his elder brother. “ What then am I to do ?” said the
king. The Brahmanas replied — “As long as the Brahmanas
shall not be displeased with Dev^pi on account of his
deviating from the path of righteousness the kingdom is his;
you should therefore give it over to him.” When the minister
of the king Amarisarin heard this he collected a number of
ascetics who taught doctrines opposed to those of the Vedas
and sent them into the forest. They met Devapi,
perverted the understanding of the simple-minded prince
and led him to cherish heretical notions. Being informed
of his offence by the Brahmanas, Santanu was greatly pained.
Accordingly he sent them before him into the forest and
then went there himself to restore the kingdom to his elder
brother. When the Brahmans reached the hermitage of
DevSLpi they informed him, that, according to the doctrines
of the Vedas, succession to a kingdom was the right of the
elder brother. But he discussed with them and set forth
various arguments which were opposed to the teachings of
the Vedas. When the Brahmans heard this they looked
towards S&utanu and said “ Come here king you need not
pvt yourself further trouble in this matter. The dearth is
gone, this man has fallen from his condition for h®


VI5HNUFURANAW.


303


uttered disrespectful words to the authority of the eternal^
uncreated Veda. When the elder brother goes down to a
degraded state there is no sin consequent upon prior espou-
sals of his junior.” Thereupon SSntanu came back to his
capital and governed the kingdom as before j his elder
brother was degraded for declaring doctrines opposed to
the Vedas. Indra poured down abundant rain, which was
followed by rich harvests.

The son of Bahlika was Somadatta, who had three sons#
Bhuri, Bhurisravas and Sala, The son of SJintanu was the
well kpown al>d the learned Bhishma, who was born to him
by the holy Gang5. He had by his wife Satyavati two sons,
Chitrangada and Vichitraviryya. Cbitrangada, in his yhutb
was slain in an encounter with a Gandharbha called Chitran-
gada. Vichitraviryya married AmbS and Ambalika, the daugh-
ters of the kiag of Kasi, and enjoying too much connubial
pleasures was attacked with consumption and died. By
command of Satyavati, my son Krishna-Daipayana, who was
always obedient to his mother, begot upon the widows of his
brother, the princes Dhritarastra and Pandu and upon a
female servant Vidura. Dritarashtra had Duryodhana,
DushAsana and others to the extent of a hundred. Hav-
ing incurred the imprecation of a deer whose mate he had»
dain in a chase, Pandu was prevented from procreating,
children. Accordingly his wife Runti bore to him three sons*
were begotten by the deities, Dharma, Vayu and liidra-^
namely Yudhishtira, Bhima and Arjuna. His wife Madri had
two sons by the sons of Aswini — namely Nakula and Saba-
4ova. These each had a son by Draupadi. The son of
Yudhishtira was Prativindhya ; of Bhima, Srutasoma; of Aijuna,.
^ntakirti ; of Nakula, Satanika, and of Sahadeva, Sruta-
^*r*nan. The Pandavas had also other sons. By his wife
Yaudheyi y^dhishtira had Devaka; Bhima had by Hidbnrtba,
^i^^totkacha, and had another by his wife Ka$i, Sarvatraga.
^^adeva had by Vijaya, Suhotra and Niratnitra was tl# son


304


VISHNUPURANAM.


^ Nakula by KarenutmatL AVjuna had IrSvat by t|]^
serpent nymph Ulupi— 4y the daughter of the king of
Manipur he had Babrubabana, who was adopted by hi»
roaternaf grand father, by his wife Subhadra, Abhimanyu
who even in his boy-hood was famous for valour and strength
and crushed the enemies' cars in fight. The son of Abhimanyu
by his wife Uttar5 was Parikshit, who after the destruction
of all the Kurus, was killed in his mother's womb by the
weapon hurled by Aswathama. But by the mercy of Krishna
at whose feet bow all the gods and demons and who for his
own pleasure had assumed human shape he/^^as resUred to
life. This Parikshit now governs the earth with undisputed
tway*


SECTION XXL

P aRASARA said : — I shall now give you an account ol
the future kings. He, who is the sovereign now, shall have
four sons, namely Janamejaya, Srutasena, Ugrasena, and
Bhimasena. The son of Janamejaya shall be Satineeka.
He shall study the Vedas from Jagnawalka, learn the use
of weapons from Kripa and then disassociate himself
worldly affairs. And then receiving instructions regarding
the knowledge of self from Saunaka he shall attain final
liberation.

From Satineeka shall be born Aswamedhadatla, whose <
son shall be Adhiseemakiishna and whose son shall be
Nichakshu who shall reside in Kusambhi, when Hastinupnj
shall be at the bed of the Ganges. Nichakshu^s son sha
be Ushna* who^e son shall be Chitraratha, whose son sha


VIsMNut^URANAM.


303

be Suchiratha, whose son shall be BrishnimSti, whose son
shall be Sushena, whose son shall be Suneetha^ whose son
shall be Richa, whose son shall be Nrichakshu, whose son
shall be Sukhabala, whose son shall be Pariplava, whose son
shall be Sunaya, whose son shall be Medhabee^ whose son
shall be Nripanjaya) whose son shall be Mridu, whose son
shall be Tigma, whose son shall be Trihadratha, whose son
shall be VasudSna, whose son shall be the second Sataneeka,
whose son sahll be Udayana, whose son shall be Aheenara^
whose son shall be Khandapani,, whose son shall be Nira-
mitr^, whose son shall be Kshemaka. The following verse
is recited of Kshemaka — “The family of Kuru, that has
produced many Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, that has been
ornamented by many a royal saint, shall end with Kshemaka
in the Kali Yuga.”


SECTION XXIL


PaRASara said: — 1 shall now engage in giving you an
account of the future kings of the Ikshawku race.

The son of Vrihadvala shall be Vrihatkshana, whose son
shall be Guruksepa^ whose son shall be Vatsai whose son
shall be Vatsabhuha, whose son shall be Pratibyoma, whose
son shall be Divlkara^ whose son shall be Sahadeva^ whose
^n shall be Vrihadaswa, whose son shall be Bhanuratha^
^hose son shall be Supratceka) whose son ahall be K^udeva^
39


3o6


VISHNUPURANAM.


whose son shall be Sunakshatra, whose son shall be Kinnara
whose son shall be Antariksha, whose son shall be Suverna,
whose son shall be Amitrajit, whose son shall be Vrihadwaja
whose son shall be Dharma^ whose son shall be Kritanjaya,
whose son shall be Rananjaya, whose son shall be Sanjaya,
whose son shall be Sakya, whose son shall be Krudhodana,
whose son shall be RStula, whose son shall be Prasenajit,
whose son shall be Kshrudraka, whose son shall be Kundaka,
whose son shall be Suratha, whose son shall be the second
Sumitra. These kings of j:he Ikswaku family are the des-
cendants of Vrihadvala. There is a verse often recited
regarding this race— The family of Ikshawku shall extend
up to Sumitra ; with this king the family shall end in the
Kali Yuga.’^


•:o:—


SECTION XXIII.


P aRasarA said I shall now describe to you the future
kings of Magadha sprung from Vrihadratha. In this race
were born Jar^sandha and other powerful kings.

The son of Jarasandha shall be Sahadeva, whose son
shall be Somapi, whose son shall be Srutavan, whose son
shall be Ayutayu, whose son shall be Niramitra, whose son
shall be Sukshatra, whose son shall be Vrihatkarman, whose


ViSHNUPURANAM.


307


son shall be Senajit, whose son shall be Srutanjaya, whose
son shall be Vipra, whose son shall be Suchi, whose son shall
be Kshemya, whose son shall be Subrata, whose son shall
be Dharma, whose son shall be Susrama, whose son shall
be Drirasena, whose son shall be Sumati, whose son shall
be Subala, whose son shall be Satyajit, and whose son shall
be Ripunjaya. The kings of the race of Vrihadratha shall
reign for a thousand years.


SECTION XXIV,


ParasarA said Ripunjaya, the last king of the race
of Vrihadratha, shall have minister by the name of Sunika.
Slaying his Master he shall place his own son Prodyuta on
the throne. He shall have a son by the name of Palaka,
whose son shall be Visakayupa, whose son shall be Janaka,
whose son shall be Nandivardana. These five kings of the
family of prodyuta shall govern the earth for^nundred and
thirty eight years.

Thereupon Sisunaga (shall become the king). His son
shall be KSikavarna, whose son shall be Kshemadarman,
whose son shall be Kshatraujas whose son shall be Vid-
*^‘sara, whose son shall be Ajatasatru, whese son shall be
Carvaka, whose son shall be Udayashwa, whose son shall be


3o8


VISHNUPURANAM.


Nanrdivardana, whose son shall be Mahanandi. These ten
kings of the family of SisunAga shall lord over the earth for
three hundred and sixty-two years.

iMahapandi shall beget a son on a Sudra woman by name,
Mahapadma Nanda, who shall be very avaricious and shall
extirpate all the Kshatryas like Parashurama. From that
time Sudra kings shall govern the earth. And this Maha-^
padma shall enjoy the earth as lord paramount, and his com-
mands shall no where be disobeyed. He shall have eight
sons— ‘Sumatya and others. Mahapadma and his eight sons
shall reign for a hundred years. Thereupon a Brahmat^, by
name Kantiiya shall root out Nanda and his sons.

After the family of Nanda, Mauryas shall lord over the
earth. This Kantiiya shall instal the Maurya king Chandra-
Gupta on the throne. He shall have a son by name Vindu-
sara, whose son shall be Asokavardana, whose son shall be
Sujasas, whose son shall be Dasaratha, whose son' shall be
Sangata, whose son shall be Salisuka, whose son shall be
Vrihadratha. These Maurya kings shall reign for hundred
and seventy-three years. After them the Sungas will enjoy
the earth.

Thereupon slaying his own master the Commander in-
Chief Pushpamitra shall establish himself on the throne. His
son shall be Agnimitra, whose son shall be Sujestsha whose
son shall be Vasumitra, whose son shall be Ardiraka, whose
son shall be Pulindaka, whose son shall be Ghosavasu, whose
son shall be Vajramitra, whose son shall be Vagabata, whose
son shall be Devabhuti. These ten Sunga kings shall reign
for one hundred and twelve years. Thereafter the Kanwa
kings shall lord over the earth. Slaying his own master,
the Sunga king Devabhuti who shall be addicted to gam-
bling) the minister Vasudeva shall place himself on the throne.
His son shall be Vumimitra, whose son shall be NArayana,.
whose son shall be Susarma. These four Kanwa kings shall
ffigo for forty 4ve years..


VISHNUPURANAM*


3 ^

A servant by name Sipraka of the race of Andra shall
slay Susarma, the last Kanwa king and by force place him-
self on the throne. Thereafter his brother Krishna shall
govern the earth. Krishna^s son shall be Purnotsanga, whose
son shall be Lambodara, whose son shall be Durlaka, whose
son shall be Meghaswaii, whose son shall be ParumaO) whose
son shall be Aristhakarman, whose son shall be Hal, whose
son shall be Pathalaka, whose son shall be Prabillasen,
whose son shall be the beautiful Satakarni, whose son shall
be Sivaswati, whose son shall be Gomatipatra, whoso son
shal] be Patimari, whose son shall be Sivasreesatakarma,
whose son shall be Sivashkandha, whose son shall be Yajna-
sree, whose son shall be Vijaya, whose son shall be Chandra-
sree, whose son shall be Pulomarchi. These thirty illustrious
Andhra kings will govern the earth for four hundred and fifty
years.

Thereafter seven kings of the Avira race, sixteen kings
of Gardavila race and sixteen Saka kings shall respectively
govern the earth.

Thereupon eight Yavana kings, fourteen Tukhara kings,,
thirteen Munda kings, and eighteen Manu kings shall rule
the earth for thirteen hundred and ninety-nine years. There-
after eleven Paura kings shall govern the earth for thre^
hundred years.

When the Pauras shall spread all over the earth the Yavar
nas of iKailakila shall become kings. And amongst theni
one Viridbyasakti shall be the lord paramount. Bis son shall
be Paranjaya, whose son shall be Ramchandra, whose son
shall be Dharma, whose son shall be Varanga, whose son
shall be Kritamandana, whose son shall be Sashinandi, whose
son shall be Nandiyasft, whose son shall be Sisaka, whose
son shall be Pravira. These nine kings shall letgn for
hundred and sixty years.

Thereafter thirteen kings of this family^ three of Valheeka,
Pushpamitra, Parupmitra and Padniamitra, the nine kings


VISHNUPURANAM.


! ilO

of Saptakosaia and then again nine kings of the country of
Nishdha shall respectively flourish.

One king of the city of Magadha by name Viswasphatika
shall create many a new mixed caste. He will root out
the Kshatriya or martial race and elevate fishermen, barba-
rians and Brahmans and other castes to power. Jhe nine
N&gas will reign in PadmSvati, K&ntipuri. and Mathurl;
and the Guptas of Magadha along the Ganges to Prayaga.
A king by name Devarakshita will reign in a city on the sea
shore over the Kosalas, Pundras and TSmraliptas. The
Guhas will occupy Kalinga, MAhihaka and the mountains
of Mahendra. The race of Manidhanu will occupy the
countries of Nishidas, Naimishikas and Kalatyas. The
people called Kanakas will occupy the Amazon country and
that called Mushika. People of the degraded three tribes
and Abhiras and Sudras will occupy Saurashtra, Avanti
Sura Arbuda and Marubhumi. And Sudras, outcasts and
barbarians will occupy the banks of the Jadus, Darvika, the
Chandrabhaga and Kashmir.

These and all the contemporary kings will be of churlish
spirit ; violent temper and always addicated to falsehood and
wickedness. They will destroy women, children and cows ;
they will seize upon the property of their subjects, will be of
limited power j they will rapidly rise and fall ; the duration
of their life will be very short ; they will form high expecta-
tions and acquire very little piety.

The people of the countries, they will rule over, will im-
bibe the same nature. And the barbarians being powerful
under rpyal patronage will destroy the subjects. Wealth
and virtue will decrease day by day until the .whole world
will be depraved. Wealth will be the test of pedigree and
virtue ; passion will be the only tie of marriage ; falsehood
will be the only means of success in litigation ; and women
will be merely the objects of sensual gratification. Earth
will be respected for its mineral treasures sacrificial thread


VISHNUPURANAM.


3II


will be the only test of a Brahman ; external marks will
constitute the only distinction of orders and wickedness will
be the only means of livelihood. Weakness will be the
cause of dependance menace will be the cause of learning :
gifts only will constitute virtue ; wealth will be the only sign
of honesty ; simple ablution will be purification ; mutual con-
sent will be the marriage ; a man wearing good clothes will be
considered honest and water at a distance will be considered
a holy spring. When the world will be thus sunk in faults,
he, who will be the strongest amidst those castes, shall be the
king; They will grow avaricious and the subjects, unable to
bear the burden of various taxes, will take refuge amongst the
valleys of the mountains and will be glad to feed upon wild
honey, herbs, roots, fruits, flowers and leaves : their only
covering will be the bark of trees and they will be exposed
to the cold and wind and sun and rain. No man shall live
more than three and twenty years. Thus in the end of the
Kali Yuga most of human-kind will be annihilated.

Thus when the ceremonies of the Vedas and the institutes
of law shall nearly have ceased, and the end of the Kali Yuga
will approach, a portion of that divine being, who is the
creator of the whole universe, preceptor of the mobile and
immobile, who is the beginning and end of all, who is at one
with all, who is identical with Brahma and all created beings,
shall incarnate himself on earth. He will be born in the
family of Vishnuyasas, an eminent Brahman of Sambhala
village as Kalki gifted with the eight superhuman faculties.
% his irrepressible power he will slay all the MIechchhas
^nd thieves and all those who are addicted to sins. His
greatness and mighty shall be unobstructed.

He shall again establish virtue on earth and when the
Kali Yuga will completely close, the remaining people shall
he awakened and their minds shall be as pure as crystal. The
people thus purified shall be the seeds of human beings and
shall procreate a progeny who shall follow the laws of Krita-


VISUNUPURANAM.


312

age. A verse is recited regarding this— ‘When the sun,
moon, and the lunar asterism Tishya and the planet Jupiter
are in mansion the Krita age shall come back.

Thus, 0 great sage, I have enumerted all the kings
of the solar and lunar dynesties— those who are hast and those
who are present and those who shall be. Fronfi the birth of
the king Parikshit and up to the installation of king Nanda
it is to be known that 1065 years have passed. Wheh the
two first stars of the seven Rishis rise in the heavens and
some lunar asterism is seen at night at an equal distance
then the seven Reshis continue stationary in that conjunc-
tion for a hundreds years oi men. At the birth of the king
Parikshit they were in Magha and the Kali Yuga then began
which consists of twelve hundred divine years.

When the portion, of Vishnu born in the race of Yadu
went back to heaven the Kali Yuga set in. But as long as
he touched with his lotus feet the earth the Kali Yuga could
not effect it. As soon as the incarnation of the eternal Vishnu
has departed, Judhisthira the son of Dharma and his brothers
renounced the kingdom. Seeing evil omens, on the depar-
ture of Krishna the son of Pandua installed Parikshit on the
throne. When seven Rishis will be in Parvashadha, then
Nanda will begin to reign and thenceforth the influence of
Kali will increase.

The day of Krishnas^ departure from the earth will be the
first of the Kali Yaga, the duration of which you shall learn
from me. It will continue tor 360,800 years of men. After
twelve hundred divine years the Krita-age shall come back.

Thus, 0 foremest of twice-born ones, thousands of emi-
nent Brahmans, Kshatryas, Vasyas, and Sudras have passed
away. It will be tautology and useless to mention the
names and numbers of them born in various families- ^
therefore refrain from doing so.

The king Devapi of the Puru race and Maru of the
lh$waku race^ by virtue of Uieir great aacetioiaro# ar® residing


VfSttNUFimANAM,


3*3


in the Tillage of Kalapa. When the Krita-age shall set in
they will come to the city and give origin to the Kshatriya
dynasties. In this wise the earth is occupied through every
series of the first three ages, Krita, Treta and DwSpara by
the descendants of Manu. As Devapi and Mam arc still
living so one of them* remains in the Kali Yug|^, to serve as
the seed of the renewed generations.

I have thus related to you briefly the families of the
various kings. To relate them at length would be impossible
in a hundred lives.

The kings mentioned above and others, who assuming
frail bodies have ruled over the ever-during world, and being
hinded by illusions have indulged the feeling—'* This earth
is mine — it is my son^s— it belongs to my dynasty,” have gone
away. Those who reigned before them, those who succeeded
them, those who will be kings in future, have ceased and
shall cease to be. The earth, with her autumnal flowers, as if
smiles, beholding the king eager for conquest and fightings.
Hear, 0 Maitrya, I shall now recite some verses that were
chanted by Earth and which the Muni Asita communicated
to Janaka, whose banner was virtue, ” How greatly are the
princes, although reasonable, mistaken, that they consider
themselves immortal when they themselves are but foam
upon the wave. Before they have subdued themselves they
endeavour to reduce their ministers, their servant, their
subjects to subjection ; they then attempt to defcait their
enemies. They say ‘We shall by and by subdue the sea-girt
earth 7* Their minds being thus always taken up with* those
thoughts, they cannot perceive the near approach of death.
The subjugation of the sea-girt earth is not so very diffietdt
for him who has subdued him ; for the final liberaticnr is
another fruit of self-control. It is through ignorance that the
kings wish to possess me whom their predecessors have been
^oiwraimed to leave and whom their Others have not kept,
by the selfish love of power fathers fight with sons
40


VISHNUPURANAM.


rii4

and brothers with brothers for occupying me. All the kings
who reigned on this earth and who are now dead foolishly
thought — ‘All this earth is mine— every thing is minejt
will be in my house for ever for he is dead.^ How is
it possible that such vain desires should be cherished
by his desc||idants, who have seen their progenitor, on
account of the thirst of dominion, compelled to' desert me,
whom he called his own and tread the path of dissolution.
When I hear a king communicating to another through his
ambassador, ‘This earth is mine — you give up all your claims
for it,’^ I laugh at first but that laughter is soon turned into
pity for the infatuated fool.” ^

ParasarA said : — These wore the verses, Maitreya, which
Earth chanted, hearing which ambition melts away like
snow before the sun. I have now given you a complete
account of the descendants of Manu amongst whom many
were endowed with a portion of Vishnu engaged in the
preservation of the universe.

He, who hears reverentially from the beginning to the end,
of the account of this family of Manu, gets his heart purified
and all this sins are removed. Hearing of the description
of the illustrious solar and lunar dynasties, people, with their
faculties perfect, shall live in unequelled affluence, plenty
and prosperity. He who has heard of the races of Ikshawku,
Jahnu, MindhSta, Sagara, Abiksheta, Raghu, Yayati, and
Nabusba, who have all perished and of other wealthy kings
gifted with great strength and power, who have been
subdued by still more powerful time and are now only tale,
will learn wisdom and forbear to call either children, or
wife, or house or lands or wealth his own. Those heroic
men, who have performed penances for many years with
uplifted hands, those who have celebrated many sacrifices,
have been left by time as subjects of narration, That
Pritbu, even, whose discus dissevered many an
who unobstructed travelled all over the regions, ha^een


VISBNUPURANAR


1P5

destroyed by the last of time like the light down of the
Simal tree. Even Karlaviryya, who defeated numberless
enemies and conquered the seven Zones of the earth, exists
now only as the topic of a theme, a subject for affirmation
or contradiction. The riches, of the kings DashAnana,
Raghava, ABikoluta and others, which dazzled all the
quarters, have all been reduced to ashes by the very frown
of time. Oh i fie upon such wealth. The lord paramount
of the earth, by the name of Mandhata now exists only in
name. And what pious man, hearing this story, will be so
fooUsh as to cherish the desire of possession in his soul ?
Bhagiratha, Sagara, K^kutstha, DasSlnana Rama, Lakshmana,
Yudhisthira and others have been. Is it so? Have they
really existed ? Where are they now ? We know not I
The kings,, who are now reigning, who shall be kings in
future, and those whose names have not been specified,,
shall all remain only in names like their predecessors. The
wise man, cognizant of this, will not cherish attachment
even for his own self^what to speak of children, lauds and!
properties.


THE Em OF PART IV.


PART V.


SECTION I.


Maitreya said You have described to me at length
the origin and spread of the families of kings. I wish to hear
in particular, 0 venerable saint, why Vishnu incarnated a
portion of himself in the family of Yadus. Tell me, 0 Muni,
what actions did the illustrious and excellent Purusha perform
in his descent upon the earth.

Parasara said I shall relate to you, 0 Maitreya, what
you have requested me to do — ^the birth, of a portion of Vishnu
nnd the benefits which his actions conferred upon the world.
0 great Muni, Vasudeva espoused the illustrious god-like
■^evaki, the daughter of Devaka. After their marriage,
^Qsa, the increaser of the race of I3hoja, drove their car as
charioteer. A voice was heard in the sky, loud and
as thunder, which addressing Kansa, said — ** 0 foolish,
eighth child of this damsel, whom thou art carrying in
^^ecar, along with her husband, shall destroy thy life,”

Hearing this the highly powerful Kansa uplifted his sword
was about to sji^y DevakI when Vasudeva said—** 0 thou
long arms, bevaki should n^ be slain by thee ; I shall
M over to thee every child that she shall bring forth.*'


31 8 YISHNUPURANAM.

0 foremost of twice-born ones, saying ‘ so be Kansa
obeyed Vasudeva’s request and out of respect for him did not
slay Devaki,

In the meantime, Earth, oppressed by her heavy load,
repaired to an assembly of celestials on Mount Meru and
addressing them, with BrahmS, at their head, described in
piteous accents all her distresses. “Agni” said Earth is the
progenitor of gold ; Surja, the rays of light ; the Supreme
NUrayana, is my guide and the guide of all spheres ; He is
Brahmi, the lord of the lord of patriarchs, the eldest of the
eldest born, one identical with minutes and hours and time
having form though indiscrete. 0 celestials, you are all
but a portion of Him. The Sun, the winds, the saints, th^
Rudras, the Vasus, the Aswins, fire, patriarchs of whom Attri
is the first, are all but the forms of the mighty and inscrutable
Vishnu. The Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Daityas, Pisachas,
Uragas, Danavas, Gandharvas, and Apsaras are all but the
forms of the glorious Vishnu. The sky painted with stars,
fire, water, wind, myself, and this manifest universe are all
identical with Vishnu. Still the diverse forms of that mani-
fold being encounter and succeed one another night and day
like the waves of the st^a. Amongst them Kalanemi and other
Danavas have occupied the regions under the earth and been
distressing the subjects continually. The mighty Vishna
destroyed the Daitya Kllanemi and he has now been born as
K^nsa, the son of Ugrasena. The Asuras, Aristha, Dhenuka,
Keshi, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda, Atyugravana, and the son
of Bali and other highly powerful ones born in various
royal families, cannot be counted. 0 celestials, many Akshau-
hini hosits of powerful Daityas — the chiefs of their race,
assuming beautiful shapes, are now treading upon me. I am
unable, being oppressed by this load, to support myself ; ^
have therefore come to you for lielp, Qi celestial chiefs, 0
; illustrious deMies, it becofiAs you to relieve me of this burden,
kst helpless I sink into the nethermo.st abyss.’^


VtSttNUPUHANAM.


319


PaRASARA said Hearing these words of Earth, BrahmA
$t their request, explained to them how her burden might be
lightened. " Deities" said Brahma ‘‘ all that earth has said is
true. Myself, Siva and you all are but a portion of Nara-
yana ; the impersonations of his power are for ever mutually
fluctuating ; an'd excess or diminution is indicated by the pre-
dominance of the strong and the depression of the weak.
Come, therefore, let us go to the northern shore of the milky
sea and having glorified Hari, report to him what we have
heard. He, who is the soul of all and at one with the uni-
verse^ descends, for the preservation of Earth in a small por-
tion of his'essence, to establish righteousness below.’^ Accor-
dingly* -BrahmA, accompanied by the celestials went to the
milky -ocean and with minds devoted to hirn, praised him<
whose emblem is Garuda. Brahma said “ 0 lord, thou art dis-
tinct from the Vedas, thy double nature is two-fold wisdom,

' superior and inferior, and thou art the essential end of both.
Thou, alike possessed and devoid of form, art the two-fold
Brahma ; smallest of the least and largest of the large ; all
and knowing all things ; that spirit which is language, that
spirit which is Supreme ; that which is Brahma and of which
Brahma is composed. Thou art the Rich, the Yajush, the
SSlman and the Atharvan Vedas. Thou art accentuation,
ritual, signification, metre and astronomy ; history, tradition,
grammar, theology, logic and law and art inscrutable. Thou
art the doctrine that seeks to find out the distinctions be-
tween soul and life and body and matter endowed with quali-
fications and that doctrine is nothing else but thy nature
inherent in and presiding over it.

Thoa art imperceptible, indescribable, inconceivable, —with-
out name, or colour, or hands or feet, pure, eternal and infinite.
Thou hearest without ears and seest without eyes. Thou art
one and manifold. Thou movest without feet and boldest with-
out hands* Thou knowest all art not by all to be known.
He who observes thee as the most subtile of atoms, not sub^-


VISHNUPURANAKT.


399

Untiaily existent, puts an end to ignorance and the final
liberation is the meed of that wise man whose understanding
cherishes nothing but thee in the form of supreme delight
Thou art the common centre of all, the protector of the
universe and all beings exist in thee. Thou art all that has
been or will be. Thou art the atom of atoms; ‘thou art spirit,
thou only art separate from primeval nature. Thou, as the
lord of fire, in four manifestations, givest light and fertility
to Earth. Thou art the eye of all and assumer of many
shapes and without any hinderance travellest the three regions
of the universe. As fire, though one, is variously lighted
and though unchangeable in its essence, is modified in many
ways, so thou, lord, who art omnipresent, takest upon
thee all modifications, that exist. Thou art one supreme;
thou art that supreme and eternal state which the wise behold'
with the eye of knowledge. There is nothing else but thou,
0 lord, nothing else has been or will be. Thou art both
discrete and indiscrete, universal and individual, omniscient,
all-seeing, omnipotent, possessed of all wisdom and strength
and power. Thou art subject, neither to increase nor de-
crease. Thou art independent and without beginning. Thou
art the subjugator of all. Thou art not subject to weariness,
sloth, fear, anger or desire. Thou art free from sin, supreme
merciful, uniform, undecaying, lord over all, the support
of all, the fountain of light, and imperishable. Salutation
unto thee, uninvested by material envelopes, unexposed to
sensible imaginings, aggregate of elemental subsUnce, spirit
supreme. Thou assumest a shape, 0 pervadiQf of the uni*
verse, not as the consequence of virtue or vice nor from
any mixture of the two, but for the sole object of upholding
righteousness in the universe.'^

Parasara said : — ^Having heard these eulogiums, the
Uobocn universal Hari, pleiifed, said to
Bfahmft, what your and the Celestials desire^ib'fi cdnsidiir
already gratified.^'


Vr^HNUPURANAM.


Beholding that divine and universal form of Hari, 6rahm&
again prostrated himself and began to chant his glories—
^‘Salutation unto thee, again and again, 0 thou having thousand
formS) having thousand arms, many faces and many feet.
Salutation unto thee, the illimitable author of creation, des-
truction and pifeservation and the inscrutable. Be propitiated
with us, 0 god, 0 great soul, most subtile of the subtile, most
vast of the great ; 0 thou, who art nature, intellect and
consciousness and who art other spirit even than the spiritual
root of those principles. 0 lord, this earth, oppressed by
powerful Asuras and shaken to her very foundation, comes
to thee, the upholder of the universe, to be relieved of her
burden. Myself, Indra, the Aswins, Varuna, Yama, the Rudras
the Vasus, the sun, the winds, fire and all other deities are
pr^ared to do whatever thou shalt and desire us to do.
Do thou, who art perfect, 0 king of the celestials, give thy
orders to thy servants, we are ready.**

When BrahmSl had said this, the supreme deity plucked
off two hairs, one white and one black and said to the celes-
tials— “ These my hairs shall go down upon earth and shall
relieve her of the burden of her distress. Let all the deities,
in their own portions, descend upon earth and fight with the
proud Asuras who are there assembled and every one of
them shall be slain. Doubt not this— they shall be des-
troyed by the withering glance of my eyes. This, my black
hair, shall be impersonated in the eighth conception of the
goddess-like Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva and shall destroy
Kansa, who is the demon K^Ianemi.** Having said this,
Hari disappeared and the celestials, bowing to him, though
invisible, went back to the summit of the mount Meru from
''^here they came down on earth.

. Thereupon the illustrious Muni Nftrada said that, the sup-
porter of the earth, Vishnu, would be the eighth child of
Povaki, Hearing this from N&rada, Kansa greatly eidlad
wrath, kept Vasudeva and Deyakt in secret coii$iiement.


323


VlSHNUPURANAM.


According to tiis promise Vasudeva delivered to KaosA each
infant as soon as it was born. It is said these, to the number
of six, were the children of the demon Hiranya-Kasipu, in-
troduced into the womb of Devaki by Yogonidra, at the
behest of Vishnu, who was his illusory energy and by whom
the whole world is beguiled, and who is known as utter
ignorance. The great god said to her--“ Go, NidrS, to the
nether regions and by my command introduce their six
princes to the womb of Devaki. When these shall be des-
troyed by Kansa, the seventh conception shall be a portion
of Sesha, who is a portion of me. There is anotheri,wife
of Vasudeva in Gokula named Rohini and this you shall trans-
fer to her, before the time of birth. The rumour shall be
that Devaki miscarries through the anxiety of imprisonment
and dread of the king of Bhojas. And on account of his being
extracted from his mother^s womb, the child shall be desig-
nated Sankarshana and he shall be like the peak of the
ivhite mountain in bulk and complexion. I shall myself then
descend in the eighth auspicious conception of Devaki and
you shall immediately enter into the womb of Yasoda. In
the night of the eighth lunation of the dark half of the month
of Nabhas in the season of the fains, I shall be born. You
will be born on the ninth. Being aided by my energy
Vasudeva shall carry me to the bed of Yasoda and you to
tliat of Devaki. When Kansa shall dash you against a stone,
0 worshipful dame, you shall attain to the sky and then the
thousand-eyed Indra, out of reverence for me, shall bow unto
you and shall accept you as his sister. Having destroyed
Sumbha' and Nisumbha and thousands of other Daityas you
shall sanctify the earth in many places. You are wealth,
progeny, fame, patience, heaven and earth, fortitude, modes-
ty, nutrition, dawn and every other female (form or virtue),
"those, who shall reverentially invoke you, morning and even*
and praise and call you Aryl, Durga, VeSagarbte, Am*
Bhadit, Bhadraklliki, Kshemi, or Ksh^anlik^li


ViSHNUPURANAM.


3?S

receive, by my grace, whatever they desire. And pleased with
their offerings of wine and flesh and various other kinds you
shall gratify the prayers of mankind. By my favour all men
shall have perpetual faith in you. Assured of this, go, god-
dess, and satisfy my orders. | **


SECTION II.


Being thus ordered by the god of gods, Jagadhatri (the
nurse of the universe) transferred six embryos into the womb
of Devaki. And the seventh conception was conveyed into
the womb of Rohini after which Hari, for the behoof of the
three worlds, entered into the womb of Devaki. And as
commanded by the great god, YogonidrS, on that very day
entered into the womb of Yasoda. The portion of Vishnu
having descended on earth, the planets moved in auspicious
order and the seasons became regular and genial. No body
could gaze upon Devaki, invested with light — and beholding
her thus dazzling, the minds of the people were disturbed.
The celestials, invisible to men and women alike, chanted the
praises of Devaki, day and night, from the time that Vishnu
entered into her person. They said — “Thou art that Prakriti
infinite and subtile, which formerly bore BrahmR in its womb.
0 nurse of the univer'^e, thou art his words— from thee have
sprung the Vedas, 0 fair damsel, 0 thou existing perpetually,
thou art the very creation and in thy womb is the Sun: thou
art the seed of all — thou art the parent of the tri-form Sacri-
fice. Thou art Sacrifice whence all fruit ptoceeda— thou art
wood whose attrition cr» ates fire. As Aditi thou art the


VISHNl/PURANAM.


3*4

mother of the celestials, as Dili thou art the mother of the
Daityas their foes. Thou art light which creates day-Mhou
art humility— the mother of true wisdom ; thou art royal policy
the mother of order — thou art modesty the mother of affec-
tion. Thou art desire from whom love is produced— thou art
contentment from which resignation is produced; thou art
intelligence, the mother of knowledge, thou art patience the
parent of fortitude ; thou art heavens whose children are
stars, and from thee proceeds all that exists. These and thou-
sand others are thy mighty faculties, 0 goddess ; and number-
less are the contents of thy womb, 0 mother of the
universe. That Vishnu, whose real form, nature, nSme,
dimensions are above human conception, is in thy womb,
with whom are identical the whole earth, embellished with
oceans, rivers, continents, cities, villages, hamlets, towns;
all the fires, waters and winds, the stars, asterisms and
planets, the sky abounding in variegated cars of the celes-
tials and ether that provides space for all substance ; the
spheres of earth, sky and heaven ; of saints, sagesj ascetics
and of Brahml : the white egg of Brahma, with all its popu-
lations of Gods, demons, spirits, snake-gods, fiends, demons,
ghosts and imps, men and animals, and whatever creatures
have life. Thou art Swahl, thou art Swadha, thou art wis-
dom, ambrosia, light and heaven. Thou hast descended upon
eairth for the preservation of the universe. Have pity upon
us, 0 goddess, and do good unto the world. Be proud of
bearing that deity by whom the universe is upheld."


SUCTION fll.


jP ARASARX said ; — Being thns eulogised by the celestials;
Devaki conceived in her womb the lotus-eyed deity— the’
saviour of the universe. The sun of Achyuta rose in the dawn
of Devakii to cause the lotus-petal of the universe to expand.
On the day of his birth, all the quarters were lighted up with
joy and it gave delight to all people like unto the rays of the
moon.

The pious obtained new delight ; the strong wind wete pat-
cified and the river flowed silently when Janardana was about
to be born. The oceans made music with their murmurings,
the Gandharbas began to sing and the Apsaras began to
dance. At the time of Janardana's birth the celestials,
stationed in the sky, began to pour flowers and the holy fires
glowed with a mild flame. At midnight, when the sup-
porter of all was about to be born, the clouds began to emit
low sounds and pour down rain of flowers.

As soon as Anakadundhubhi saw the child, looking like
lull-blown lotus-petals, having four arms and the mystic
mark Sribatsa an his breast • he began to chant his glories in
terms of love and respect and represented the fears he
entertained of Kansa. Vasudeva said, ‘ f have known thee^
0 sovereign lord of the celestials, O thou the holder of cotfch,
discus and mace. Be pleased to withhold this thy celestials
form, for Kansa will surely destroy me when he will know
that thou hast deseended in my dwelling.'' Devaki said,--*
“God of gods, who art identical with all things, in whose
person all the religions of the world exist and who, by
^Uusion,! bast assumed the condition of an infanti have pity
me, whhho-W thy four-armed shape. Let not Kansa,
the wicked son of Diti, know of this birth."

42


3256


VtSHNUFURANAM.


To this Bhagavat replied — worshipful dame, I was
worshipped by thee before to be bofn as thy son. Thy
prayers have now been granted and I am now born as thy
son/’ So saying he was silent and Vasudeva, taking the
babe, went out the same night. The guards and gate-keepers
of Mathura were all charmed by YoganidrS and none of
them obstructed the passage of Anakadundhubhi, It was
raining heavily at that time and the many-headed serpent
Sesha followed Vasudeva spreading his hoods above their
heads. And when he, with the child in his arms, crossed
the Yamuna, deep as it was and dangerous with num rous
whirlpools, the waters were silent and rose not above his
knee. On the bank he saw Nanda and others who had come
there to bring tribute to Kansa, but they did not see him.
At that time Yasoda was also influenced by YoganidrS:,
whom she had given birth as her daughter and whom the
wise Vasudeva took up, placing his son in her place by the
side of the mother. He then speedily came back home. Wlun
Yasoda awoke, she found she had been delivered of a boy as
black as the dark lotus-leaves ; and she was greatly delighted.

Vasudeva, taking the female child of Yasoda, reached .
his house unpercieved and placed the child in the bed,
of Devaki. He then remai ned as usual. The guards were
awakened by the cry of the new-born babe and starting up
they informed Kansa that Devaki had given birth to a child.
Kansa inunediately went to the house of Vasudeva where
he got hold of the infant. Devaki faintingly prevented hiWj
crying out again and again — ''Do not destroy it j Do not
destroy it.’’ Kansa dashed it against a stone; it at once
went up to the sky and expanded into a gigantic figure,
having eight arms each bearing a formidable weapon. This
terrible figure laughed and said to Kansa. "What benefit,
have you derived, 0 Kansa, by hurling me to the ground?
^He is born, who shall destroy thee, the mighty one amongst
celestials, who was formerly the destroyer, Considering


VlSHNUPURANAM.


rtiis do thou accomplish what shall tend to thy welfare/'
Having said this, the goddess, decorated with heavenly
unguents and garlands, and glorified by the spirits of the air,
disappeared from the sight of the king of the Bhojas.


SECTION IV.


ParaSARA said:— Kansa, greatly disturbed in mind,
called together all the leading Asuras, Pralamba, Kesin and
others and said to them — ye, leading Asuras, Pralamba,
Dhenuka, Putana, Arishta and all others, hear my words. 0
heroes, the wicked celestials, troubled by my power, have
been trying to destroy me — but I do not much care for them.
Save murdering the Asuras by fraud, what can the weak Indra
and the ascetic Hara or Hari do ? What have we to fear from
the Adityas, the Vasus, the Agnis or any other of the immor-
tals who have all been defeated by my resistless arms?
Have you not seen the king of the celestials, when he had
come out into the conflict, quickly fly from the field receiving
my arrows upon his back, not bravely upon his breast ? When
Indra withheld rains from my kingdom, were not the clouds
compelled by my arrows to pour water as much as was
acquired? Are not all the kings of the earth afraid of my
prowess and subject to my orders, save my father Jarasandbaf
0 ye leading and heroic Daityas, I have already got hatred


328 YfeHNUPURANAM.

towards the celestials— it has created my laughter that they
have been trying to slay me. And it is my fixed determina-
tion to inflict still deeper degradation upon those vicious and
and wicked-minde celestials.

Let us therefore kill every man who is known for liberality
(in making gifts to gods and Brahmans) and letevery man, who
is celebrate for performing sacrifices, be slain ; and thus the
celestials shall tbe deprived of the means they live upon.
The goddess, who has taken her birth as the child of Devaki,
has said to me that he is again born who destroyed me in one
of my previous birth. Let us vigorously find out all young
children upon earth and let every boy in whom theie are signs
of unusual vigour, be killed mercilessly/'

Having passed these orders Kansa went to his palace and
liberated Vasudeva and Devaki from their captivity. He said
to them. — *‘In vain have I killed all your children, for he, who
is distined to kill me, has escaped. It is useless to regret the
the past. The children, who shall be born to you^ after this, may
enjoy life till its natural close ; no one shall cut it short.”
Having thus consoled them, Kansa, greatly terrified for him-
eelf^ went into the inner apartments of his palace.


SECTION V.


HEN Vasudeva was freed, he went to the waggon of
Nanda and found him greatly delighted that a son was born
to him. He then kindly said to him '' It is a blessing that you
have got a son in your old age. Have you given your annual
tribute §o the king? If you have finished your work, you
should not wait here for you are men of property. Why do
you wait here since the work that has brought you, is finished?
Go therefore, speedily, 0 Nanda, to your Gokula. I have
also got a son there, born of Rohini, and he should be
brought up by you as this your own son.’’

ParasARA said : — Thus having paid their dues to the king
and placed their goods in their waggons, Nanda and other
cow-herds went to their village. And while they were thns
living in Gokula, Putana the child-killer, taking up Krishna,
asleep in night, gave him her breast to suck. And whatever
child is suckled by Putana in night, dies instantly having its
limbs wearied and exhausted. But laying hold of the breast
with two hands, Krishna sucked it with such violence that he
drained it of the life and the terrible Putana, roaring aloud
and giving way in every point, fell on the ground dead.
Hearing those cries, the inhabitants of Vraja, terrified, got up
and saw Putan2l lying on the earth with Krishna in her
arms. Snatching up Krishna, Yasoda waved over him a cow*
tail-brush to guard him from harm, whilst Nanda placed dried
cow-dung powdered upon his head ; he gave him also an amu«
^ct, saying at the same time—'* May Hari the lord of creation,
he, from the lotus of whose navel the world was produced
^nd on the tip of whose tusks the globe was upraised from
waters, protect thee. May that Kesava, who assumed the
^orm of a boar, protect thee. May that Kesava, who, as'


330


VISHNUPURANAM.


the man-lion, rent with his sharp nails, the bosom of his foe,
save thee. May that Kesava, who ^appearing first as the
dwarf, traversed with all his power with three paces, the
three regions of the universe, constantly protect thee. May
Govinda guard thy belly, Janarddana thy legs and feet, the
eternal and irresistible N^rayana thy face, thine arms, thy
mind and thy faculties of sense. May all ghosts, goblins
and malignant spirits, that shall be engaged in thy mischief,
be destroyed by the bow, the discus, the mace, the sword of
Vishnu and the by echo of his chonch shell. May Vaikuntha
guard thee in thy cardinal points and Madhusudana in ^the
intermediate ones. May Hrishikesha defend thee in the sky
and Mahidhara upon earth.'^ Having recited these prayers to
avert all evil, Nanda caused the child to sleep in his bed
underneath the waggon. Seeing the huge carcass of Putana
the cow-herds were filled with surprise and fear.


,00


SECTION VI.


Parasara said Once on a time while the slayer of
Madhu was asleep underneath the waggon, he cried for the
breast and kicking up his feet he overturned the vehicle and
all the pots and pans were upset and broken. Hearing the
AOtse the wives of the cow-herds came exclaiming.—*^ Ah !
4b)'* and there they found the child sleeping on his back.
•*!:?(VhQ could have overturned the. w.aggon?” exclaimed the


VISHNUPURANAM.


33 *

cow-herds. *‘That child/' said some of the boys who saw
the circumstance. *‘We saw him,” said the boys, “crying
and kicking the waggon and so the waggon was upset ; no
one else had anything to do with it.”

The cow-herds were therefore greatly surprised and not
knowing whaC to do Nanda at once took up the boy and
Yasoda offered worship to the broken pieces of pots and to
the waggon, with curds, flowers, fruits and unbruised grain.

Being commissioned by Vasudeva, Garga performed the
initiatory rites of the two boys secretly in Vraja. The eldest
was named Rama and the other Krishna by the wise Garga,
the foremost of the intelligent. In a short time they began
to crawl about the ground, supporting themselves on their
hands and knees and creeping everywhere, often amidst
ashes and filth. Neither Rohini nor Yasoda was able to pre-
vent them from getting into the cow-pens or amongst the
calves, where they amused themselves by pulling their tales.
When Yasoda could not prevent the two boys, who always
rambled together, from playing naughtily, she became angry
and taking up a stick remonstrated with Krishna having eyes
like lotus-petals. Fastening a cord round his waist she tied
him to the wooden mortar and being angry, she said to him
“Now you wicked boy, get away from here, if you can."
Having said this, she went about her domestic affairs. As soon
as she had gone, the lotus-eyed Krishna, trying to extricate
himself, pulled the mortar after him to the space between the
two Arjuna trees that grew near together. Being dragged
there the mortar became wedged between the two trees, and
Krishna having pulled it, the two huge trees covered with
inanyjeaves, were uprooted. Hearing the cracking noise the
inhabitants of Vraja came to see what was the matter and
there they beheld the two huge trees with broken branches
and stems lying on the ground with the child fixed between
them, with a rope round his belly, laughing and shewing his
white teeth, just budded. It is from this that Krishna is called


332


VrsHNUPURANAM.


D&modara from the binding of dama (rope) round his udard
(belly). The elders among the cow-herds, with Nanda at their
head, looked upon these circumstances with alarm, considering
them as inauspicious signs. They said — ** We cannot remain
in this place — let us go to some other part of the forest
Here many evil omens threaten us with destruction — the
death of Putana, the upsetting of the waggon and the fall of
the trees without their being uprooted by the wind. Let us
go away from here without any delay and go to Vrindavana,
where evil omens may no longer disturb us/^

Having thus made up their minds, the inhabitants of Vraja
communicated their intention to their families and desired
them to go without delay. Accordingly they started with their
waggons and their cattle, driving before them their bulls and
cows and calves ; they threw away the fragments of their
household stores and in no time Vraja was overspread with
flights of crows. Vrindavana was selected by Krishna, who
was above the influence of actions, for the sake of providing
for the nourishment of the kine, for there in the hottest season
the new grass springs up as profusely as the rains. Having
s,gone to Vrindavana from Vraja, the inhabitants? of the latter
up their waggons in the form of a crescent.

As^tfefi two boys Rama and Damodara grew up, they lived
always toother in the same place and engaged in the same
boyish sports. They made themselves crests of the peacocks
plumes and garlands of forest flowers and musical instruments
of reeds and leaves or played upon the pipes used by cow-
herds; their hair was arranged like the wings of the crow,
and they looked like two young princes and portions of the
god of war. They were robust, and walked about always
laughing and playing sometimes with each other, sometimes

with other boys; driving, along with other young covi'-herds,

the calves to the pasture. Thus the t>yo protectors of t ®
uiiiverse were keepers of cattle until they became sevco
ylars old in the cow-pens of Vrindavana.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


333


Then began the rainy season when the atmosphere was
full of clouds and the quarters of the horizen were blended
into one by the driving showers. The water of the rivers
rose and overflowed their banks, and spread beyond all limits
like the mind of the weak and wicked transported byond
restraint by sudden prosperity. The pure radiance of the
moon was obscured by heavy vapours as the teachings of
the sacred writings are darkened by the arrogant scoffs of
the unbelievers. The bow of Indra held its place unstrung
in the sky like a worthless person elevated to honour by an
indiscreet king. White line of storks appeared upon the
back of the clouds in such contrast as the bright conduct of
a man of respectability opposes to the conduct of a scoundrel.
The ever-fickle lightning, being nesvly allied with the sky,
was like the friendship of a profligate for a man of substance.
Overgrown by the spreading grain, the paths became diffi-
cult of being traced like the words of the ignorant carrying
no definite meaning.

Krishna and Rama, delighted, begai» to live in the forest
in that beautiful season maddenning the peacocks and bees.
Sometimes they sang and danced with the cow-herds and
sometimes sat under the cool shade of a huge tree for rest.
Sometimes they beautified themselves with garlands of
Kadamba flowers and again with garlands of peacocks^
feathers ; sometimes they painted themselves with the miner-
als of the mountain; sometimes they slept on beds of leaves
4nd sometimes they rejoiced with the infants of the c»»vv-
l>€rds, hearing the muttering of the clouds ; sometimes they
praised the songs of the boys, sometimes mimicked the cry
the peacocks and sometimes played on pipes.

Thus greatly attached to each other and participating,
h) various emotions and sports, Rama and Krishna delightedly
resided in that forest. And every evening they used to
cpme back home like two cow-boys along with the cows
and cow-herds. And coming home in the evening, the two
43


334 VISHNUPURANAM,

deitifti heartily engaged in sports giving delight to the soni
of the cow-herds.


SECTION VII.


P ARASARA said Once on a time Krishna went to
Vrindavana, without Balarama ; and there, adorned with gar.
lands of wild flowers, roamed he, encircled by the cow-herds,
He then repaired to the banks of Kalindi, undulating and
sparkling with foam and as if smiling when the waves dash-
ed against the banks. There he saw the pool with the dreadful
serpent K&Iiya, boiling with the fires of poison. By
the touch of that, poison the huge trees on the banks were
withered and being touched by the waters raised by the wind
the birds were scorched. Beholding that dreadful serpent,
like the second mouth of death, the illustrious Slayer of
Mahdhu thought— ^'Forsooth, the wicked and poisonous serpent
Kiliya lives here, who, being defeated by me, was constrained
to leave the ocean whose waters were defiled. By him the
waters of the Yamuna, flowing to the ocean, have been
poisoned, and the thirsty cows and cow-herds cannot satisfy
their thirst. I must slay this serpent, so that the inhabitants
of Vraja may live here happily freed from fear. I have

l^ieended upon the land of mortals to chastise' the wickcd>


VIS«NUt*UKA«AM.


335


led astray into vicious paths; 1 shall therefore climb up the
neighbouring Kadamba tree and jump down into the pool.’*
ParASAka said : — Having thus thought within himself he
bound his clothes tightly about him and jumped boldly into
the pool of the serpent-king. The huge lake was agitated as
soon as he fell 4iito it/ and the waves raised thereby began to
sprinkle the distant trees, which being touched by the water
and wind/ thus poisoned, were immediately set on fire, and
the whole horizon was ablaj^e. Having dived into the lake,
Krishna struck his arms defiantly. Hearing that noise the
serpent-king immediately issued out — whose eyes were copp-
ery and hoods were flaming with deadly venom. He was en-
circled by many'other powerful and poisonous snakes living
upon air and hundreds of serpent-nymphs adorned with rich
ornaments, whose earrings glittered with brilliance as the
wearers moved along. Coiling themselves around Krishna^
they all bit him with teeth from which fiery poison came out.
Beholding him in the lake thus surrounded by serpents, his
companions immediately went to Vraja bewailing aloud his
fate. “Krishna has foolishly jumped into the lake of the ser-
pent Kaliya, and is being devoured by that serpeftt-kingj do
ye come and behold him.” Hearing those words, resembling
the fall of thunder, the cow-herds and their wives headed by
Yasoda, proceeded speedily towards the lake. ’’Alas where is
Krishna gone” cried the wives of the cow-herds greatly
tewildered ; and Yasoda, terrified, with faltering steps, proceed^
ed quickly. Rama, gifted with great prowess, Nanda and
other cow-herds being anxious to see Krishna, arrived quickly
at the bank of the Yamuna and beheld him surrounded by,
snakes, possessed by the surpent-king and motionless. 0,
fpremost of Munis, looking at the countenance of their soiii
the cow-herd Nanda and the noble Yasoda became stupified.
And the wives of the other cow-herds stricken with grief and
keeping, saw him ; and with words expressive o{ fear and
affliction, they, ont of love towards Keshava, 8tid««i'‘We .shall'


336


VISHl^UPURANAM.


all with Yasoda enter this huge lake of the serpent^king ; wc
shall not be able to go back to Vraja. Wfcal is day without
the sun, night without the moon, cow without a bull and
Vraja without Krishna ? Without Krishna we shall not
rijturn to Vraja, like unto a pond without water, in his
absence, nor ^hall we roam in the forest. We do not like
to live there, even if it be the house of our mothers^ where
tltere is not Hari, having the countenance like lotus-petals.
How shall we live sorrowfully without beholding Hari in
pasture having eyes resembling lull-blown lotus-petals ? We
khall not go back to the house of Nanda in Gokula without
the lotus-eyed Krishna, who with his pleasant conversation
has stolen all our hearts. 0 ye cow-herds ! behold, Krishna
is still casting smiling lookj upon us, although he U en-
circled by snakes engaged by the serpent-king,

PaR'\S''Ra said ; — Hearing those wards of the wives of the
cow-herds and beholding the cow-herds stricken wdth fear
the highly-powerful son of Rohini looked settled (for some
time.) And then seeing Nanda, with fixed looks towards
Krishna and Yasoda almost in a swoon, he began to chant by
signs the glories of Krishna — *'0 god of gods, why art thou
displaying these human characteristics? Dost thou not per-
ceive thyself at one with one without end ? Thou art the
centre of creation, as the nave is of the spokes of a wheell.
A portion of thee, I have even also born, as thy eldest brother.
To share in thy sports as men, the celestials have all descended
under a like disguise. Having made all the goddesses descend
in Gokula for thy sport, thou hast afterwards descended,
although thou art existing perpeiualty. Wherefore Krishna
dost thou neglect these celestials who, as cow-herds, are thy
friends and kin-— and these sorrowing females, who also are
Ihy relations ? Thou hast assumed, the character of man ;
thou hast displayed the tricks of childhood. Now let this
dreadful snake although armed .with poisoned Jangai
HaUgui^lied ^by tiieo) ” .


VISimUPU^ANAM.


J37


thus reminded of his real character by Rama,
‘Krishna smiled gently and immediately freed himself from
the coils of the snakes. And catching with both his hands
the middle hood of the serpent-king, that highly powerful
(Krishna) bent it down and set his foot upon the hitherto-un-
bended hood*, and danced upon it victoriously* And the hood
of the serpent was bruised by the tieading of Krishna’s feet,
and wherever the snake altt nipted to raise his head, it was
again trodden down. Trampled upon by the feet of Krishna
as they changed position in the dance, the snakes fainted and
vomitted froth much blood. Seeing the head and neck of
their king thus bruised and blood flowing from this mouth,
the females of the snake-king implored the mercy of the
Slayer of Madhu.

The females of the serpent-king said — “We have recog-
nized thee, O god of gods, O supreme lord of all. Thou art
a portion of titat supreme light and the mighty lord. Thou
art the self-existent lord and even the celestials c^re unable
to praise thee worthily, and how can the females truly chant
thy glories ? How can we sing Ids glories whose portions
are earth, sky, water, fire and air ? Even the holy ascetics
have in vain sought to know thy real essence. We bow to
that form, which is the most subtiles of atoms, the largest of
the large ; to him whose birth is without a creator, whose end
knows no destroyer and wbo alone is the cause of duration.
There is no anger in thee, thou protectst the world and
hence this punishment of KSliya. Hear us. The virtuous
should pity women ; and creatures are pitied even by the
fools ; let thereforethe foremost of the forgiving have com-
paesion upon this poor creature. Thou art the upholder of
the universe and this snake is gifted with but little sti^ength,
if and oppressed by thee, be shall in no time give up his fife.
There is a vast difference between this poor serpent of limit-
ed strength and thyself in whom the world reposes'. Friend-
tliip and enmity are felt towards ec^uals and superiors hud


YISHNUPURANAM.


?38

not for those who are infinitely inferior to tfs* This unforta-r
nate snake is about to die, — give us therefore, as a matter of
charity, our husband

Parasara said When the wives of the serpent-king bad
said this, he, too, although wearied, repeated feebly his pray-
ers for clemency. Pardon me” he said— ”0 god of gods,
how sliall 1 address thee, who art possessed, through thine
own stoength and essence, of the eight great faculties and art
in energy unmatched ? Thou art the Supreme, the originator
of the supreme ^ thou art the supreme spirit and from thee,
the Supreme proceeds : thou art beyond all finite objects :
how can I sing thy glories ? How can I chant his greatness
from whom have sprung Brahma, Rudra, Chandra, Indra, the
Maruts, the Aswins, the Vasus and the Adityas — of whom but,
a small portion is the whole universe, which is destined to
represent his essence and whose, nature, primitive or derived
is beyond the conception of Brahin^ and other immortals.
How can I approach him who is worshipped by the celestials
with incense and flowers culled from the groves ol Nandana?
How can I adore him whose incarnate portion are being
worshipped even by the king of celestials and w'hose real
nature he is not conscious of? How can I approach him,
whom the sages, having their minds withdrawn from external
objects, worship in thought and enshrining whose image in
their hearts present to it the flowers of sanctity ? I am quite
unable, 0 god of gods, to worship thee or sing ths glories—
by thy mercy only, be thou propitiated with me. 0
Kesava, the serpents are by nature, crooked. I am born in
that race, so I am also wily, which is the charactirestic of my
own race, so I am not to blame in this, 0 Achyuta. Every
thing has been created by thee and every thing is beimg des-
troyed by thee — and the species, form and nature of all
thing in the world, are thy work. Even such and I as thou
hfst created the in kind, in form and in nature. Such am f
M such are my actions. Should I act differently then indeed


VISIINUPURANAM.


33d


ctiould I deserve punishment ; so thou hast destined. And
that ! have been punished by thee, is indeed a blessing — for
punishment from thee alone is a favour.

Behold I am now divested of strengih and poison —
deprived of both by thee. Save my life — I ask na more.
Order me what shall I do.”

Being thus addressed by Kaliya, Krishna said — *‘You must
not wait here any more*, go immediately, with your family and
followers, to the sea. Garuda, the enemy of the serpents, will
not injure thee if he sees the impressions of my feet upon your
hoo(J.^' Having said this, Hari liberated the serpent-king, who,
respectfully bowing to his victor, went to the ocean accom-*
panied by all his wives, servants and children, leaving the
sight of all and the pool he had lived in. When the snake had
departed, the cow-herds received back Govinda as one risen
from dead and embraced him and bathed his forehead with
tears of joy. Others, considering the water of the river pure,
were filled with surprise, and chanted the glory of Krishna,
who is above the influence of actions. Being thus glorified
by his illustrious exploits and eulogized by the cow-herda
and their wives, Krishna came back to Traja.


SUCTION VIII.

— :o : —


PaRaS'R^ said Thereupon again driving their cattle,
Kesava and Balarama rambled together in the forest, and on
one occasion went to a pleasing grove of palms. There lived
in that pleasing grove a demon named Dhenuka, resembling an
ass in appearance and living upon the flesh of deer. Beholding
the fruits there ripe, the cow herds, being anxious to take them,
said— “ 0 Rama | O Krishna I Dhenuka always lives
here and therefore the trees are loaded with ripe fruits the
smell of which perfumes the air. We wish to eat some.
Will you throw some down ?'* Hearing those words, Krishna
and Sankarsana brought down some fruits on the ground.
Hearing the sound of the falling fruits, the dreadful and malig-
nant demon Dhenuka, having the countenance of an ass,
irrivf d there speedily, and being angry began to kick Rama
on the breast with his hinder heels. Catching him by his
both hind legs, Rama however hurled him round till he died;
then he threw up the dead body to the top pf the palm tree
from the blanches of which it struck down enough fruits like
rain drops poured down on earth by the wind. The relatives
of Dhenuka came running to his help, and Krishna and Rama
did the safme thing with them until the trees were filled with
dead asses and the ground was covered with ripe fruits.
Thenceforth the cattle grazed unobstructed in the palm groves
and cropped the new pasturage where they had never gone
before.


SSCDION IX.


ParasARA said: — That demoii) in the form of an ass^ and
all his relatives, being slain, the cow-herds and their wives
began to roam at pleasure in that picturesque grove of palms*
Having slain that liend Dhenuka, the two sons of Vasudeva,
greatly delighted, repaired to the Bhandira fig-tree. They .
began to roam about shouting and singing and collecting
fruitsP and flowers from the trees— sometimes driving the
cattle to a distant pasture, sometimes [calling them by their
names, sometims carrying the foot-ropes of the kine upon
their shoulds, sometimes decorating themselves with gar**
lands of forest flowers, they appeared like two young bulls
when the horns first appear?^'*^ Dressed, the one in yellow and
and the other in sable garments, they appeared like two
clouds one white and one black, surmounted by the bow of
Indra. The two brothers, although lords of the universe^
having descended upon earth, began to sport mutually with
frolics beneficial to the world. Adopting human duties and
assuming human character and engaged in human sports, they
stayed about in the forest. And these two highly powerful
(brothers) engaged in exercise, in swinging upon the boughs
of trees. or in boxing and wresting and hurling stones,

Having seen Krishna and Balarama thus sporting, this
Asura Pralamba, on one occasion with a view to carry them
away stealthily arrived there assuming, the guise of a cow-
herd. And that foremost of. demons, assuming a human shap^,
mixed with them, unsuspected* Then seeking their faults he
found Krishna irrepressible and made up his mind accordingly
to slay the son of Rohini.

The boys commenced playing at the game of leaping like
toW| and two together. Govinda was matched with
44


34 *


VISHNUPURANAM.


Sridama and Balarama with Pralamba ; the other boys were
coupled with one another and went leaping away. Krishna
beat his companion and Balarama his, and the boys who were
on Krishna's side, were also victorious. The boys who were
defeaif‘d, carrying the victorious boys on their shoulders went
to the Bhandira fig and then came back to the starting-place.
And placing Sankarshana speedily on his shoulders the
demon Pralaml a did not tary there and ran away like unto
fcloud vviih the moon. Being unable lo carry the weight of
Ulohini’s son that fbremost of fiends began to increase in bulk
like unto a cloud in the rainy season. Beholding him like a
scorched mountain, his head crow'tied with a diadem ah 3 his
heck hung round with garlAiids, having eyes as large as cart
Wheels, a fearful form and shaking the earth with his tread,
Balarama called out, as he was carried away, “Krishna,!
Krishna! lam carried off by some demon, disguised as a
cow-herd and huge as a mountain! what shall I do? Tell me
Madhusudana, the vallian runs away speedily.”

PAkasarA said : — The high-souled Krishna, cognisant of
the prowess and strength of the son of Robini, opened his
toouih, smiling and said--“ 0 thou the soul of all, the cause of
cause and all that is alone'.when the world the destroyed,
\\hy art thou assuming clearly the character of a man?
Dost thou not know that you and are alike the origin of the
World and have come to relieve it of its load ? The sky is
thy head > the waters are thy person ; earth is thy feet ;
eternal fire Is thy mouth 5 the moon is thy mihd ; the wind is
Ihy breath ; the four regions are thy arms and bands. 0
biglHSOuled and highly'^powerful lord, thou bast a thousand
beads, a thousand hands and feet and bodies. Thou art the
beginning ©I all creation — Brahma, sprung from lotus — and
ibe sages have praised thee in these terms for a thouaaud
times. No one else knowetb thy divine person. The celestials
; worship only thy incariiate person. Dost thou not know that
In the end the whole World will disappear in thee ? 0 thou


VISHNUPURANAM.


343


of endless forms^ thou art upholding all creation, mobile and
immobile. Thou, being indentical with time with its division
of hours and minutes, devourest the world. As the waters of
the sea, when swallowed up by submarine fire, are transferred
into winds and thrown in the form of snow upon Himachala^
where coming.in contact with the rays of the sun, re*assume
the watery nature, so this world, devoured by thee at thb
time of dissolution, is agian created by thee at the end of a
Kalpa through thy creative energy. Thou and I, soul of the
universe, are but one and the same cause of the creation of
earth, although for its protection we exist as distinct indivi-
duals! Bringing to thy memory, who thou art, O being of
illimitable prowess, destroy thyself the demon. Suspending
a while your human character, do what is right.^’

Thus reminded by the noble Krishna, the powerful BalarSma
laughed and crushed Pralanmba with his knees striking him
simultaneously on the head and face with his fists so as to
beat out both his eyes. Vomitting blood from his mouth and
having his brain forced through the skull, the demon fell upon
the ground and died. Seeing Pralamba slain the cow-herds
were surprised and rejoiced and exclaimed ‘^Well done!"
and praised BalarSma. Thus praised by his play- mates and
accompanied by Krishna, Balar^ma, after the death of the
demon Pralamba, came back to Gokula.


.00


SECTION X.


— :o;—

Parasara said Whilst Krishna and Rama were thus
sporting in Vraja the rainy season ended — the autumn
appeared and the lotuses became full-blown. The Safari fish
in their watery burrows, were oppressed by the heat like a
man by his selfish desires, who is attached to his family.
The peacocks, renouncing all amusements, became silent like
the ascetics withdrawing themselves from worldly enjoy,
ments considering their unreality. The clouds of shining
whiteness, exhausted of their watery wealth, deserted the sky
like the wise who have acquired wisdom, departing from their
home. Evaporated by the rays of the autumnal sun, the
lakes were dried up, like the heaits of men withered by the
contact of selfishness. The silent water of the autumn were
beautified by white water-lilies, like the minds of the pure by
the perception of truth. The moon shone with undiminished
brilliance in the sky crested with star like the saint, who
has reached the last stage of bodily existence in the company
of the pious. The rivers and lakes slowly went far off from
their banks as the wise by degrees shrink from the selfish
attachment that connects them with their wife and children.
The swans again began to frequent those lakes which they
had abandoned before like false ascetics whose devotions
are interrupted and they are again stricken with numberless
afflictions. The ocean, with silent waters, became perfectly
calm like the accomplished saint who has gone through rigid
penances and has acquired undisturbed tranquility of spirit.
Everywhere the waters are as clear and pure as the minds
of the wise who behold Vishnu in all things. The autumnal
sky was perfectly free from clouds like the heart of tk®
ascetic, whose cares have been devoured by the fire of devo-


VISHNUPURANAM.


345


tion.^ The moon allayed the fervours* of the sun as
discrimination removes the pain consequent upon egotism.
The autumn removed the clouds from the sky ; the muddiness
of the earth and the discoloration of the waters, as abstraction
draws away^ the senses from the objects of perception. The
water of the*lake, by becoming full, stationary and again
declined, performed as if the exercise of inspiring, suppres*
sing and expiring the vital air.

At this season, when the heavens* were clear and bright
with stars, Krishna, once repairing to Vraja, saw the inhabi-
tants engaged in the celebration of a sacrifice in honor of
Sakra. Beholding all the cow-herds busily and anxiously
engaged in making preparation, Krishn, gifted with high,
intellect, as if, out of curiosity asked the elders, saying—
What festival of Sakra is this, in which you are taking so
much delight?’* To him thus asking, the cow-herd thus
lovingly said— Satakratu (performer of hundred sacrifices),
the king of the celestials, is the lord of the clouds and waters ;
ordered by him the clouds pour down water on earth, by
which the grain is produced, on which we and othe embodi-
ed beings live and by which we please the gods. By this too
these cows bear calves and give milk and are happy
and well-nourished. Wherever the clouds pour waters, the
earth is neither barren of corn, nor bare of verdure, nor is man
stricken with hunger. Having drunk the milk of the earth
by means of the rays of the sun, Indra, the giver of water,
pours it again on earth for the sustenance of all the worlds.
For this reason all sovereign princes offer, with delight, sacri-
fices to Indra at the end of the rainy reason, and so also do
we and so do the other people.”

Parasara said : — Having heard the words of the cow-herd
Nanda regarding the worship of Sakra, D&modara, to excite
the anger of the lord of celestials, said— “We, father, are
neither cultivators of the feoil, nor merchants— we are so-
journers in the forests and cows are our gods. There are


346


VISHNUPURANAM^


four; divisions of knowledge'-^logical, spiritual^ practical, and
political. Hear from me, what is the practical sci^nctt.
Agriculture, commerce and tending of cattle^the knowledge
of these three professions, 0 noble Sire, is the practical
science* Agriculture is the means of subsistence to the
cultivators, buying and selling to the traders, and tehdiqg ojf
cattle is our subsistence. The practical science has thus
been divided into three branches. The object, that is culti-
vated by any one, afeould be to him, his chief deity — he must
worsiiip that, for that is his benefactor. O father, the. man
who. worships another’s deity, recej^ving the fruit fr^m his
own, does not obtjiiii a prosperous situation either in'^this
world or in the next. Where the land is no longer cultivated
there are limits assigned, beyond which begins the forest;
the forests are bounded by the hills and so far do our limits
extend* We are not confined within doors or walls, we have
neither fields nor homes ; we wander about happily wherever
we 4ike in our waggons.* We have heard that the spirits
oi these mountains, assuming whatever shapes they like,
walk in the woods upon their own precipices. If they are
dj^ipl^ased with tlmse who inhabit the forests, then transfor-
ming themselves to lions and beasts of prey, they will like the
offenders. We are thus bound to worship the mountains and
sacrifices to cattle. What have we to do with Indra?
Cattle and mountains are our gods. Brahmans oUer worship
with prayer; cultivators of the earth worship their land-
marks ; but we, who tend our cattle in the forests and moun-
tains, should worship them and our kine. Let prayer aqd. offer-
ings he then made to tiie mountain Govardhana and let us duly
kin a victim. Let milk be collected from all stations and let
us feed Brahmans and all others who wish to partake of it*-^
.Up need of any judgment about it. When the oblations have
hpen presented and the Brahmans have been fed let thff cow-

• The word in the text is chakracharina^xi means also, those eacetics, who
vrhir^ver tb^ arrive Hi the evening, tbair, hptnea.


VISHNUPU^ANAM.


34;?


herds circumambulate the cows decorated with garlands of
autumnal dowers. If the cow-herds pay attention to these
suggestions, they will secure the favour of the mountain of
the cattle and also mind.^"

When Nanda and other cow-herds heard the speech of
Krishna, their faces were brillint with joy and they said that
he had spoken well. ** You have judged aright, child”
exclaimed they ** we will do exactly as you have said and
offer worship to the mountain.” Accordingly the inhabitants
of Braja worshiped the mountain presenting to it curds and
milk and flesh ; and th<i|y fed hundreds and thousands of
Brahmans and many other guests who carjje to the ceremony
even as Krishna had directed ; and when they had made their
offerings they circumambulated the cows and the bulls thkt
cried as loud as roaring clouds. Upon the summit of Govara-
dhana Krishna stood and said ”1 am the mountain” and partook
of the food presented by the cow-herds ; whilst in his own form

Krishna, he ascended the hill with other cow-herds and
worshipped his other self. Having promised them many
blessings the mountain-person of Krishna disappeared,
and the ceremony being finished the cow-herds returned
theit homes.


SECTION XI.


Parasara said— Being thus disappointed of offerings
in the sacrifice, O Maitreya, Sakra, greatly angry, addressed
the attendant clouds called Samvarttaka saying— *'0 ye
clouds ] hear what 1 say and do ye speedily execute without
any judgment my behests. The foolish cow-herd Nanda and
his companions, relying upon the protection of Krishna have
withheld the usual offerings to us. Now therefore, distress
the cattle, with wind and rain at my command, that are their
subsistance and whence their occupation is derived. Ascend-
ing my elephant, huge as a mountain summit, I will give you
assistance in strengthening the tempest.”

Parsara said : — 0 twice-born one, being thus command-
ed by the celestial-chief, the elouds catne down in a fearful
storm of rain and wind to destroy the caitle. In a moment,
the earth the points of the horizon and the sky were all blend-
ed into one by the heavy and incessant showers. Being afraid
of the light ning^s scourge, the clouds filled the quarters with
their mutterin|f and pouring down uninterpted torrents.
The clouds pouring down waters day and night, the earth was
filled with darkness ; and above below and on every side the
world was filled with water. The cattle, pelted by the storm,
shrank cowering into the smallest size or gave up their breath.
Some covered their calves with flanks and some saw
their young ones carried away by the flood. TremWing iR
the wind, the calves cast their piteous looks at their mothers
or begged, in low moans, as if, the help of Krishna. Behold-
ing all Gokula moved with terror and cow-herds and cow-herd
esses and cattle stricken with consternations, Hari thus
thought ^‘This is the work of Mahendra, who has been offend-
ed for withholding sacrifices from me ; it is therefore my duty


VISHNUPURANAM.


349


to defend this village of herdsmen. I will uplift this spacious
mountain from its snowy base and hold it up as a large
umbrella over the cow-pens.^^ Having thus made up his
mind| Krishna immediately upheld the mountain Govardhana
with one hand as if in sport, and said to the cow-herds^
Behold the ipountain is on high j entfr beneath it speedily,
and it will sheltcir you from the storm ; here you v\ill be secure
and happy in places defended from the wind ; enter speedily
and fear not that the mountain will fall.” Thereupon, all the
people with their cattle, waggons, goods, women, afflicted as
they were by rain, went to the shelter of the mountain which he
held steadily over their heads ; and Krishna, as he supported
the mountain, was contemplated with delight and atonishment
by the inhabitants of Vraja. As his eyes expanded with
joy and wonder, the cow-herds and cow-herdesses sang his
glories. For seven days and nights did the vast clouds,
despatched by Indra, pour down showers upon the Gokula of
Nanda, to destroy the dwellers, but they were protected bjr
the hight of the mountain. And being baffled in his pur-
pose, the Indra, the destroyer of Bala, ordered the clouds to
cease. The threats of Indra having been fruitless and the
sky clear, all the inhabitants of Gokula came out from the
shelter and went back to their respective habitations. Then
Krishna, in the presence of the inhabitants of the forests
filled with surprise, restored the great mountain Govardhana
to its original site.


45


SECTION xir.


Parasara said: — ^After the rnhabilants of Gakula had
been saved by the upholding of the mountain Govardhana^
the chastiser of Faka (Indra) became desirous of seeing
Krishna. Having mounted his huge elephant Airavata, that
lord of the celestials, the destroyer of enemies, beheld the
mighty Krishna on the mount Goyardhana, tending cattle,
assuming the person of a co’vv-boy and encirJed by the ^sons
of cow-herds, although the protector of the universe. He saw
above his head, Garuda, the king of birds, invisible to men,
spreading out his wings to shade the head of Hari. Descend-
ing from his elephant and taking him at a distance, Sakra,
having his eyes expanded with delight, said to the Slayer of
Madhu — ‘‘Heart hear, 0 Krishna, why I have come here;
why I have come to thee; do not think otherwise of it.
Thou, O lord, who art the supporter of the universe, hast
descended upon earth to relieve her of her burden. Being
enraged on account of my rites being obstructed, I sent the
clouds to deluge Gokula and they have done this evil deed.
By upholding the mountain, thou hast preserved the cattle
and really, O hero, I am much pleased with thy wonderous
deed. The object of the celestials is, now, I think, accom-
plished, for with thy single hand thou hast uplifted this chief
of mountains. Being commissioned by the cattle, 0 Krishna,
I have come to thee, to honour thee for thou didst save them.
At their words, I shall install thee as Upendra and as the
Indra of the cows thou shalt be called Govinda.*' Saying this,
Mahendra took a ewer from his elephant Airavata and with
the holy water it contained performed the regal cerenjony
of sprinkling. And as the ceremony was being performed,
the cattle deluged the earth with their milk.


VISHNUPURANAM.


3Sl


Having thus inaugurated Krishna, fndra, the husband of
Sachi, again affectionately said — I hav-e don« this at tli€
fiequest of the cattle ; hear, 1 shall speak something else to
thee, 0 noble one, being desirous of relieving the earth of her
burden. 0 foremost of men, a portion of mine, under the
name of Arjuha, has descended <upon earth — do thou protect
him always. He shall assist thee in relieving the earth of her
burden. He should be protected by thee, 0 Slayer of
Madhu, like thy own Self.’'

The Deity said ‘‘I know that in the family of Bharata,
thy jon has been born by Pritha. I shall protect him as long
as I shall live on this earth. 0 Sakra, 0 Slayer of foes, 0 lord
of the celestials, as long I shall be on this earth, no one shall
be able to vanquish Arjuna in conflict. The highly powerful
Asura Kansa and Arishtha Keshi, Naraka and others being
slain, there shall take place a terrible conflict, 0 king of the
celestials ; know that, O thousand-eyed deity, as what will
relieve earth of her burden. Do thou go ; it behoves thee not
to be anxious for thy son. No enemy of Arjuna shall grow in
power before me. For Arjuna I shall render back Yudhish-
Ihira and his brothers to Kmnti after the great battle of
Kurukshetra.”

PakaSARA said : — Being thus addressed, the king of the
celestials embraced Janarddana and having mounted the
elephant Airavata again went to the celestial region.
Krishna too with the cows and cow-herds came back to Vrnja
by the way sanctified by the looks of the females of the cow-
herds.


SECTION XIIL


P ARASARA said Sakra having departed, the cow-herds,

on seeing him uplift the mountain Govardhana, said to
Krishna of wonderous deeds, delightedly :—‘'0 thou of
mighty arms, thou hast saved us from a great fear; by hold-
ing up the mountain thou hast protected the cows. Wonder-
ful are thy childish sports and insignificant is the condition
of a herdsman and all thy actions are those of a god. Tell
us what is the meanings of all this. Kaliya has been vanquish-
ed in the water; Pralamba has been killed: Govardhana
has been lifted up : our minds are filled with surprise. We
can swear by the feet of Hari, 0 thou of unbounded might,
that beholding thy powers we do not consider thee as man.
O Kesava, the woman, the children and the old of Vraja are
all pleased with thee— even all the celestials cannot perform
the deeds thou hast done. Thy boyhood and thy prowess ;
thy humiliating birth amongest us, are contraductions that fill
us with surprise whenever we think of them. Be thou a god,
or a demon or a Yaksha or a Gandharba, or whatever, we
may consider thee, we should respect thee for thou art our
friend/'

When they had finished, Krishna remaind silent for some
time as if hurt and wounded and then said to them. Herds-
men, if you are not ashamed of my relationship, if I have
deserved your praise, then what necessity have you to discuss
thus concerning me ? If you have any love for me, if I merit
your praise, then consider me as your friend. I am nither
a god, nor a Gandharba nor a Yaksha nor a demon— I am
born as thy friend and you should not think otherwise of me."

ParasarA said Being addressed thus, O great Muni*
the cow-herds remained^silent and went into the woods


VISIINUPURANAM.


353


leaving Krishna apparently displeased. Beholding the clear
sky with the autumnal moon, and the air perfumed with the
fragrance of the wild water-lily in whose buds the clustering
bees were murmuring their songs, he felt inclined to join with
the females of cow-herds in sport. Thereupon with Rdma he
began singing-sweet low strains in various measures such as
the woman loved ; and they, as soon as they heard the music,
left their homes and hastened to meet the Slayer of Madhu.
One damsel gently sang an accompaniment to his song,
another attentively listened to his music : one called him by
the name and then shrank in bashfulness : whilst another, more
bold and prompted by love, pressed close to his side ; one,
as she came out, saw some of the seniors of her family and
dared not venture satisfying herself with meditating on
Krishna with closed eyes and whole-minded devotion by
which immediately all acts of merit were effaced by rapture
and all sin was expiated by regret at not seeing him : and
others again, reflecting upon the cause of the world, in the
form of the Supreme Brahma, obtained, by their sighing, final
emancipation. Thus encircled by the females of cow-herds
Krishna thought the lovely moon-light night of autumn suited
to the R&sa ^ dance. Many of them so imitated the different
actions of Krishna that in his absence they wandered through
Vrindavana representing his person. “1 am Krishna ex-
claims one behold the beauty of my movements."^ “lam
Krishna^’ cries ai. other ‘^Listen to my sing.^’ “Wait i wicked
Kliiya, I am Krishna^' cries out another striking her arms
defiantly. A fourth cries out ; “ Herdsmen, fear nothing, be
steady, there is no danger of the storm any more for 1 uplift
the Govardhana for your protection, and a fifth exclaims—
“ Now let the cattle graze wherever they will, for 1 have slain
Qhenuka.’' In this wise the females of the cow-herds imitat-


* The Rasa dance is danced by men and women holding each other’s hands
goitig roifad in a ciicle singing the ai» to what they dance.


854


VISHNUPURANAM.


ed tl>e various actions of Krishna^ and in his absence removed
their sorrow by mimicking his sports. One damsel^ looking
on the earth with the down of her person erect and expanded
eyes, exclaims ** See here are the impressions of Krishna^s
feet and as he lias gone, he has left those marks of the banner,
the thunder-bolt and the goad. What fortunate damsel is
going with him inebrieate with her passion as her irregular
footmarks prove ? Here Damodara has called flowers from
on high, for we see alone the marks of the tips of his feet.
Here a nymph has sat down with him be-decked with flowers,
fortunate in having propitiated Vishnu in a pristime birth.
Having left her in a haughty mood because he had adored
her with flowers, the son of Nanda has gone by this road ;
for see, unable to follow him ’with equal steps his companion
has here trippled along upon her toes ; and that holding his
hand, the damsel has passed on is evident from the uneven and
intermingled footsteps. The w’icked Krishna merely took her
by the hand and then left her. The damsel, being dis-
appointed, is returning in faltering steps — for such her foot-
marks indicate. Forsooth he proposed to her that he would
come back soon, for here are his own footsteps returning with
speed. Here he has entered the thick forest but as the rays
of the moon do not enter here his footsteps can be traced no
farther.” Being hopeless of beholding Krishna, the females
of the cow herds came back and arriving at the banks of the
Yamuna, they began to sing his songs. They immediatery
saw the protector of the three worlds, with a smiling counte-
nance, coming speedily towards them, on which one cried
out ” Krishna, Krishna being unable to utter any thing else.
One liked to contract her forehead with frowns as djinking
with the bees of her eyes the lotus of the face of Hari : ano-
ther, shutting her eyes, meditated,, in her mind, upon his form
as if being engaged in an act of devotion. Thereupon com-
ing amongst them MAdliaba conciliated some with soft words
boine with gentle looks and some he took by the hand and


ViSHNUPURANAM,


355


(lie illustrious deity sported with them in the stations of the
dance, after all the damsels had been propitiated. As each
of the damsels attempted to remain in one place close to the
side of Krishna, the circle of the dance could not be construc-
ted. Thereupon taking each by the hand and when their eye-
lids were closed by the effects of such touch Hari formed the
circle. Then began the dance in accompaniment with the
music of their clashing bracelets and songs that celebrated in
sweet melody the beauty of the autumnal season. Krishna
sang the moon of autumn, a mine of gentle rays but the
damsels chanted the praise of Krishna only. At times, one
of them exhausted by the revolving dance, threw her arms,
adorned with the tinkling bracelets round the neck of the
Slayer of Madhu : another proficient in tiie art of singing his
praises embraced him. The drops of perspiration from the
arms of Hari were like fertilizing rain which produced a drop
of dew upon the temples of the damsels of cow-herds.
Krishna sang the melody that was suited to the dance.^^ The
damsels again and again repeated— “ Bravo, Krishna,’^ to his
song. When leading, they followed him, when coming back,
they met him and whether he went forwards or backwards
they always followed his footsteps. Whilst sporting thus
with the females of the cow-herds, they regarded one moment
in his absence, as a myriad of years. And although prohibited
in vain by their husbands,and brothers, they went nut in night
to sport with Krishna, the idol of their affection. Thus the
deity of unbounded prowess, the remover of all imperfections,
assumed the character of a youth amongst the damsels of
Vraja, pervading their natures and that of their lords, by
his own essence all diffusive like the wind, for even as in all
creatures the elements of ether, fire, water, and air are
comprehended, so also is oe everywhere present and in all.


SECTION XIV.


One evening whilst JanSirddana was engaged in RSsa,
the demon Aristha, disguised as a hull, came there striking
terror into the hearts of all. His appearance was like a cloud
saturated with waters — ^his two horns were very sharp and
his two eyes were bright like the sun. As he proceeded, he
ploughed up the ground with his hoops : his tongue was
repeatedly licking his lip<5 ; his tail was erect ; the sinews of
his shoulders were strong and between them rose a hump of
enormous proportions; his hunches were soiled with ordour
and he was a dread to the herds ; his dewlap hung low and
his face was marked with scars from butting against the
trees. Terrifying all the kine, and destroying hermits and
ascetics that demon, in the guise of a bull, haunts all the
forests. Being greatly stricken with fear on beholding that
dreadful bull, the cow-herds and their females cried out
^‘Krishna, Krishna.*' Krishna then shouted and slapped his
arras in defiance.When the demon heard the noise, he turned
}upon his challenger, and fixing his eyes and pointing his
iiorns at the belly of Kesava, he ran furiously upon the
youth. Krishna did not stir from bis place, but smiling in
aport and derision, awaited the near approach of the bull,
when he siezed him, as an alligator would have done and held
him firmly by the horns, whilst he pressed his sides with his
knees. Having thus humiliated his pride and held him cap-
tive by his horn, he wrung his throat as if it had been a piece
of wet cloth ; and then tearing off one of the horns, he beat
the dreadful demon with it until he died vomitting blood from
bis mouth. Seeing him slain the herdsmen glorified Krishna,
as jthe companies of the celestials of old prajsed Indra^ wheu
he triumphed over the Asura Jambha.


SECTION XV.


After tliese things had happened, Aristha, the bull
demon and Dhenuka and Pralaitiba had been destroyed,
Govardhana had been uplifted^ the serpent Kailya had been
vanquished, the two trees had been broken, the female fiend
PutanS had been destroyed and the waggon had been over-
turned, NaraSda went to Kansa and related to him the whole,
beginning with the transference of the child from Devaki to
YosadS. Hearing this from NSrada, Kansa was greatly
enraged with Vasudeva and remonstrated with him hard, and
with all the Yadavas in an assembly of the race. Then thinking
what was to be done he determined to destroy both
Krishna and Rama whilist they were yet young and before
they had attained to man-hood. Accordingly he made tip his
mind, to invite them from Vraja under the plea of the
solemn rite of the lustration of arms, when he Would engage
them in a trial of strength with his chief boxers ChSlnura and
Mushtika, by whom they would undoubtedly be slain. will
send'^ he said *'the noble Akrura, the son of Swapalka to
Gokula to bring them hither. 1 will order the dreadful Kesin,
who frequents the forest of Vrin Javan, to attack him, and he is
of unequalled prowess and will, for certain, kill them ; or if
they come here, my elephant Kuvalayapida shall trample to
death these two cow-boy sons of Vasudeva.^' Having thus
planned to kill Rama and Janardana, the vicious Kansa sent
for the heroic Akrura and said to him, ^0 master of liberal
gifts, hear my words : and out of friendship for me perform my
orders. Ascend your chariot and go to the house of the
*nilkman Nanda. The two vicious boys, portions of Vishnu,
have been born there, for the very object bringing about
destruction. On the fourteenth lunation I intend celebrat-
46


55 »


VISHNUPURAflAM.


ing the rite of tlie lustration of arms. I wish them to be
brought here by you to take part m the games and that the
people may behold them engage in a boxing match with my
too skilled boxers Chanura and Mushtika; or by chance, my
elephant, driven against them by his rider, shall destroy these
vicious youngsters — the sons of Vasudava. When they are
out of tjie way, I shall kill Vasudeva himself, the cow-herds and
my foolish father Ugrasena and I will get there by the flocks,
herds and all the properties of the rebeHions cow-herds who
have ever been inimical to me. Save thou, lord of liberalily,
all the Yadavas have been my enemies and I will find out
means for their destruction ; and I shall then govern my*king'
dom with thee without any disturbance. If you regard me, do
thou go as I direct thee ; and thou slialt command the cow-
herds to bring in speedily their supplies of milk and butter
and curds.’'

Being thus advised the illustrious Akrura the immediately
undertook to see Krishna and ascennding his magnificent
chariot he went, out from the city of Mathura.


SECTION XVL


ParASARA said: — Being txmmispioned by Kansa's
emissary, Kesin, elated with the confidence of liis prow'ess,
reached Vrindavana, being desirons of bringing about the
destruction of Krishna. He assailed the cow-herds, spurning
the ground with his hoofs, scattering the clouds with his mane
and obstructing the paths of the sun and the moon Being
terrified by the neighings of the demon, assuming the shape of
a steed, the cow-herds and their females fled to Govindafor
shelter exclaiming “Save us I Save us ii” Hearing their cries,
Govinda replied in a voice deep as the roaring of the thunder
cloud. Srikrishna said : “Away with the fears of Keshin, 0
cowherds; being born as Gopals, why do you destroy my
valour and heroism ? Why are you afraid of one of such little
might whose neighings are his only terrors, a galloping and
vicious horse who is ridden by the strength of Daityas ?
Come on, wretch. I am Krishna and I will knock all thy
teeth down thy throat, as the weilder of trident did to Pushan.'^
Thus defying him, Govinda went to fight with Kesin. The
demon with his mouth wide open, ran upon Krishna. But
Krishna, enlarging his arms, thrust it into his mouth and
knocked down the teeth which fell from his jaws like frag-
ments of white clouds. Still the arm of Krishna in the
throat of Krishna continued to enlarge, as a disease,
neglected in the beginning, increasing till the dissolution.
The torn lips of the demon vomitted forth foam and blood ;
Ms eyes rolled in affliction ; his joints gave way ; he struck
the earth with his feet; his body was covered with perspira-
tion and he became incapable of any exertion. Having his
mouths rent open by the armof Krishna, that dreadful demon
down like a tree struck and shattered by lightning,


$60


VISHNUPURANAM.


divided into two portions. Each of those portions had two
legs, half a back, half a tail, one ear, one eye and one
nostril. Krishna stood, unhurt and smiling after the
destruction of the demons encircled by the cow-herd, who,
together with their females, were filled with surprise at the
death of Kesin and glorihed the lotus-eyed deity. Beholding
the destruction of Kesin, the Brahmin Nftrada, invisible and
seated in a cloud, delightedly exclaimed— *‘Well done, 0 lord
of the universe who has easily destroyed Kesin, the
oppresser of the celestials. I have never heard of such a
combat between a man and a horse; being curious to behold
it, I have come from htaven. My heart is filled with joy and
surprise, 0 slayer of Madhu, on beholding the wonderful
works thou hast done in thy descent upon earth. O Krishna
Indra and other celestials lived in fear of this horse, who
tossed his mane and neighed and looked down uyon the
clouds, Because thou hast slain the impious Kesin thou
shalt be celebrated in the world by the name of Kesava.
farewell j I will now go. I shall meet thee again, 0 subduer
of Kesin, in two days more, when thou shalt be engaged in a
conflict with Kansa, When the son of Ugrasena, with his
follwers shall have been slain, then, 0 upholder of the earth
earth’s burden will have been lightened by thee. Many are
the battles of the kings that have to see, in which thou shalt
be renowned ; I will now go away, 0 Govinda. Thou hast
accomplished a great deed admired by the celestials, I have
boea much pleased with thee and take my leave.’' When
NSrada had departed, Krishna, who was the cynosure
of the eyes of the damsels of Vraja, not the least surprised,
went back with the cow-herds to Gokula.


•OP'


SECTION XVII.


P ARASARA said Having issued out of the bouse of
Kansg) AkrurSi being desirous of seeing Krishna, proceeded
towards the house of Nanda in a swift<coursing car. He
tnought within himself. There is none more fortunate than
I, for 1 shall behold the countenance of a portion of the holder
of discus. To-day my life has borne fruit, my night is
folfowed by the dawn of day, for I shall behold the counte-
nance of Vishnu resembling full-blown lotuses. Blessed are
my eyes and blessed are my words, for on beholding Vishnu
a conversation shall take place between him and me. I
shall behold the countenance of Vishnu having lotus eyes,
which, when seen only in imagination, removes all sins.
1 shall behold to-day the mouth of Vishnu — the glory
of glories, whence proceeded the Vedas and all their
divisions. I shall behold the lord of the universe by whom
the world is sustained, who is worshipped as the best
Purusha and as the male of sacrifice in sacrificial rites.
1 shall behold Keseva, who is without beginning or end,
by worshipping whom with a hundred sacrifices, Indra
obtained the sovereignty over the celestials. That Hari,
whose nature is unknown to Brahma, Indra, Rudra, the
Aswins, the Vasus, the Adityas and Maruts, will this
day touch my body* He, who is the soul of all omni-
scient, is identical with everything, omnipresent, permanent,
undecaying, all-pervading, sliall converse with me. He, the
unborn, who has preserved the world in diverse forms of a
fish, a tortoise, a boar, a horse, a lion, will this day talk
with me. The lord of the universe, who assumes shapes at
will, has taken upon him the condition of Humanity to satisfy
some ob^ ot hii heart. The endless, who holds the


363 VISHNUPURANAM.

earth upon liis crest and who has descended upon earth for
its protection, will this day call me by my name. Glory to
that being, whose deceptive adoption of father, son, brother,
friend, mother, and relative, the world is unable to compre-
hend. Salutation unto him, who is identical with true know-
ledge, who is inscrutable and through whom, when seated in
his heart tne ascetic gets over the worldly ignorance and
illusion, I bow to him, who, by the performers of holy rites,
is denominated Yajnapurusha (the male of a sacrifice),
VSsudeva, by the devotees and Vishnu by the adepts in
VedSLnta philosophy. May he, who comprises in himself,
cause and effect and the world itself, be pleased with me,
through his truth, for I always confide in that unborn and
eternal Hari, by meditating on whom man becomes the re-
pository of all auspicious things.’’

Parasara said : — Thus meditating upon Vishnu, Akrura,
having his mind animated by devout faith, reached Gokula a
litlle before sun-set ; and there he beheld Krishna amongst
the cattle, dark as the leaf of the full-blown lotus ; his eyes
of the same colour and his breast adorned with Srivatsa
mark; long-armed, broad-chested; having a high nose, a
graceful countenance with smiles; treading, firmly on the
ground with feet whose nails were tinted red ; dressed in
yellow raiments and be-decked with a garland of forest
flowers ; having a creeper, just collected in his hands, and a
chaplet of white loius-flowers on his head. Akrura also saw
there Balabhadra, white as a jasmine, a swan or the moon
dressed in a blue dress ; having large and mighty arms and
a countenance as radiant as a blue lotus, like the KailSsa
mountain adorned with a wreath of clouds.

When Akrura, beheld these two youngmen, his coun-
tenance expanded with joy and the down of his body stood
erect with dglight. And he thought — “ This is the supreme
happiness and repository ; this the double manifestation of the
divine Vasudeva ; blessed are my eyes for 1 have seen the


VISHNUPURANAM. 36$

protector of the universe and my bodily form shall yield fruit,
when by the favour of the deity it shall come in contact with
his person. Shall that assumer of infinite forms place his
hand on my back by the touch of whose fingers alone all
sins are dispelled and imperishable, felicity is secured.
And by this .hand holding the fierce irresistible discus blazing
with all the flames of fire, lightning, and the sun, were slain
the Daitya chiefs, and the collyriurn from the eyes of their
females was washed. Into this hand Bali poured water and
obtained enjoyments in the region under the earth and
immortality and dominion over the celestials for a whole
Manwantara without danger from any enemy. Although I
am not sinful, perhaps he will dispise me for my connection
with the vicious Kansa. If so, cursed is my birth who is counted
amongst the wicked. What is there unknown to him wlvo
resides in the hearts of all men, who is ever existent, freed
from imperfection, the aggregate of the quality of purity and
at one with true knowledge? With a heart animated with
devout faith I approach the lord of lords, the descended
portion of that excellent Purusha, Vishnu, who his without
beginning, middle or end.”


SECTION XVIIL


ParaSara said Thus meditating, Akrura, born in the
race of the Yadus, bowed his hand down to the feet of Harl
saying— “I am Akrura.*^ And Krishna placed his hand upon
him^ which was marked with the flag, the thunder-bolt, the
lotus, and drew him towards him and affectionately embraced
him.


3^4


vishnupuranam.


Beingf thus honored by him, Balarama and Kagava,
delighted, entered with him their own habitation. Having
entered into conversation with them and been fed, herd lated
to them everything duly, how their father Anakadundhubi,
the princess Devaki and even his own father had been
insulted by the wicked demon Kansa and for what purpose
he had been despatched. Having heard all from him the
illustrious slayer of Kesin said—'' 0 thou of liberaf gift, I
know all thou hast said ; O e^reat one^ I shall devfse proper
measures for this — do not think otherwise of this ; consider
Kftnsa as already slain. Rama and I will go to Muthra to*
morrow along with you. The elders of the cow*herds shall
accompany us carrying sufficient offerings. Rest here to night
and drive all thy anxiety. Within three nights I will destroy
Kansa and all his followers.”

Having thus commanded the cow-herds, Akrura with
Kesava and Rama retired to rest and slept soundly in the
house of Nan da. The next morning was clear and the
youngmen prepared to proceed to Mathura with Akrura. The
females of the cow*herds. on seeing them about to depart,
were much afflicted. They wept bitterly— their bracelets
were loose upon their arms— and they thus thought within
themselves — " If Govinda goes to Muthra, how will he come
back to Ghkula, ? His cars will be pleased by the sweet and
finished conversation of the damsels of the city. And being
used to the language of the graceful females of Mathura he
will never again like the rustic expressions of the Gopces.
Hari, the pride of our village is taken away and a fatal blow
is laid upon us by inexorable destiny.

The women of the city have sweet smiles, graceful
language, beautiful air, elegant gait and significant glances^
Hari is of rustic breeding, and, captivated by their fascina-
tions, what likelihood is there of his returning to the Society
of any one amongst us? Kevasa, who has mounted the car

to go to Mathura, has been deceived by the cruel, vHe, and


VlSriNUt<URANAM.


365

despefate Akrura. Does not the unfeeling traitot know the
affection that we all here feel for our Hari, the joy of our
eyes, that he is taking him away? Unkind that he isj
Govinda is departing from us, along with Rama : haste [ let
us stop him ! Why talk of telling our seniors that we cannot
bear his loss*? What cart they do for us, we are con-
sumed by the fires of separation ? The Gopas, with I^anda
at their head, are themselves preparing to depart ; no one
makes any attempt to detain Govinda. Bright is the morning
that succeeds to this night for the women of Mathura, for the
bees of their eyes will feed upon the lotus face of AchyUta.
Happy are they who may go hence without impediment, and
behold, enraptured, Krishna on his journey. A great festival
will delight today the eyes of the inhabitants of Mathura when
they will behold the person of Govinda. What pleasurable
dream was seen by the happy damsels of the city that their
graceful eyes shall behold unobstructed the countenance of
Krishna i Alas | the eyes of the females of cow-hefds have
been deprived of their vision by the relentless BrahmS, after he
had shown them this grest treasure. Hari departing with his
love for us decayed, the bracelets from our arms slip. The
cruel-hearted Akrura urges on the steeds ; who does not feel
pity for females like us who are bewailing? Alasi behold
the dust of Krishna^s chariot- wheels ! and now he is distanced
from us by that for even that dust is no longer to be seen
Thus lamented by the damsels, Kesava and Rama left the
hamlet of Vraja. Travelling in a car drawn by quick-coursing
steeds they reached, at noon, the banks of the Yamuna when
Akrura requested them to halt a little whilst he performed the
usual daily ceremonial in the river. They having agreed to
this, the high-minded Akrura bathed in the water and linsed
his mouth and then entering the stream he stood meditating
upon the Supreme Being. He beheld, in his meditation,
^alabhadra, having a thousand-hooded heads, a garland of
jasmine flowers, having large-red eyes resembling lotus'

47


366


VISHNFUPURANAM.


pe^kahj, surrounded fey Va^uki, Rambba and otberin^hly ser-
pents, praised by Gan dharvas, decorated with garlands of wild
flowers, clad in dark-coloured raiment, crowned with a chap-
let of lotuses, adroned with brilliant ear-rings, drunk and stand-
ing at the bottom of the river in the water. He saw on his
lap Vishnu, having four arms, and holding concli, discus, and
mace, having the complexion of cloud, coppery and expansive
ey-es, excellent ear-rings and an elegant form, clad in yellow
clothes, adorned with many coloured flowers and appearing
like a cloud adroned with streams of lightnings and the bow
of indra; his breast was marked with celestial sign, four,arms
were adroned with keyuras and head with a brilliant crown:
he was attended by Sanand.ma andw other holy sages, who,
fixing their eyes upon the tips of their noses, were absorbed
in profound meditation.

Understanding them as Krishna and Bilarama, Akrura
was struck with amazement ; and be thought how they could so
quickly have got there from the chariot. He desired to ask
them of this, but Janarddana deprived him of the faculty of
speech at that moment. Having come out of the waters he
then came to the chariot and saw there, like before, Rama
and Krishna stationed in their human forms. And having
entered the stream again he saw those two forms praised
by Gandharvas, great ascetics, Siddhas and great serpents.
Apprehending then their real nature he enlogized the eternal
deity gifted with discriminative knowledge.

Akrura said: — '‘Salutation to thee, who art uniform and
liianifold, all pervading, Supreme spirit, of inconceivable glory
and who art simple existence. Salutation to thee, 0 inscrut-
able, who art truth and the essence of oblations. Salutation
to thee, O Lord, whose nature is unknown, who art beyond
primeval matter, who existest in five forms, identical with the
dements, with the faculties, with matter, with the living soul
jiU}d with the Supreme spirit. Be propitiated with me, 0 soul

the uiUTerse, essence of all things, perishable or eternal,


VJSJINUPURANAM.


367


whether addressed by tl>e name Brahma, Vishnu, Siva or like.
I adore ihce, O God,^ whose nature is indestructible, whose
purposes cannot be decipltered, whose name even is un-
known ; (or the attributes of kind or appellation are not
applicable to thee, who ark that, the supreme Brahman,
eternal, unchangeable, uncreated. But as our objects can
not be accomplished but through some specific from, thou art
termed by us Krishna, Achyuta, Ananta or Vishnu. Thou,
unborn divinity, art all the objects of these impersonation;
thou art the gods and all other beings ; thou art the whole
world, thou art all. Soul of the universe, thou art free from
change and there is nothing except thee in all this existence.
Thou art BrahmS, Pasupati, Aryaman, Dh^tri and VidhStri j ;
thou art Indra, air, fire, the regent of the waters, the god of
wealth and the judge of the dead; and thou, although but
one, presidest over the world with various energies directed to
various purposes. Thou, identical with the solar ray, createst
the universe : all elementary substance is composed of thy
qualities j and thy supreme form is denoted by the imperish-
able term Sa^. I bow to him who is identical with true
knowledge and who is and not perceptible. Salutation to
him the lord Vasudeva, to Sankarsana, to Pradyumna and to
Aaiiuddha.


SECTION XIX.

Parasara said Having thus praised Vishnu, standit^
in the stream that descendant of the Yadu race worshipped
the lord of ail wUh flowers, incense and all otlier beautiful
articles. Having withdrawn his mind from every thing else and


368


VISHNUPURANAM.


devoted it to Vishnu, he engaged, for some time, in the medita-
tion, am Brahman'^ and then desisted from his abstraction.
Then considering himself as blessed, the high-minded Akrura
got up from the waters of the Yamuna and came to the char,
lot. Like before, he again saw stationed on the car, Rama
and Krishna. Seeing Akrura thus amazed, Krishna said-^
‘Torsooth, 0 Akrura, your eyes are expanded with surprise.
Methinks you have seen something wonderful in the waters
of the Yamuna.’^

AkrukA said -‘'0 Achyuta, the wonder I saw in the
waters, I behold here, before me in a bodily shape ; I am unit-
ed with thee, Krishna, the marvel I have seen and whose
wonderous form is the universe. No more of this, let us go to
Mathura, 0 Slayer of Madhu— I am afraid of Kansa. Oh !
lie on them who eat the bread of another.’’ Saying this he
urged on the quick steeds and they arrived^ after sunset, at
Mathura, When they came in sight of the city, Akrura said
to Krishna and Rama “You must now go on foot, whilst I
proceed alone in the car ; and you must not go to the house
of Vasudeva for the elder has been banished by Kansa on
your account.”

ParasarA said: — Having said this Akrura alone entered the
city of Mathura, Rama and Kri«ibna proceeded thereto follow-
ing the public road. All the females and males of Mathura
espied the two brothers with delight. And they went along
sportively looking like two young elephants. As they roamed
about, they saw a washerman colouring clothes and,
with smiling countenances, they went and wanted of him
some of his fine linen. He was a washerman of Kansa and
was made insolent by his master’s favour, so he remonstrated
hard with Rama and Kesava. Thereupon Krishna, in rage,
struck down the head of that vicious-souled (washerman)
on earth. Having thus killed him and taken yellow and
blue raiment Krishna and RSma, delightedly came to a flower-
sellcr^s shop. Seeing them, having expansive eyes, the flovrcr-


VISUNUPURANAM.


369


seller was astonished and thought, 0 Maitreya, who could
they be or whence could they have come. Beholding tw^o
youths so lovely, dressed in yellow and blue garments, he took
them to be divinities descended upon earth. Being asked
for some flowers, by them, having mouths budding like lotuses
he placed his hands upon the ground and touched it with his
head, saying — ‘ My lords have shown me great kindness, by
coming to my house, fortunate that lam; I will pay them
homage.” Having said this, the flower-seller, with a smil-
ing face, gave them whatever choice flowers they selected,
to gain their favour. Prostrating himself again and again
before them, he presented them again and again with flowers
beautiful, fragrant and fresh. Being much pleased with
him, Krishna gave him the blessing — “ Fortune, O good
friend, who depends on me, shall never forsake thee. Thou
shalt never lose strength or wealth and thy family shall never
be extinct. Enjoying many things, thou shalt, in the end,
remembering me, attain to the region of the celestials. 0
good friend, thy mind shall always be in virtue and those, who
shall be born in thy race, shall be long-lived. 0 great one,
as long as the sun shall exist, none, in thy race, shall be
disturbed with famine or other troubles."'

Farasara said : — Having said this and been worshipped
by the flower-seller, 0 foremost of Munis, Krishna in the
company of BalarSlma, issued out of his house.


SECTION XX.


HILE thus going along the high road, Krishna saw a
young girl, who was crooked, carrying a pot of unguent.
Krishna addressed her in sweet words and said — ** For whom
arc you carrying that unguent ? TcU me, lovely maiden, tell
me truly.” Being thus addressed by him through affec-
tion, Kubja being attracted by his affection and well dis-
posed towards Hari, replied to him also mirthfully : — “*Do
you not know, my lord, that my name is Tribakra^ I am the
servant of Kansa and appointed to prepare his perfumes.
Kansa does not like perfumes prepared by any other female
and for this he loves me greatly and shows me favour."
Krishna said:— *‘0 thou having a lovely countenance, give
us sufficient unguent used by the king, to rub upon our
bodies.” ” Take it,” Kubja said and she gave them as much
of the unguent as was required for their persons and they
rubbed it on various parts of their bodies and faces, till they
looked like two clouds, one white and one black, decorated
by the many-tinted bow of Indra. Then Krishna skilled in the
curative art, took hold of her under the chin, with the thumb
and two fingers and lifted up her head, whilst with his feet he
pressed down her feet and in this way he made her straight.
Being thus rendered straight, she became the most beautiful
of damsels. Then tilled with affection, she took Govinda
by the g^fbient and said ** Come to my house.” Hari, smiling,
replied— “I shall come to your house sometime after.’'
Having thus dismissed her and cast his looks towards RUtna,
he laughed aloud.

Dressed then in blue and yellow raiment and aonointed
wijtb fragrant unguents and adorned with beautiful garlands,
and Rftraa went to the hall of arms. They then


riSHNUPURANAM.


3T«


inquired of the warder which excellent bow they would take.
Being loformed, Krishna at once took up a bow and bent it ;
then drawing it ivtth violence he snapped it 4 ii two and all
Mathura resounded with the noise made by its fracture.
Abused by the guards for breaking the bow, Krishna and
Rim a retorted and defied them and left the hall.

When Kansa came to know that Akrura had returned and
Krishna had snapped the bow, he then said to Chlnura and
Mushtika : — “Tow cow-herd boys have arrived— ‘You must kHI
them both before n»e in a trial of strength, for they always
try ^0 kill me. When you two, gifted with great strength,
shall destroy these two cow- herd boys — I shall give you what-
ever you will desire. These two boys are my enemies ; by
means, whether foul or fair, you must kill them both. They
killed, the kingdom shall be ours in common.'^ Having thus
commanded the two wrestlers, he sent for his elephant-driver
and said to him loudly : — “You must place my great elephant
Kuvalaylpida who is as huge as a cloud charged with rain,
near the gate of tlie arena and drive him upon the two bo3rs
wlien they shall attempt to enter.*' Having given these
orders, he ascertained tliat the platforms were all ready and
waited tfor the rising sun, not conscious of his impending
desRh.

‘In the morning the citizens assembled on the platforms
set apart for them, and the princes with the ministers and
courtiers occupied the royal seats. Kansa made all those sit
in front who were judges of the games whilst he himself sat
apart, close by, upon a lofty throne. Separate^atforms
were also set up for the ladies of the palace ano^ney sat
there. Nanda and. cow-herds had places set apart for then^
at the end of which sat Akrura and Vasudeva. Amongst the
wives of .the citizens was Devaki, mourning for her son,
whose lovely countenance she desired to see even in the hour
of destruction. Thereafter the bugles were sounded and
Cli&tmra sprang forth and Mushtika clapped his arms defiantly


373 VISHNUPURANAW.

and people cried aloud Alas.** Covered with the temporal
juice and blood of the elephant, whom they had killed when
driven against them by the driverj Balabhadra and Janarddana
confidently entered the arena, like two lions’amidst a herd
of deer, with proud looks towards all. There arose exclama-
tions of pity and expressions of surprise from all the arena
and people said This is Krishna { This is Balabhadra 1!
This is that Krishna by whom the she-demon Putanli was
killed. This is that Krishna by whom the waggon was
upset. This is that Krishna who uprooted the two trees.
This is that Krishna — the boy who danded upon the hood-
ed fangs of the serpent KSiliya and who for seven days
upheld the mountain Gova/dhana. Behold, this is that
Krishna, who easily destroyed the demons Arislha, Dlienuka
and Kesin. This is that Achyuta. There is his elder brother
Balabhadra, before him, having long arms. He is young,
sportively affording delight to the minds and eyes of the
damsels. It has been foretold by the wdse, skilled in the
sense of PurSnas that he shall, as a cow-herd, exalt the de-
pressed Yadu race. This is a portion of the all-existing, all-
generating Vishnu descended upon earth, who will assuredly
lighten her load.’* The citizens having thus described RJma
and Krishna, Devaki’s heart was filled with compassion
and milk oozed out of her breast out of affection. And
on beholding the faces of his son, Vasudeva forgot his in-
firmities and felt himself young again. The women of the
palace, and the females of the city beheld Krishna with eyes
wide OM. *‘Look friends*^ said they to their companions
**Iook * the face of Krishna; his eyes are reddened by his
conflict with the elephant and the drops of perspiration stand
upon his cheek outweighing a full-blown lotus in autumn
studded w’ith glittering dew. Make your birth blessed and
the faculty of vision fruitful, by beholding the breast of the
boy, the seat of splendour and marked with the mystic sign
Sribatsa ; and see his arms menacing destruction to the


VtS^NUPURANXRf.


iii

enemies. Do you not see Baiabhadra coming with him, dad
inf a Wue raiment, having his countenance fair as the jasmine,-
as the moon and as the fibres of the lotus stem ? See, how he
gently smiles at the gestures of Mushtika and ChUnuira ^ they
spring up« And see Hari is advancing to meet ChSntira. Is
there no elder present here who will judge rightly ? How
can the delicate form of Hari, }ust in his youth, match the
huge and adamantine form of the great demon ChSnuraf
Two youths of delicate and beautiful forms are on the one’
side and the athletic fiends headed by ChSlnura on the other.
Is this fair? This is a great sin in the umpires to allow at
contest between boys and strong men.

ParAsara said The women of the city having thus
conversed with one another, Hari tightened his girdle and
danced in the ring shaking the ground on which he trod.
Baiabhadra too, slapping his arms defiantly, danced— and
wonder it is that the earth was not riven asunder by his
trodding. The highly powerful Krishna engaged with
Chinura and the demon Mushtika, well-versed in wrestling,
began to fight with Baiabhadra. Mutually entwining and
pushing and pulling and beating each other with fists, arms
and elbows and pressing each other with their knees, inter-
lacing their arms, kicking with their feet, pressing with their
whole weight upon another, fought Hari and Chanura. And
at the time of this national festival, dreadful was the encounteri
though without weapons, displaying strength and heroism^
And as long as the contest continued, Chanura was gradually
losing something of his original vigour and the wreath uponj
his head trembled from his fury and distress, ^ilst thef
World-comprehending Krishna wrestled with him but sport-
ively, Seeing Chanura losing and Krishna, gaining strength—
Kansa, worked up with ire, ordered the music to cease. And
as soon as music was stopped by Kansa countless celestial
bugles were sounded in the welkin. And the celestialsi
greatly delighted and invisible, said ^‘Krishna [ be thou

48


VISHNUPURANAM*


374

crowned wiih. success; Kesava, do thou slay that demon
Chinura.*’ Thereupon sporting for a long time with ChRnura,
Krishna, the slayer of Madliu, at last lifted him up and
whirled him with the intention of slaying him. Having
whirled ChSnura round a hundred times until his breath was
expended in the sky, he dashed his body on the ‘ground. As
soon as it fell it was sundered into a hundred pieces and the
earth was strewn with a hundred pools of gory mire. Whilst
this happened, the powerful Baladeva was engaged likewise
with the demon bruser Mushtika. Striking him on the head
with his fists and on the breast with his knees, he stretched
him on the ground, and pummelled him there till he was
dead. Again, Krishna encountered the royal bruiser
Tomalaka, and felled him to the earth with a blow of his left
hand. When the other athletae saw Chanura, Mushtika, and
Tomalaka killed, they fled from the field ; and Krishna and
Sankarshana danced victorious on the arena, dragging along
with them by force the cowherds of their owm age. Kansa,
his eyes reddening with wrath, called aloud to the surround-
ing people, “Drive those two cow-boys out of the assembly:
seize the villain Nanda, and secure him with chains of iron :
put Vasudeva to death with tortures intolerable to his years;
and lay hands upon the cattle, and whatever else belongs
to those cowherds who are the associates of Krishna.^

Upon hearing these orders, the destroyer of Madhu
iaughed at Kansa, and springing up to the place where he
was seated, laid hold of him by the hair of his head, and
struck his tiara to the ground : then casting him down upon
the earlK, Govinda threw himself upon him. Crushed by the
weight of the upholder of the universe, the son of Ugrasena,
Kansa the king, gave up the ghost. Krishna then dragged
the dead body, by the hair of the head, into the centre of the
arena, and a deep furrow was made by the vast and heavy
carcass of Kansa, when it was dragged along the ground by
Krishna, as if a torrent of water had run through it. Seeing


VISHNUPURANAM.


375


Kansa thus treatedi his brother SumSllin came to his succour ;
but he was encounteredi and easily killed, by Balabhadra.
Then arose a general cry of grief from the surrounding circle,
as they beheld the king of Mathura thus slain, and treated
with such contumely, by Krishna. Krishna, accompanied by
Balabhadra, ehibraced the feet of Vasudeva and of Devaki ;

= but Vasudeva raised him up ; and he and Devaki recalling
to recollection what he had said to them at his birth, they
bowed to JanSLrddana, and the former thus addressed him :
“ Have compassion upon mortals, 0 god, benefactor and lord
of dejties : it is by thy favour to us two, that thou hast become
the (present) upholder of the world. That for the punish-
ment of the rebellious, thou hast descended upon earth in my
house, having been propitiated by my prayers, sanctifies our
race. Thou art the heart of all creatures ; thou abidest in all
creatures, and all that has been, or will be, proceeds from
thee, 0 universal spirit j Thou, Achyuta, who comprehendest
all the gods, art eternally worshipped with sacrifices : thou
art sacrifice itself, and the offerer of sacrifices. The affection
that inspires my heart and the heart of Devaki towards thee
as if thou wast our child, is indeed but error, and a great
delusion. How shall the tongue of a mortal such as I am
call the creator of all things who is without beginning or
end, son ? It is reasonable, that the lord of the world from
whom the world proceeds should be born of me, except
through illusion ? How should he, in whom all mobile and
immobile beings exist, be conceived in the womb and born
of a mortal being ? Have pity on me, therefore, 0 Supreme
lord, and being incarnate do thou protect the universe. O
god, thou art not my son : thou comprisest the whole universe
from Brahma to a tree. Therefore, 0 great soul, why dost
thou beguile me? Blinded by illusion I considered thee,
as my son and hence I was afraid of Kansa. And therefore
1 did carry thee to Gokula where thou hast grown up ; but
1 no longer consider thee as mine own son. Thou Vishnu


VISIWUPimANAW.


376

the supreme lord of all, whose actions Rudra, the Maruts, the
Aswins, Indra and the celestials cannot equal although they
behold them ; thou, who hast descended amongst us for the
behoof of the universe, art recognized, and delusjon Is ao
fljpre.”


SECTION XXL


- 00 -


Parasara said Beholding Devaki and Vasudeva
obtain true discriminative knowledge on seeing his wondci-
ful feat, Krishna, being anxious to beguile them and other
descendants of Yadu race, spread again the illusions of
Vishnu. Thereupon he said to his parents — “0 father, 0
piother, my elder brother Baladeva was all along anxious to
behold you. It is out of fear of Kansa he could not do so.
So long the pious do not serye their parents that portion of
their life is spent in vain. 0 father, blessed is the birth of
Ithose men who serve their spiritual preceptors, celestials,
BrAhmanas and their parents. Thou shouldst therefore for-
give us, 0 father, for the violations committed. For up to this
time we were greatly distressed and under the influence of
another on account of the prowess and strength of Kansa."
Saying this Krishna bowed unto his parents and othei
elderly members of the Yadq race and duly honoured the
citizens. Thereupon Kansa’s mothers and wivei^ being
stricken with grief and sorrow, began to lament encircling
y^nsa lying dead on the ground. Hari then expressed his
pgret fpt what had happened, and with eyes saturated with


VlSllNUPURANAM.


37;


tears he consoled them. The slayer of Madhu then released
Ugrasena from prison and placed him on the throne rendered
vacant by the death of his son. Being installed on the
throne the Jadava-chief performed the funeral rites of Kansa
and of the rest of the slain. When the ceremony was fi-
nished and 'Ugrasena had taken his royal seat, Krishna ad-
dressed him and said :— ** 0 Supreme lord, order me freely
what else to be done. By the curse of Yayati, our race can-
not govern— but having me as your servant you may order
.even the celestials. How should kings disobey them

JParASARA said Having said this, Kesava, assuming
human shape summoned mentally the deity of the wind, who
immediately came there, and said to him — ‘‘Proceed, Vayu,
te Indra and tell him to lay aside his pomp, and resign to
•Ugrasena his splendid hall Sudharman : tell him that Krishna
commands him to send the royal hall, the unrivalled gem of
princely courts, for the assemblage of the race of Yadu.*'
Accordingly Vayu went and delivered the message to the
husband of Sachi, who immediately gave up to him the hall
Sudharman, and VSyu conveyed it to the Yadavas, the chiefs
of whom thenceforth possessed this celestial court, emblazon*
ed with jewels, and defended by the arms of Govinda. The
two excellent Yadu youths, versed in all knowledge, and
possessed of all wisdom, then submitted to instruction, as
the disciples of teachers. Accordingly they repaired to
Sindipani— who, though born in KSsi, resided at Avanti—
io study the science of arms, and, becoming his pupils, were
obedient and attentive to their master, exhibiting an example
to all men of the observance of instituted rules. In the
course of sixty-four days they had gone through the elements
of military science, with the treatises on the use of arms, and
directions for the mystic incantations, which secure the aid
of supernatural weapons. . SSndipani, astonished at such
proficiency, and knowing that it exceeded human faculties,
imagined that the sun and the moon had become his scholars.


373


vishnupuranam.


When they had acquired all that he could teach, they said to
him, Now say what present shall be given to you, as the
preceptor^s fee.” The prudent SSlndipani, perceiving that
they were endowed with more than mortal powers, requested
them to give him his dead son, drowned in the sea of
Prabhasa. Taking up their arms, they marched against the
ocean ; but the all-comprehending sea said to them, “ I have
not killed the son of Sandipani j a demon named Panchajana,
who lives in the form of a conch shell, seized the boy ; he is
still under my waters. On hearing this, Krishna plunged
into the sea ; and having slain the vile Panchajana, he ^ook
the conch shell, which was formed of his bones (and bore it
as his horn), the sound of which fills the demon hosts with
dismay, animates the vigour of the gods, and annihilates
unrighteousness. The heroes also recovered the boy from
the pains of death, and restored him in his former person to
his father. Rama and Janarddana then returned to Mathura,
which was well presided over by CJgrasena, and abounded
in a hapgy population both of men and women.


SECTION XXII.


ParaSarA said: — ^The mighty Kansa had married the
two daughters of Jarasandha, one named Asti, the other
Prapti. Jarasandha was king of Magadha, and a very power-
ful .prince *, who, when he heard that Krishna had killed his
son-in-law, was much incensed, and, collecting a large force,
marcjied against Mathura, determined to put the Yadavas and
Krshna to the sword. Accordingly he invested the city with
three and twenty numerous divisions of his forces. RSma
and Janirddana sallied from the town with a slender, but
resolute force, and fought bravely with the armies of
Magadha. The two youthful leaders prudently resolved to
have recourse to their ancient weapons, and accordingly the
bow of Hari, with two quivers filled with exhaustless arrows
and tlie mace called Kaumodaki, and the ploughshare of
Balabhadra, as well as the club Saunanda, descended at a
wish from heaven. Armed with these weapons, they speedily
discomfited the king of Magadha and his hosts, and re-entered
the city in triumph.

Although the wicked king of Magadha, Jarasandha, was
defeated, yet Krishna knew that whilst he escaped alive he
was not subdued ; and in fact, he soon returned with a mighty
force, and was again forced by Rama add Krishna to fly. Eigh-
teen times did the haughty prince of Magadha renew his attack
upon the YSdavas, headed by Krishna ; and was as often
defeated and put to the rout by them, with very inferior
numbers. That the YSdavas were not overpowered by their
foes, was owing to the present might of the portion of the
discus-armed Vishnu. It was tlie pastime of the lord of the
universe, in his^capacity of man, to launch various weapons
Against his enemies ; for what effort of power to annihilate


VrSHNUPURANA#


380

his foes could be necessary to him,' whose fiat ereatfes and
destroys the world? But as subjecting himself to human
customs, he formed alliances the brave, and engaged
in hostilities with the base. HiAad recourse to'the four
devices of policy, or negotiation, prrtfcnts, sowing dissension,
and chastisement ; and sometimes ^en betook himself to
flight. Thus imitating the conduct of human beings, the lord-
of the world pursued at will his sports.


SECTION XZIIt

— :o:—

Parasara said: — SySla having called Gargya, the
BrSihmana, whilst at the cow-pens, impotent, in an assembly
of the Yadavas, they all laughed ; at which he was highly
offended, and repaired to the shores of the western sea,
where he engaged in arduous penance to obtain a son,
who should be a terror to the tribe of Yadu. Propitiating
MahSdeva, and living upon iron sand for twelve years, the
deity at last was pleased with him, and gave him the desired
boon. The king of the Yadanas, who was childless^ became
the friend of GSrgya ; and the latter begot a son by his wife,
who was as black as a bee, and thence called KSlayavana,
The Yavana king having placed his son, whose breast was
as hard as the point of the thunderbolt, upon the throne,
retired to the woods. Inflated with the conceit of his prowess
Kilayavana demanded of Narada who were the most mighty
heroes on earth. To which the sage answered. The
yidavas/’ Accordingly Kilayavana assembled many myri^^^
Mlechhas and barbarians, with a vast armament 0


VISHNUPtJRANAM.


^Jepfiants, cavalry, chariots, aod foot, advanced impatiently
against Mathura and the Yadavas ; wearying every day the
animal that carried him, b^krsensible of fatigue himself.

When Krishna knewHrhis approach, he reflected that
if the ysdavaa encounte^hthe Yavana, they would be so
much weakerted by the cWnict, that they would then be over-
come by the king of Magadha ; that their force was much
reduced by the war with Magadha, whilst that of K^layavana
was unbroken ; and that the enemy might, therefore, be
victorious. Thus the Yadavas were exposed to a double
danger. He resolved therefore to construct a citadel for the
Yadu tribe, that should not be easily taken ; one that even
women might defend, and in which therefore the heroes of
the house of Vrishni should be secure ; one in which the male
combatants of the Yadavas should dread no peril, though
he himself should be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad.
Thus reflecting, Krishna solicited a space of twelve furlongs
from the ocean, and there he built the city of DWarakSL,
defended by high ramparts, and beautified with gardens and
reservoirs of water, crowded with houses and buildings, and
splendid as tlve capital of Indra, Amar^vati. Thither Jan^rd^
dana conducted the inhabitants of Mathura, and then awaited
at that city the approach of Kalayavana.

When the hostile arn>y encamped round MathurS, Krishna,
unarmed, went forth, and beheld the Yavana king. Kalya-
vana, the strong-armed, recognising VSsudeva, pursued him ;
him whom the thoughts of perfect ascetics cannot overtake.
Thus pursued, Krishna entered a large caverDi where
Muchttkufida, the king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana
entering the cave, and beholding a man lying asleep there,
concluded it must be Krishna, and kicked him; at which
Muchukunda awoke, easting on him an angry glance,
the! Yavana was instantly confined, and reduced to ashes.
Por, in a battle between the go& and demons, Machukundai
M {ovmerly contributed to the defeat of the latter ; and^
49


3^2


VISHNUPURANAM.


being overcome with sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon
that he should enjoy a long repose. Sleep long and soundly/’
said the gods ; ** whoever disturbly^oy shall be instantly burnt
to ashes by fire emanating from^^^/ body.*'

Having burnt up the iniquitof^^^avana, and beholding the
foe of Madhu, Muchukunda asken pirn who he was. “lam
born,” he replied, “ in the lunar race, in the tribe of Yadu, and
am the son of Vasudeva.*' Muchukunda, recollecting the
prophecy of old Garga, fell down before the lord of all, Hari,
saying. “ Thou art known, supreme lord, to be a portion of
Vishnu ; for it was said of old by Garga, that at the end ^f the
twenty-eighth DwSpara age, Hari would be born in the family
of Yadu. Thou art he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind
for thy glory 1 am unable to endure. Thy words are of
deeper tone than the muttering of the rain cloud; and earth
sinks down beneath the pressure of thy feet. As in the battlft
between the gods and demons, the Asuras were unable to
sustain my lustre, so even am I incapable of bearing thy
radiance. Thon alone art the refuge of every living being
who has lighted on the world. Do thou, who art the alleviator
of all distress, show favour upon me, and remove from me all
that is evil. Thou art the oceans, the mountains, the rivers,
the forests ; thou art earth, sky, air, water, and fire ; thou art
mind, intelligence, the unevolved principle, vital airs, the lord,
life — the soul ; all that is beyond the soul; the all-pervading;
exempt from the vicissitudes of birth ; devoid of sensible
properties, sound and the like: undecayiug, illimitable,
imperishable, subject neither to increase nor diminution ;
thou art that which is Brahma, without beginning or end.
From thee the immortals, the progenitors, the Yakshas,
Gandharvas, and Kinnaras, the Siddhas, the nymphs of
heaven, men, animals, birds, deers, reptiles, and all the veget-
able world, proceed ; and all that has been, or will be, or is
now movable or fixed. All that is amorphous or has form,
all that is subtile, gross, salable, or movable, thou art, 0


ViSHNUPURANAM.


383


creator of the world j and beside thee there is not anything.
0 lord, I have been whirled round in the circle of worldly
existence for ever, and lyA suffered the three classes of
afHiction, and there i; j^9st whatever. I have mistaken
pains for pleasures, suit i&Bours for a pool of water ; and
their enjoyment has/yiq^d me nothing but sorrow. The
earth, dominion, forces, treasures, friends^ children, wife,
dependants, all the objects of sense, have I possessed
imagining them to be sources of happiness; but 1 found that
in their changeable nature, O lord, they were nothing but
vcxatipn. The gods themselves though high in heaven, were
in need of my alliance. Where then is everlasting repose ?
Who, without adoring thee, who art the origin of all worlds,
shall attain, 0 supreme deity, that rest which endures for
ever? Beguiled by thy delusions, and ignorant of thy nature,
men, after suffering the various penalties of birth, death, and
infirmity, behold the countenance of the king of ghosts, and
suffer in hell dreadful tortures, the reward of their own deeds.
Addicted to sensual objects through thy delusions, I revolve
in the whirlpool of selfishness and pride ; and hence I come
to thee, as my final refuge who art the lord deserving of all
homage, than whom there is no other asylum ; my mind
afflicted with repentance for my trust in the world, and
desiring the fulness of felicity, emancipation from all
existence.*'


SBCTIOW TXIV


Thus praised by the wise Muchukunda, the sovereign o(
all things, the eternal lord, Hari, said to him, *‘Go to whatever
celestial regions you wish, lord of men, possessed of might
irresistible, honoured by my favour. When you have fully
enjoyed all heavenly pleasures, you shall be born® in a
distinguished family, retaining the recollection of your former
births ; and you shall finally obtain emancipation. Having
heard this promise, and prostrated himself before Achyuta,
the lord of the world, Muchukunda, went forth from the cave
and beholding men of diminutive stature, now first knew that
the Kali age had arrived. The king therefore departed to
Gandharaddana, the shrine of Naranirdyana, to perform
penance.

Krishna having by this stratagem destroyed his enemy
returned to Mathura and took captive his army, rich in
horses, elephants and cars, which he conducted to Dwaraka,
and delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu race was relieved
from all fear of invasion. Baladeva, when hostilities had
entirely ceased, being desirous of seeing his kinsmen, went
to Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed with the
herdsmen and their females, with affection and respect. By
some, the elders, he was embraced ; others, the juniors, he
embraced ; and with those of his own age, male or female, he
talked and laughed. The cowherds made many kind speeches
to Halayudha ; but some of the Gopis spoke to him with the
affectation of anger, or with feelings of jealousy, as they
inquired after the loves of Krishna with the women of
Mathura. ‘Is all well with the fickle and inconstant Krishna.
Md they ; ^‘Does the volatile swain, the friend of an instant


VISHNUPURANAM.


385


amo'^e the women of the city by laughing at our rustic efforts
(to please him) ? Does h&ever think of us, singing in chorus
to his sons ? Will come here once again to see his

.mother ? But whi^t things ? It is a different tale

to tell for him witho^iY^Xind for us without him. Father,
mother, brother, kus^^, kin, what have we not abandoned
for him ; but he is a monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us,
does not Krishna talk of coming here ? Falsehood is never,
0 Krishna, to be uttered by thee. Verily this is Damodara,
this is Govinda, who has given up his heart to the damsels of
the, city, who has no longer any regard for u-, but looks upon
,us with disdain.'' So saying, the Gopis, whose minds were
fixed on Krishna, addressed Rama in his place, calling him
D&modara and Govinda, and laughed and were merry ; and
RAma consoled them by communicating to them agreeable,
.modest, affectionate, and gentle messages from Krishna.
With the cow-herds he talked mirthfully, as he had been wont
io do. and rambled along with them over the lands of Vraja.


SECTION XXV.


W^HILST the mighty Sesha, the upholder of the globe,
was thus engaged in wandering amidst the forests with the
herdsmen, in the disguise of a mortal — having rendered great
devices to earth) and still' considering what more was to be
achieved^Varuna, in order to provide for his recreation, said
his vyiife VAfuni.(tht goddess ol wine), “Thou, MadkA, aitj


386


VISHNUPURANAM.


ever acceptable to the powerful Ananta ; go thereforei auspi*
cious and kind goddess, and promote his enjoyments/’
Obeying these commands, Varuirf^i^t and established her-
self in the hollow of a Kadamba bee woods of Vrindi-

vana. Baladeva, roaming about, cfJ^Vrhere, and smelling
the pleasant fragrance of liquor, resir| ed his ancient passion
for strong drink. The holder of the ploughshare observing
the vinous drops distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much
delighted, and gathered and quaffed them along with the
herdsmen and the Gopis, whilst those who were skilful with
voice and lute celebrated him in their songs. Bring inebryit-
ed with the wine, and the drops of perspiration standing like
pearls upon his limbs, he called out, not knowing what he
said, “Come hither, YamunS. river, I want to bathe.'^ The
river, disregarding the words of a drunken man came not
at his bidding : on which Rama in a rage took up his plough-
share, which he plunged into her bank, and dragged her to
him, calling out, “Will you not come, you jade, will you not
C04ne? Now go where you please (if you can).” Thus say-
ing, he compelled the dark river to quit its ordinary course,
and follow him whithersoever he wandered through the wood.
Assuming a mortal figure, the Yamuni, with distracted looks,
approached Balabhadra, and entreated him to pardon her, and
let her go: but he replied, “ I will drag you with my plough-
share in a thousand directions, since you contemn my prowess
and strength.” At last, however, appeased by her reiterated
prayers, he let her go, after she had watered all the country.
When he had bathed, the goddess of beauty, Lakshmi, came
and gave him a beautiful lotus to place in one ear, and an

ear-riag for the other; a fresh necklace of lotus flowers, sent

by Varuna ; and garments of a dark blue colour, as cosily as
the wealth of the ocean : and thus decorated wdth a lotus in
one ear, a ring in the other, dresjsed in blue garments, and
wearing a garland, Balarftma appeared united with loveliness.
Thus decorated, Rima sported two months in Vraja, and then


VISHNUPURANAM.


38;


returned to DwirakS, where he married Revati, the daughter
of king Raivata, by lyfom he had two sons, Nish^tha and
Ulmuka.


SECTION XXVL

BhiSHMaKA was king of Vidarbha, residing at Kundina.
He had a son named Rukmin, and a beautiful daughter term-
ed Rukmini. Krishna fell in love with the latter, and solicited
her in marriage : but her brother who hated Krishna, would
not assent to the espousals. At the suggestion of Jarasandha,
and with the concurrence of his son, the powerful sovereign
Bhishmaka affianced Rukmini to Sisupala. In order to cele-
brate the nuptials, JarSsandha and other princes, the friends
of Sisupala, assembled in the capital of Vidharba; and
Krishna, attended by Balabhadra and many other YSdavaS,
also went to Kundina to witness the wedding. When there,
Hari contrived on the eve of the nuptials, to carry off the
princess, leaving Rama and his kinsmen to sustain the weight
of his enemies. Paundraka, the illustrious Dantavakra,
Viduratha, Sisupala, JarSsandha, Salya, and other kings, in-
dignant at the insult, exerted themselves to kill Krishna, but
were repelled by Balarama and the Y&davas. Rukmin,
vowing that he would never enter Kundina again until he had
slain Kesava in fight, persued and overtook him. In the
combat that ensued, Krishna destroyed with his discus, as if
in sport the host of Rukmin, with all its horses, and elephants,
ind foot, and chariots, and overthrew him, and hurled him on


VISKNUftlltAtVJItM.


38 ^

the ground; and woti*ld have put hii^ to deaths but was With.,
held by the entreaties of Rukm5ni^*,^He is my only brother,”
she exclaimed, “and must not thee : restrain your

wrath, 0 divine Lord, and give brother in charity”.

Thus addressed by her, Krishna, no acts affect, spared
Rukmin ; and he (in pursuance of hW Ww) founded the city
Bhojakata, and ever afterwards dwelt tlierein. After the
defeat of Rukmtn, Krishna married R'ukmini in due form,
having first made her his own by the RSkhasa ritual. She
bore him the gallant Pradyumna, a portion of the deity of
love. The demoa* Sambara carried him^ offy but he slew
the demon.


SECTION ixvir


M[aitheya saidr—Row, Muni.^happened it that the here
Pradyumna was carried away by Sambara? And in what
manner was the mighty Sambara killed by Pradyumna?

Parasaha said : — ^When Pradyumna was but six days’
old, be was stolen from the lying-in chamber by Sambara,
terrible as death ; for the demon foreknew that Ptadyumna,
if he lived, would be his destroyer. Taking away the boy^
Sambara cast him into the ocean, swarrhing with monsters,
into whirlpool of roaring waves, the haunt of the huge
creatures of the deep. A large fish swallowed the child, but
he died not, and was born anew froi» Its belly : for that fish>
ndth others, was caught by the fishermen, and delivered by
them td the great Asura Sambara.^ His wife MlyddevI, the


3 *#


inistrew of the household, lorded over the cooks. And she
fcspied, when the fish w/t^cut open, beautiful child looking
like a new shoot of tree of love. When struck

with curiosity she ^who is this child? How

has it come into the fish ?’ Narada came and

said to her : — '’This is tSi^on of Krishna who creates and
destroys the universe. He was stolen away from the nursery
room by Samvara. He was devoured by the fish when!
thrown into the ocean ; now he has come itnder thy control ;
do thou, O beautiful damsel, teaderly rear this jewel of
fflankjnd.’’

ParASARA said . —Thus addressed by Nllrada, she took
charge of the child and brought it up from boyhood being
attracted by the beauty of his person. 0 great saint, when
the boy attained to youth, MSySvati^ moving like a she-
clephent, begait to cherish desire for him. And fixing her
mind arid eyes upon the high-minded Pradyumna, May^Vati,
blinded with lust, gave unto him all her magic powers,
fiehoding that fotus-eyed damsel thus passionately attach-
ed unto him, Krishna^s son said to her : — “Why dost thou
indulge in feelings which da not become a mother j” Shef
said to him : — “Thou art not my son ; thou art the son of
the illustrious Vishnu ) Kala Samvara stole thee and threw
into the ocean ; thou wast swallowed by a fish but rescued by
me from its belly cut open. O lord thy loving mother is
still weeping for thee.“

PARASAkA said; — Hearing those words Pradyumna in-
vited Samvara for battle. And worked up with ire that
highly powerful one fought with him. fn the battle the sort
of MAdhava killed the entire host of Samvara. Having
^oven times baffied the delusions and mastered them inf the
eighth he destroyed that deirion Samvara. And haviitg got

into the welkin with her he proceeded to his fathers
house. And beholding him descend into the iriner apartment ‘
vrtth Mtylvati, Krblint^s wives considered him u Krishna

50


39 ®


VISHNUPURANAM.


himself. The highly beautiful Rultmini with her eyes full
of tears lovingly said : — “Blessed ^ujthe woman who has got
such a son in the bloom of 9^>ve my

son Pradyumna would have beewiji^'bps age. Who is the
fortunate mother adorned by affection I feel

for thee and from thy appear^u^i{.ne-thinka thou art as-
suredly the son of Hari.^*

Parasara said:— At this time Krishna arrived there with
Narada; and the latter delightedly said to Rukmini. “This is
thy own son who has come hereafter sUying Sambara, by whom
he was carried away when a child from the lying-in chamber.
This is the pious MSySlvati, his opouse and not the wife of
Samvara. Hear the reason ; when Manmatha had perished,
the goddess of beauty, being desirous of effecting his
revival, fascinated Samvara by the charms of her delusive
form. And she, having eyes rolling with inebrietion, exhibit-
ed herself to him in various illusory enjoyments. This thy
son is the incarnation of Kama and this his spouse is the
goddess Rati. Do not doubt the least that she is your
daugter-in-law.^’

Thereupon Rukmini and Keshava were worked up with
delight and the whole city resounded with the exclamations
of praise. And beholding Rukmini regain a son who bad
been long lost all the people of DwSlrakSL were surprised.


SECTION XXVIIL

P ARASARA said Rukmini bore Krishna these other
apns Charudeshna, Sudeshna, Charudeba, Sushena^ Charu*
Bhadracharu, Charuvillda^ Suebaru and the very power*


VI5HNUPUAANAM.


391


tul Charu ; also one daughter Charumati. Krishna had seven
other beautiful wives :-/fl|ajindi^ MitaravindS, the pious
Nagnajiti, the divin,^^|^^f9abati ; the beautiful Rohini ;
Madri, the excellent ^^MKrely daughter of the king of
Madra ; Satyabhamai t'lp^^hter of Satrajit and LakshmanSl
having lovely* smiles, '^^siaes these he had also sixteen
thousand other wives. The highly powerful Pradyumna took
the beautiful daughter of Rukmin at her public choice of a
husband and she too accepted Hari's son. Of her was born
a highly powerful son Aniruddha, fierce in fight on account
of p( 0 wess and subduer of enemies. Keshava demanded in
marriage the grand daughter of Rukmin and though the
latter was inimical to Krishna he gave him his grand
daughter. On the occasion of his nuptials Rama and other
Yidavas accompanied Krishna to Bhojakata, the city of
Rukmin. After the wedding had been finished several of
the kings headed by him of Kalinga said to Rukmin
"Although the wielder of plough-share is ignorant of dice he
has got a great passion for it ; why may we not fight with him
and beat him in play

PARASARa said : — The powerful Rukmin replied to the
kings, saying so be it ” and he engaged BalarSma at a game
of dice in the palace. Balarirna lost to Rukmin a thousand
gold coins ; he bated a second time and lost another thousand
to Rukmin. And the third time he staked ten thousand
Niskshas and this time also won Rukmin the foremost of
those expert of gambling, At this time the king of Kalinga
laughed aloud and the weak and vain Rukmin groaned and
said: — *‘By me this Baladava, ignorant of gambling, has
been defeated ; and blinded by a vain passion for play he
think that he understands dice.'* Beholding the king of
Kalinga laugh aloud and hearig the contemptuous words of
Rvikmin the wielder of plough-share was worked up with
ire and increased his stake to ten millions of Niskshas
Kukmirt accepted the challenge and threw dice.


VltHMUIPUItANAM.


»*

This time Baladeva won and cried aloud. ^This stake
is mine.'’ Rukmin cried ioudjl^f^nd said that he was the
winner. ’*Tell no lies Bala” true that the

stake is yours, but I did not h(!o this — although you
have won this, still I am the winR^^av/

Thereupon a deep voice w^^i^Cird in the welkin in.
creasing the more the ire of the high-minded Baladeva,
saying :—-**Baladeva has justly won the whole amount;
Rukmin speaks lies ; although he did not accept the pledge
in words he did so by his acts.” Thus inflamed and having
his eyes reddened with rage, Balarama got up and ^ruck
Rukmin with the board on which the game was played and
slew him. And holding the trembling king of Kalinga,
Bala forcibly knocked out the teeth which he had shown
when he laughed. And uprooting a huge golden column
be, enraged, killed therewith all those princes who had
assisted his adversaries. Thereupon, 0 twice-born one, Bala
being enraged, the whole circle cried out with fear and
fled on all sides from his terror. When the stayer of Madhu
beard that Rukmin had been slain by Bala he could not
speak anything, being afraid of Rukmin on one hand and
Bala on the other. Thereupon taking with him the newly
wedded Aniruddha and the Yadu tribe he returned to
PwSirakS.


SECTION XXIX,

Parasara said: — Thereupon Sakra, the lord of the
three worlds, came mounted on his infuriated elephant^
AirSivata to visit Sauri at DwSrak&. Having entered Dw&raki
welcomed by Hari he communicated unto hi«


ViSMNUVUIUNAM.


393


the actiotfs of the demon SNataka. (He said) “ 0 slayer of
Madhui by thee, the the deities, although situated

in mortal condition, afflictions have been soothed ;

thou bast slain Ari|j^|Bhenuka ChILnura, Mjushtika and
Kesin— all the demoi^^were slaying the ascetics. Kansa
Kavalayapida and -destroying Putana, as well as

other oppresso-rs of tie world have all been slain by thee.
The three worlds being protected by thy valour and wisdom,
.the deities, obtaining the share of sacrifices undertaken by
the devout, enjoy satisfaction. Hear, 0 JanSrddana, for
whft I have come to thee and try to remedy it. 0 slayer
,of enemies, residing in the city of Pragyotish, the demon
Naraka, son of Bhumi, has been inflicting the creatures.
Carrying of! the maidens of the celestials, saints, demons
and kings he shuts them up in his own palace. He has
carried away the umbrella of Varuna,. always producing
water, the jewel mountain crest of Mandara, and the nectar-
dropping ear-rings of my mother Aditi ; and he now
demands my elephant AirSvat 0 Govinda, I have thus
related unto thee the oppressions of the demon Naraka*— •
do thou now consider what thou shouldst do in tbis.'^
Having heard this, the illustrious son of Devaki gently
smiled and taking Vasava by the hand rose up from the
-excellent seat. Thereupon the lord thinking of the eater
of serpents Garuda, he immediately appeared there. And
having first placed Saty;tbh&mi on his back he ascended
and flew to the city of Pragyotish. Having ascended the
elephant Airivat, Indra, the lord of the celestials, set out for
his city in the sight of the inhabitants of DwSraki.

O foremost of twice-born ones, the four sides of the city
Pragyotish to the extent of a yojana were environed by
nooses made by the demon Mura, whose edges were as sharp
M razors. But throwing his discus Sudarshana amongst
them Hari sundered iliem into pie^. Thereupon Mura
tose up but Krishna killed Wriit bil seven thousand


394 vishhupuranam.

80 QS like so many moths with the flame of the ed^e of his
diactts. Having slain MurA? Hay^^ia, and Panchajana the
wise Hari soon reached thoi cHy There ensued

a dreadful conflict with Naraka'8^^¥ b|' <vhich Govinda slew
thousands of demons. And tbeAJ^v/ul annihilator of the
demon tribe cut in two with his ofeJr^Bhumi's' son Naraka
who came there showering arrows and weapons upon the
celestials. The demon Naraka being slain, Earth, taking the
two ear-rings of Aditi, approached the lord of the world and
said “ 0 lord, when 1 was upheld by thee in the shape of
a boar, then this my son was engendered by thy cont;act
Thou didst confer this son upon me and thou hast slain him
now. Do thou now take this pair of ear-rings and protect
his progeny. Thou, 0 lord, whose aspect is ever pleasing,
hast incarnated on this sphere a portion of thyself to
lighten my burden. Thou art the eternal creator, preserver
and destroyer of the universe, the origin of all the worlds
and identical with the universe ; how can we worthily chant
thy glories? Thou art the pervader and that which is per-
vaded, the act, the agent and the effect— thou art the soul of
all creatures and how can we sufficiently chant thy glories?
Thou art the great soul — the sentient and living soul of all
beings and imperishable — there is no praise worthy of thee
-^how can we chant thy glories ? Have pity, 0 universal
soul and forgive the iniquities which Naraka has committed.
Verily it is for his purification that he hath been killed by
thcc.'^

Parasara said Having replied to the Earth saying “so
be it’’ the lord, who is the substance of all creatures, took
various jewels from Naraka's abode. Having entered the
female apartment the highly powerful Krishna saw sixteen
thousand and one hundred damsels. He also found in the
palace sixteen thousand huge elephants each having four
twenty-one lakhs of hoirses of Kfimboja and otheir
«k;^illeQt breeds. All those Govinda sent U Dwl^kl


VISI NUPURANAM.


395


Gh«rg« of the servants
Vafuna's umbrella and
And hawng ascendec
city of celestials to


of Naraka. Thereupon he placed
^Iden mountain on Garuda’s back,
atyablikma he repaired to the
foil Aditi her car-rings.


SECTION XXX.


Garrying the umbrella of Varuna, the jewel mountain
and Hrishikesh with his spouse on liis back, Garuda went
along lightly and sportively. When Hari arrived at the gate
of Swarga he blew his conoh on which the celestials came
forward to meet him bearing respectful offerings. Having
received the homage of the celestials he proceeded to the
palace of the mother of gods whose turrets resembled the
white clouds and found Aditi there. Thereupon having bowed
unto her along with the king of celestials he conferred the
pair of ear-rings upon her and related unto her the destrac-
tion of the demon Naraka. Well-pleased, Aditi, the mother
of Gods with her thoughts wholly devoted unto Hari, the
protector of the universe, began to chant liis glories;—
‘'Salutation unto thee, 0 tliQu having lotus eyes, who re-
movest all fear of the devoties, who art eternal, the soul
of all creatures, the creator of all and identical with all.
Thou art at one with the three qualities and the creator of
tnind, intellect and senses. Thou art beyond the three
qualities, exempt from contraries, pure, residing in the
hearts of all; void of colour, extension and every transient
modi6cation and uninfluenced by the changes of birth and
^ath And sleep and waking. Thou art evening, night and


30


VISHNUPURANAM.


day, earth, sky, air, water and fire, mind, intellect and' indivi.^
duality. Thou art the agent ofy^'Hion, preservation and
destruction and the lord overHu^j^ent--^^ appearest
in various forms which are Vishnu and

Siva—and thou art the masterKJ^aw/i all these thy forms.
Thou art Gods, Yakshas, DaK^^^^’Rakshasas, Sidhas,
Pannagas, Kushmandas, PisSchas, Gandharvas, men, animals,
deer, elephants, reptiles, trees, shrubs, creepers, climbers,
and grasses— all things, large, middling, and srtall, immense
or minute ; thou art all bodies whatsoever composed of
aggregated atoms. Those who are ignorant of thy true
nature cannot understand thy illusio-n — the fools (only)
follow tlie illusion and think ' this is mine,*' O Lord, thy
illusion is the mother of the world — and the notions ^ t am,
this is mine* are but delusions. 0 Lord, those meti, who
attentive to their duties, worship thee, obtain salvation after
traversing these illusions. Brahma and all the celestials,
men and animals are alike enshrouded by the thick darkness
of delusion in the abyss of the illusions of Vishnu. This is
also thy delusion, 0 lord, that men having worshipped thee
seek the gratification of desires and their own preservation.
That people having worshipped thee desire for the total
annihilation of themselves is but the outcome of thy delu*
sion. That I have worshipped thee for son and the des-
truction of the enemies and not for salvation is also the
result of thy fascination. It is the fruit of the iniqiuitouff
acts of the impious (to pray for vain things to one who- is*
able to give better things) like asking for a rag to cover
nakedness from the tree that confers whatever is solicited
from it. Be propitious with me, 0 thou imperishable, who
hast deceived the whole universe with thy delusion. 0 lord
of creatures, do thou remove this ignorance of mine-^hc
notion that I am wise ; salutation unto thee, the holder of
discus ; salutation unto thee the wietder of bow ; saluUtioo
unto Uiee, the holder of a club ; salutation unto tbeO« the


VISHNUPURANAM.


397


holder of a conch. 0 god, I do perceive thy perceptible
form— *-but cannot perceivfi^L real form ; do thou therefore
be propitious with me.

ParaSARA said : — mother of gods, having thus
chanted the glories be smiling said Thou art

our mother, 0 goddess, propitious and confer upon

me a boon.”

Aditi said i — So be it, ever as thou wilt ; 0 foremost of
men, as long as shalt thou dwell in the land of mortals thou
shalt be invincible by celestials and demons.” Thereupon
SatyaJjhamS, along with Sachi, bowed unto Aditi again and
again and said. ” Be thou pleased.” Whereto Aditi replied
saying: — ” Fair-browed dame, by my favour thou shalt never
experience decrepitude or loss of beauty ; thou shalt be of a
blameless person and asylum of all graces.''

PakasAR^ said : — Being commanded by Aditi, the lord of
the celestials duly honored Janarddana. Thereudon Krishna,
accompanied by Satyabhama beheld Nandana and other
pleasant gardens of the celestials. There Kesava, the lord
of the universe and the slayer of Kesi, saw PSrijata, the
favourite of Sachi, having golden bark, young sprouting leaves
of a copper colour and bearing numerous fragrant clusters of
flowers, and wliicli was produced when the ocean was churned
for ambrosia. Beholding that tree, 0 foremost of twice-born
ones, SatyabliSma said to Govinda. ” Why should not this
celestial tree be taken to DwarakA. If what yon always
say is true that I am really dear to you then take this tree
from here for the gardens of my dwelling. 0 Krishna, you
always say 0 Satya, neither Rukmini noi Jamvabati is be*
loved unto me like thee,” if this is true and not mere flattery
flien let this PArij&ta be the ornament of my dwelling.
Wearing the flowers of this tree in the braids of my hair
I wish to appear graceful amidst my fellow queens.”

Parasara said Thus requested by Satyabh&m&’Hari,
smiled and taking the Pftrijata plant placed it upon Garuda.
5 *


398


VISMNUPURANAM.


The guards said : ‘^0 Govinda, this tree belongs to Sachi,
the queen of the king of celesti[^; it is not becoming for
thee to remove it. When churned by the

celestials this tree was prodtjlWt)^^ providing Sachi with
flowery ornaments ; thou shajj^^^^go with it uncalched.
This is the property of one^-#ij/ whose countenance the
king of the celestials delights to look j it is out of ignorance
that thou dost attempt to take it — taking this no one shall be
suffered to depart in peace. Forsooth shall the celestial
chief punish this audacity ; and when he shall take up his
thunderbolt all the deities shall follow him. 0 thou im-
perishable, it is not proper for thee, to enter into conflict
with all the divinities. The wise never undertake a work
that terminates fatally.” The guards having said this
Satyabham^ was greatly worked up with ire and said : “ How
does this PSrijata belong to Sachi? Who is Sakra, the lord
of the celestials? If this had been produced when the ocean
was churned by the celestials then all have equal right over
it— why shall Vasava alone possess it ? 0 ye warders of
the garden, ambrosia, the moon and Lakshmi are the common
properties of all ; so is this Parijata tree. If Sachi has taken
possession of it forcibly by the valour of her husband, do ye
go and communicate unto her that SatyabhamS is taking it
away and let not Sachi forgive her. Do ye soon go to her
and according to my instructions tell her that Satyabhami
has given vent to these proud words. ‘ If thou art dear
unto thy husband, if he is under thine control then let him
take back the Parijata tree which my husband is taking away.
I know thy husband Sakra is the master of the three worlds.
Still being a mortal I take away this Panjata tree.”

PaRASAkA said: — Being thus accosted, the warders went
to Sachi and communicated unto her everything duly. And
Sachi excited the lord of the three worlds. Thereupon
accompanied by the army of the celestials, Indra, issued
out to fight with Hari, in defence of the Parijata tree. The


VISHNUPURANAM.


399


celestials were armed with clubs, swords, maces and darts
and Indra wielded the As soon as Govinda

beheld the king of th}^»fM|Bials proceeding against hinfi
mounted on his eleph;^^P®Jided by the immortals he blew
his shell so that all ^ll^^’^Mrtes were filled with the sound
thereof and he smiling'^j^howered myriods of shafts upon
his assailants. When the^ celestials saw that all the direc*
tions and atmosphere were overspread with arrows they
also in return hurled numberless missiles. But all these,
the slayer of Madhu, and the lord of the three worlds, sundered
easily* into a thousand pieces with his shafts. Garuda, the
devourer of serpants, laid hold of the noose of the king of
seas and tore it to pieces with his beak as if it had been
a little snake. Devaki’s son hurled his mace at the club of
Yama and cast it broken upon the ground ; he sundered in
pieces the litter of the lord of riches with his discus ; his
eye-looks overclouded the radiance of the sun ; he cut Agni
into a hundred parts with his shafts and scattered the Vasus
through the realms of the space; he sundered with his discus
the points of the tridents of the Rudras and cast themselves
upon the earth ; and with the arrows shot from his bow he
scattered the Sadhyas, Viswas, Maruts and Gandharbas
through the sky, like fleeces of cotton from the pods of the
Simal tree. Garuda also diligently plied his beak and
wings and bit and bruised and scratched the celestials
who opposed his lord. Like unto two heavy clouds shower-
ing raindrops the king of the celestials and the slayer of
Madhu overpowered each other with numberless arrows.
Garuda fought with Airavata in that conflict and Janirddana
engaged with his discus with all the celestials. When all
other weapons had been sundered into pieces Indra stood
armed with his thunderbolt and Krishna with the discus
Sudarshana. Beholding them thus ready for fight all the
inhabitants of the three worlds, cried aloud Alas i Alsa ! ''
in vain did Indra hurl his bolt for Hari caught and arrested


400


VfSHNUPURANAM.


it He however, did not hurl his discus, but only called out
to Indra to stay. Beholding Indj&^'sarmed and his elephant
disabled by Garuda and the to fly away Satya-

bhiima said to him : — 0 hing worlds, it becomes

not the husband of Sachi to riK®Jgv|'. . She will approach
you adorned with PSrijSta gerlm^^. What 'shalt thou do
with the kingdom of heaven when no longer thou dost
behold Sachi approach thee, like before, embellished with
Parijata garlands ? Fly not 0 Sakra ; you must suffer
shame, take the Parijata; let the celestials be no longer
annoyed. Worked up with the pride of her husband Sachi
has not welcomed me to her dwelling with her respectful
presents. 0 king of the celestials, I am a woman and there-
fore of light purpose and am anxious of my husband^s fame;
for this I have instituted this fight with thee. I do not re-
quire the Parijata any more. Why shall we steal another's
property ? What female is not inflated with the pride of
her husband? But she is proud of her beauty.”

PakASaRa said : — Thus addressed by her the king of
the celestials turned back and said 0 wrathful dame,
thou shouldst not afflict thy friend with further reproaches. I
am not ashamed of being defeated by him who is the author
of the creation, preservation and destruction of the world,
who is the substance of all tilings, and in whom the universe
exists, without beginning or middle, and from whom and by
whom at one with all things, it proceeds and will cease to
be. 0 goddess, what disgrace it is to any one, to be van-
quished by him who is the agent of creation, preservation and
destruction? His form, though infinitely subtle, is the parent
of all worlds and is known to those only by whom all that may
be known is known ; who is capable of defeating the unborn,
unconstituted, eternal lord, who has, of his own accord, des-
cended for the behoof of the world ?


SM?tION XXXI.


TThuS chanted the king of the celestials, Kesava
smiled and replied gravely saying : — “Thou art, 0 Indra,
the king of the celestials: we are mere mortals, 0 king of
the universe: thou must therefore forgive me, for the offence
1 have committed. Let this Parijata tree be taken to its
proper place. I remove it to satisfy Satya^s desire. Take
^back also this thy thunderbolt which thou didst hurl at me ;
for this is your proper weapon — O slayer of thy enemies.’^
Whereto Indra replied, saying : — 0 lord, thou dost beguile
us in calling thyself mortal. We are endowed with subtlety
of discernment and therefore know thee as gifted with six
qualities. Whoever thou mayst be, O slayer of thine
enemies, thou art engaged in the active preservation of earth
and thou removest the thorns implanted in her bossom. 0
Krishna, do thou take this Parijata tree to the city of Dw^raka
and when thou shalt renounce this land of mortals it shall
no longer remain on earth.’'

PAkaSARA said Having agreed to the proposal of the
king of the celestials Hari returned to earth eulogised by
attendant sages, saints and quiristers of heaven.

When Krishna arrived over the city of DwSraka he blew
his conch and delighted the inhabitants with the sound.
Thereupon alighting from Garuda he proceeded with Satya-
bhama to her garden, and there planted the great Parijata
tree the smell of which extended over the earth for three
furlongs and an approach to which enabled every one to
recollect the events of a pristine existence. And beholding
their faces in that tree the Yadavas know themselves in their
(original) celestial forms. Then Krishna took possession


VISHNUPURANAM.


492

of wealth, elephants, horses and v^men which he had re-
covered from Narakaand which haK*^?n brought to DwarakS
by the servants of the demon ; aiWWij%^'auspicious hour he
married all the maidens whoml^W^t'had carried off from
their friends ; and simultaneously time in different

mansions he received the hands the damsels. The

number of the maidens was sixteen thousand and one
hundred and in so many forms did the slayer of Madhu
appear, so that every one of them thought that he had wedded
her in his single person. Hari the creator of the world and
the assumer of the universal shape lived severally in lilie
mansion of each of these his wives.


SECTION XXXIL

P ARASARA said I have enumerated to you Pradyumna
and other sons begotten on Rukmini by Krishna. Satya-
bhamS bore Bhanu and Bhairika. The sons of Rohini were
Diptimat, Tamrepakshi and others; Jamvabati gave birth to
the powerful Samba and other sons. Bhadravinda and other
valiant youths were the sons of Nagnajiti. Saivya bore several
sons of whom Sangramajit was the chief. Vikra and others
were begotten by Hari on Madri. LakshmanA gave birth to
Gatravat and others; and Sruta and others were the sons of
KAlindi. Besides Krishna had sons by his other wives in all
one hundred and eighty thousand. The eldest of the whole was
Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini ; his son was Aniruddha, whose
son was Vraja; his mother was llsha, the daughter of Bina
the grand daughter of BAIi, whom Aniruddha won in war.
On that occasion a dreadful onset endued between Hari and


viSHNUPURANAM.


403


Sankara in which the thousand arms of Bana were cut off by
the discus of the


MAITREYA said : it, 0 venerable Brahman, that a

contest took place, of Usha, between Siva and
Krishna? And in thousand

arms of Baoa? I an^^c^y stricken with curiosity to hear
this story of Hari — do thou, O venerable Sir, relate this.

ParaSARa said : Having seen Parvati dallying with his
lord Sambhu, Usha, the daughter of Bana, was inspired with
a similar desire. The charming Gauri, knowing the hearts
of^ all, said to her: — “Do not grieve; you shall have a
husband.” “But when will this be and who shall be my
husband?” thought UshSl within herself, on which Pelrvati
said : — “He who shall appear to you, princess, in a dream,
on the twelfth lunation of the light half of VaishSlk, shall be
your lord.“ Accordingly, in consonance with the goddess'
foretelling a youth appeared in dream to UshA on that lunar
day, of whom she became enamoured. When she got up and
no longer saw him she was distressed with grief and not
caring for modesty asked of her companion whither he had
gone. This companion and friend of the princess was
Chitralekha, the daughter of Kubandha, the minister of Bans.
She said to Usha of whom do you speak?” But ashamed
she did not reply. However gaining her confidence Chitra-
lekha heard from her everything. And again Usha request-
ed her who had been informed of all, to devise means by
which she might be united with the person whom she had
beheld in dream.


PaRaSARA said :^Thereupon Chitralekha painted the
figures of the most eminent celestials, demons, spitits and
mortals and showed them to Usha. Putting aside the like-
nesses of celestials, spirits, snake-gods and demons, the
princess selected those of mortals and amongst them the
heroes of the races of Andhaka and Vrishni. And when she
found the portraits she \yas bewildered by shame ; then she took


VIsiHNUPURANAM.


404

his eyes away with shame from the parirait of Pradytrhina.
But as soon as she saw the picturejC^us son, the object of
her passions, she set aside all jMij^.ess and with wide
expanded eyes, cried aloud, ‘'ThW^ this is he,^ Her
friend, who was gifted with magic|Pi 4 v^, requested her to be
cheerful and started for Dwiraka tM^^* the air. '


SECTION XXXIIL


00—

P ARASARa said : — Before this, once Bana prayed to the
three-eyed deity saying “0 lord I am humiliated by the
possession of a thousand arms ; let some conflict take place
in which I may make use of my arms. Without any war what
is the use of these arms ; they are but a burden to me.

Sankara said : — " When this peacock banner shall be
broken thou sbalt have war, the deh’ght of the evil spirits
that live on human flesh.” Thereupon pleased and bowing
unto Sankara he returned to his house where he found the
standard broken which increased his joy.

At that time the foremost of Apsaras, Chitralekha, came
back from Dwaraka and by virtue of her m-agic powers
brought Aniruddha with her. Finding him there with Ush5,
the warders of the inner appartments reported it to the king,
who immediately sent a number of his retinue to seire the
prince. But taking up an iron club the powerful youth
killed all his adversaries. Thereat Bana ascended his
chariot, proceeded against him and tried to kill him. Finding
however that Aniruddha was not to be vanquished by power
he followed the counsel of his nvinister and brought his
magical faculties into the conflict, by which he succeeded in
capturing the Yadu prince and binding him in serpent bonds.


VlSIlNUlFUftANAM.


403

Wlien Anirudha was found missing from Dwaravati
j^nd the Ylldavas were another whither he

had gone, NArada camjJJS(iym>mmunicated unto them that he
was a prisoner of l|i^rVR(ving been taken by a female
by virtue of her magic|j^'3^ies to Sonitpura. When they
heard that he had wken to Sonitpura, by a damsel,,
cenversant with magical powers, they did not place con-
fidence in his words. Thereupon Krishna thought of Garuda
who immediately arived there. And mounting upon him
along with Bala and Pradyumna he started for the city of
Bina. On their approach to the city they were opposed by
the attendant spirits of Rudra ; but they were soon slain
by Hari and he and his companions entered the city. There-
upon mighty fever, an emanation of Maheshwara, having
three feet and three heads, fought desperately with the
holder of conch in defence of Bana. Baladeva, upon whom
his ashes were scattered, was seized with burning heat and
his eye-lids trembled — but he obtained relief by clinging
to the body of Krishna. Thereupon fighting with the holder
of bow, the fever, emanating from Siva, was soon driven out
from Krishna's person by the fever engendered by himself;
Beholding the Saiva fever bewildered by the strokes of the
arms of Krishna, BralimA, the patriarch of the deities,
entreated him to desist, upon which the slayer of Madhu
refrained and absorbed into himself the fever he had created.
The rival fever then went away saying to Krishna; ‘Those
men who shall recollect the fight between us shall be freed
from febrile disease.''

Thereupon Vishnu overcame and destroyed the five fires
and with perfect ease slew the Dfinavas. Then the son of
Bali^ with the entire Daitya army, aided by Sankara and
Kartikeya fought with Krishna. A dreadful battle ensued
l^etween Hari and Sankara. Scorched by their burning
Weapons, all the rigions trembled and the celestials thought
(orceitiiuthBtthe end of the universe was at hand. With

5a


406


VISHNUPURANAM.


the weapon of Yawning Krishna set Sankara agape j then tlie
attendant demons and delni-g^)dw^^S*va were slain on al]
sides, for Hara, overcome gaping, sat down

in his car and was unable to Krishna any longer,

who is above the enfluence of The deity of war

Kartikeya, wounded in the arm^-J Garuda,' struck by the
weapons of Pradyumua and disarmed by the shout of Hari,
fled away. Beholding Sankara disabled, the demons slain,
Guha fled and Siva's attendants destroyed, BSna proceeded
in his huge car, the steeds of which were harnessed by
Nandisha, to fight with flari and his associates Bala* and
Pradyumna. Attacking the army of BSna, the valliant
Balabhadra, wounded them in diver.se ways with his shafts
and put them to a shameful cof^fusion. And their king saw
them dragged about by RUma with his ploughshare or beaten
by him with his mace and pierced by Krishna with liis
shafts; he therefore attacked Krishna and a fight took place
between them ; they hurled at each other burning arrows
that pierced through their armour ; but Krishda intercepted
with his arrows, those of BAna and sundered them into piece*;,
B&na however, wounded Kesava and the weilder of the
discus wounded Bana ; and both of them, desirous of victory
and endeavouring angrily to bi ing about the death of his anta-
gonist, hurled diverse missiles at each other. When a num-
ber of weapons had been sundered into pieces and the
weapons began to be exhausted, Krishna determined to slay
Bina. Thereupon the destroyer of the demons took up
his discus Sudarshana shining with the radiance of a hundred
suns. As he was about to meet it the mystical goddess of
Kotair, the magic lore of the demons, stood naked before
him. Beholding her before him, Krishna, with open eyes,
cast Sudarshana to cut off the arms of B^na. The discus
lopped off successively the numberless arms of Bftna
"pvhicli proved useless the missiles discharged by the celestials*
the slayer of Madhu, agacj took in his hand the


vi5HNipi:ranam.


407

discus, after ten thousand arms had been sundered, for the
total destruction of destroyer of Tripura came

to know it. Beholdiiig^^^^jpod gushing out from the dis-
severed arms of BSli^^||Bhusbaiul of UmSl approached
Govinda and requestf^J^Kut off his hostilities, said
Krishna, the lord of llf^ ?S?rse, I know thee, ^the excellent
Furusha, the ?Rupreme*'’^^rd, the infinite felicity without
beginning or end and beyond all things. This sport of
universal being in which thou assumest the person of god,
animals and men is a subordinate attribute of thy energy.
Be propitious, therefore 0 lord, unto me. I have given
Bana assurance of safety, do not thou falsfy my words.
0 thou eternal, this Bana has grown old under my protec-
tion, let him not incur thy displeasure. I conferred a
boon on this Dailya and therefore I am begging thy for '
giveness.*'

Being thus addressed, Govinda, dismissing his resent-
ment against the Asura, smilingly said to Uma's lord, the
holder of trident *‘0 Sankara, let this Bana, the king pf
demons draw his breath since thou hast conferred a boon
upon him ; to honour thy words, I withhold my discus ; the
assurance of safety given by thee, is also given by me. Do
not consider me as distinct from thee. The celestials, Asuras
and men and the whole universe are not distinct from us.
Those who have been possessed by ignorance consider me
as seperatc from thee.^*

Having said this Krishna went to where Amiruddha was;
and the snakes that bound him were destroyed by the
Hrcath of Govinda. And placing him along with his wife
upon the celestial bird, Krishna with Pradyumna and R5ma
returned to Dwarka.


SECTI0NXZXI7.


[aITREYA said:


fb|(ed a mortal form


Sauri performed mighty achi and discomfitted
Sakra and Siva and all other nt divinities. 0 great

sir,', do thou also describe unto me, his other exploits by
which he ^humiliated the prowess of the celestials; I am
desirous to hear them.

PARASara said : — Hear with respectful attention, 0
Brahman, as described by me of the burning of VArSiiashi
by Krishna in the course of his relieving the burden of the
earth.


There was a king of Pundra, who was known as Vasu-
deva and flattered by the ignorant people as the descended
deity until he thought himself to be the VSsudeva who had
come down upon earth. Forgetting his real character he
assumed the emblems of Vishnu and sent an ambassador
to the high-minded Krishna with this message. “ Give up
thy discus, 0 foolish man, lay aside all my insignia, my name
and the character of Yasudeva and come and do me homage
and I shall grant thee, the means of subsistence.'^ Hearing
those words and laughing, Janlrddana said to the messenger
^ Go back, messenger to Paundraka and tell him in my
name shall hand over my emblem, the discus to him.
Thou wilt properly understand my meaning and consider
what is to be done j for I shall come to thy city bringing
the discus with me and shall surely give it over to thee. If
thou dost comand me to come I immediately obey and
be with thee tomorrow and shall not delay, and having
aouglit thy protection I shall so manage, O king, that I shall
not have to fear anything from thee/' So saying he sent
away the messenger to communicate these words unto the
sovereign, and summoning Garnda taounted him and started
fbr the city of Paundrilka.


ViSHNUPURANAM.


409


When the king of Kasi heard of the preparations
of Kesava he sent to help Paiindraka himself

bringing up the rear, the army of the king of Kasi

and his own troops, the false Vasudeva marched

to meet Krishna. ^t a distance standing in

his car holding a disc a mace, a scimitar and a lotus

in his hands adorned with a garland of flowers, and bearing a
bow; and having his standard made of gold, he had also the
mystical mark Sribatsa on his brest ; he was robed in yellow
raiment and embellished with ear rings, and a tiara. When
th^god, whose emblem is Gariida, saw him, he laughed aloud
and engaged in encounter with the hostile army of cavalry
and elephants fighting with swords, scimitars, maces, tridents
spears and bows. Showering upon the enemy the arrows
from his SSiranga bow and hurling at them his mace and
discus he soon destroyed both the army of PaundrSka and
that of the king of Kasi. He then addressed the former
who was foolishly wearing his emblems saying : — “PaundrSka,
you wanted me through your messenger, to resign to you
all my insignia, I now deliver them to you. Here is my
discus; here is my mace; and here is Garuda, let him mount
upon thy banner.” Saying this he dischargd the discus
and mace by which Paundraka was sundered to pieces and
cast on the ground ; whilst the Garuda which was on the
banner of PaundrSka was destroyed by tlie Garuda of Vishnu.
Beholding this the people cried ”alas 1 alas” ; but the brave
king still siding the imposture of iiis friend carried on the
encounter till Sauri, cut off his head with his arrows and shot
into the city of Kisi to the surprise of all the inhabitants.
Having thus destroyed Paundraka and the king of KSsi with
all their retinue Sauri came back to Dwarka where he resided
enjoying heavenly delights..

When the inhabitants of Kisi beheld the head qI tbeir
king shot into the city they were much surprised and won-
dered how it could have been accomplished. Having come


410


VIsHNUPURANAM.


to know that the king had been slain by Krishna, the king’s
son together with the priest of the lj|^i!y propitiated Sankara.
Well pleased on account of ht*ing^J*j^ipped in the .sacred
place Avimukta the deity asked By ^|j nee to pray for a
boon, on which he said : — *‘0 through

thy favour, let thy mystic spirit s^^J^^.shna, the murderer
of my father

*It shall be so' answered Sankara and from out of the
southern fire up sprang a vast and formidable female like
flame out of fire, blazing with ruddy light and fiery radiance
streaming amidst her hair. Worked up with ire she called
upon Krishna and departed to Dvvarka. There the people
seeing her were struck with terror and fled for protection
to the slayer of Madhu the refuge all worlds. Under-
standing that the fiend had been created by the son of the
king of KSsi through his worship of the deity whos^ emblem is
the bull, the wielder of the discus being engaged in sport and
playing at dice said to the discus *‘Kill this dreadful creature
whose tresses are of plaited flame." Accordingly .Sudarshana,
the discus of Vishnu, attacked the fiend in no time, dread-
fully covered with fire and wearing tresses of plaited flame.
Terrified at the might of Sudarshana, the creation of Mahes-
wara did not wait for his attack but fled quickly followed by
him with equal velocity until she arrived at VarSnashi
repelled by the superior prowess of the discus of Visnnu.

The arms of the king of K5si and the whole number of
the attendant divinities of Siva armed with various weapons
inarched out to oppose the discus. But an expert in the
use of arms he consumed the whole host by his radxaace and
then set fire to the city, [in which the magic power of Siv^
bad concealed herself. Thus was Varanashi burnt with all its-
princes and their followers, its inhabitants, elephants, horses
abd msn, treasures aed granaries, houses, palaces and markets.

whole of the city that was inaccessible to the celestials
will ^iiue covered with flames by the discus of ftari and wa^


VISHNUPURANAM.


411

totally destroyed. The discus, with unsoothed wrath, blazing
fiercely and not accomplishment of so

easy a task, then retr,C^^I^|;jthe hands of Vishnih


SECTION XXXV.

• ]M[aitheya said: — O Brahman, I have a great desire to
listen to some other exploits of Balarama ; do thou describe
them unto me. You have related to me, 0 reverend Sir, his
diagging the Yamuna ^d other mighty deeds ; do thou now
recount some other of his acts.

PaRASARA said:— Listen O Maitreya, to the exploits
accomplished by Rima who is the eternal, illimitable Sesha,
the upholder of the earth. At the choice of a husband by the
daughter of Duryodhana, the piincess was taken away by the
hero S&mba, the son of Jdmvavati. Being pursued by Duryo-
dhana, Kama, Bhishma, Drona and other illustrious chiefs
who were enraged for his audacity, he was defeated and taken
prisoner. When the Yddavas heard of this event they were
greatly enraged with Duryodhana and his companions and
addressed themselves to fight with them. But Baiadeva, in
accents suppressed by the effects of inebriety, forbade them and
said. will go alone to the sons of Kuru and at my request
they will let Sdmba free. Accordingly he went to Hastmd-
pur and took his abode in a grove outside the town which
he did not enter. When Duryodhana and others were in-
formed of his arrival, they sent him a cow, a present of
fruits and flowers and water. Bala received the offering in
tite customary form and said to the descendants of Kuru
'^Ugrasena commands you to liberate Skmba.'* When
Duryodhana, Kama, Bhishma, Drona and others heard tbisj


413


VISHNUFURANAM.


they were worked up with ire, and Blhlika and other friends
of the Kauravai who considered tyl^adu race as having no
claims to regal dignity said to tlwli^^jr of the club. **What
is this, 0 Balardma, that thou ha®^ bi^ What Yadava shall
command the chiefs of the Kurujjg^^^lr If Ugrasena thus
commands the (Curavas, we away the white um-

brella which he has usurped and which is only fit for the kings.
You should go away therefore, BalarAma ; you are entitled to
our respect; but Sdmba has been guilty of an improper
conduct and we shall not let him free either at Ugrasena's
commands or yours. The Kukkura and Andhaka races might
not pay the homage due to us,' their superiors, but who ever
heard of a servant commanding his master? You. have
been rendered arrogant by our treacling, you equally with
seat and food; we have committed la gr^at.^Hwista^^ in
neglecting the policy, for our great frieodship fdf" yduc iThe
present that we sent you -today ’was a sign ’ol" perSbnal
regard, but it was not fit for us to have offered nor for yours
to have expected.”

Having said this, the Kuru chiefs unanimously refused
to liberate Hari's sons and came back to^ their city* Moving
about with intoxication and anger caugjd by their insolent
words, Bala struck the ground furiously with his heel so
that it burst to pieces with a loud sound that reverberated
through the regions of space. His eyes reddened withf rage
and his brow curved, with frowns he exclaimed. ‘What pride
is this in such vile and pithless creatures. The sovereignty
of Kauravas as well as our own is the work of destiny
whose decree it also is that they now disrespect or disobey the
commands of Ugrasena. Indra may, as is his right, command
the celestials and Ugrasena exercises equal authority with
the Flc upon the pride that boasts a throne,

leaAintgf^ ♦of a Jijindred mortals. Is not he the sovereign of
edrth, the Wives \ghose servants adorn themselves with
tiie blossams. of the ; Pjirjgita tree ? Ugrasena shall be the

. 9


VlSliNUPURANAM.


4*3


Undisputed lord of kings ; for I will not return to his capital
until I have rid the. wprf^»holly of the sons of Kuru. I
will destroy Kama, ^^jwuanai Dronaj Bhisma^ BSlhlikaj
Dussisana, Bhurisrav^jT^jmvat^ Salya^ Bhima^ Arjuna^
Yudhishthira, the twClro/'^d all the other wretched sons
of Kuru with their horSes, elephants and chariots^ I will
liberate the hero Sambas and carry him along with his wife
to DwIrakI where I shall again hehold Ugrasena and the
rest of my kinsmen. Or commanded by the king of celestials,
to remove the burden of the earth, I will take this capital
of rtie KaUravas with ail the sons of Kuru, and throw
Hastinapur into the Bhagirathi.'^

Saying this with his eyes reddened with ire, Baladeva, the
wielder of the clup, plunged the blade of his ploughshare
downwards\befteath the ramparts of the city, and drew them
towards him* When tlie Kauravas beheld HastinSpur totter-
ing, they were much afraid, and called loudly on Rama, saying,
'' 0 Riirta ! Rama;j hold, hold ; supress your anger and have
compassion upon us. Here is Samba and his wife also
delivered up to you. Forgive the sins committed by us
ignorant of your wondrous power.’^ Accordingly the Kauravas
burried out of the city and delivered Samba and his wife to
the mighty Balarama, 'who> bowing to Bhisma, Drona and
Kripa,, who pacified him, said, ** I am satisfied,’^ and desisted.
The city bears the mark of the shock even to the present day
—such was the might of R^ma proving both his strength
ind power. The Kauravas then, offering homage to S^mba
ind Bala, sent away the former with his wife and dowry.


53


P ARasara said : — Listen, O^ailreya, to another achieve-
ment accomplished by the powerful Balarama. The great
Asura, Naraka, the enemy of the friends of the celestials,
had a friend of exceeding might in a monkey named
Dvvivida, who was worked up with implacable hostility
against the celestials, and vowed to revenge on all of
them the destructhm of Naraka by Krishna at the insti-
gation of the king of the celestials, by preventing sacrifices
and bringing about the total destruction of the world.
Blinded by ignorance therefore, he interrupted all religious
practices, put down all righteous observances, and brought
about the death of living creatures * he set fire to forests, to
villages and towns : sonietimes he deluged cities and villages
with a downpour of rocks or lifting up mountains in the
waters he cast them into the ocean ; then placing himself in
the midst of the deep, he agitated the waves until the
foaming sea rose above its confines and swept away the vil-
lages, and cities situated upon its shores. Dwivida, who was
capable of (assuming shapes as he liked, enlarged his bulk to an
immense proportion, and rolling and tumbling and trampling
amidst the corn-fields, he crushed and spoiled the harvest.
The whole world, disorganised by this vicious monkey, was
deprived of sacred study and religious ceremonies, and was
greatly afflicted.

Once on a time HalSyudha was drinking in the groves of
Raivata along with the illustrious Revati and other beautiful
females ; and the celebrated Yadu whose glories were sung
and who was pre-eminent amidst graceful and sportive
women, resembled Kuvera, the god of riches, in his palace. In
the meantime, the monkey Dwivida came there and stealing
the pIougli;share and the club of Balartlrna^ grinned at and


VISHNUPURANAM.


415


mocked him, and laughed at the women and threw over
and broke the cups filled with wine. Enraged at this,
BalarSlma threatened thQijL|tokey ; but the latter disregard-
ed his threats and chattering noise. Thereupon

BalarSma started up and ^i^ized his club in anger, and the
monkey laid hbld of a large rock w'hich he hurled at the hero.
And casting his club at it as it approched him, Bala broke
it into a thousand pieces, which together with the club, fell
upon the ground. Beholding the club thus fallen, the
monkey sprang over it and struck the YSdava violently on
the breast with his paws. Bala returned it with a blow of
his fist upon the fore-head of Dwivida which felled him,
vomittiag blood and lifeless to the earth. The crest of the
mountain on which he fell was sundered into a hundred
pieces by the weight of his body, as if the Thunderer had
shivered it with his thunder-bolt. The celestials threw
down a shower of Bowers upon Kama and approached
him and praised him for the glorious feat he had performed.

Well has the v;orld been freed’* said they “ by thy prowess,
0 hero, of his vile ape, who was the enemy of the celes-
tials.*^ Then welUpleased, they and their attendant spirits
returned to heaven. Many such inimitable deeds were
performed by the illustrious Baladeva, the impersonation of
Sesha, the bupporicr of the earth.

SECTION XXXVIL


In this way, Krishna, aided by Baladeva, destroyed, for
the behoof of the earth, demons and iniquitous kings, and
along with Phalguna also did he relieve earth of her burden
hy the death of seven Akshauhini hosts. Having thus


4i6


vishnjpuranam.


relieved the earth of her load and destroyed many impious
kings, he exterminated, by the plea of an imprecation de-
nounced by Brahmanas, his own i^dava race. Thereupon
quitting l)w^rak& and renounci np Mj mortal frame, the self*
born with all his emanations re-Mtered his own sphere of
Vishnu.

Maitrcya said; — Tel! me how Janirddana brought about
the extermination of his own family under the pretext of
a Brhaminical curse and in what manner did he renounce his
human body.

PARAsARAsaid ; — At theholy place of Pindarika,Visw2imkra,
Kanwa and the great sage, Narada, were seen by some boys
of the Yadu family. Inflated with their youths and influenced
by predestined results, they dressed and adorned Samba,
the son of JSmbavati, as a female and taking her to the sages,
they addressed them with usual reverence, saying ; — “ What
child with this female, the wife of Babru, who is anxious to
have a son, give birth to ?" The sages, who were gifted
with divine wisdom, enraged at this insult, said : — She
will give birth to a club that will exterminate the entire
Yadava race.”

Thus addressed by the sages, the boys went to Ugrasena
and related to him what had happened ; and after sometime,
as foretold, a club was produced from the belly of SSmba.
Ugrasena had the club, which was made of iron, ground to
dust and thrown into the sea, and particles of the dust there
became rushes, There was one part of the iron club which
was like the blade of a lance and which the Andhakas
could not break ; this when thrown into the sea was swal-
lowed by a fish ; the fish was caught, the iron spike was
extracted from its belly, and was taken by a hunter named
JJtra. The all-wise and illustrious slayer of Madhu did not
think it proper to counteract the predestination of fate.

In the interval an emissarry despatched by the celestials
came to Krishna and said to him in private I am sent


VISHNUPURANAM.


4t7


to thee, 0 lord, by the celestials ; and do thou hear what Indra
together with the Viswas, Maruts, Adityas, S&dhyas and
Rudras respectfully re|M||kent. More than a century has
gone by since thou il|||p)mpliance with the request of the
celestials, descended upon earth for the purpose of re-
lieving it of its load. The denrons have been destroyed
and the burden of earth has been removed ; now let the
immortals once again see their king in heaven. More than a
hundred years have passed, and if thou dost wish, do thou
return to heaven. This is the prayer of the celestials. And
if this be not thy will, do thou remain here as long as it may
he desirable to thy dependants." Whereto Krishna replied,
“I am well aware of all thou hast said. The earth is not
relieved of her load until the Yadavas are extirpated. I
shall also speedily bring it about in my descent, and it shall
take place in seven nights. Having restored the land of
DwSraka to the ocean and destroyed the race of Jadu, I shall
proceed to the region of the celestials. Inform the celestials
that having renounced my mortal frame and been accompanied
by Sankarshana, I will then return to them. The tyrants that
oppressed the earth, Jarasandha and the rest, have been slain
and a youth even of the race of Yadu is so less than they
an incumbrance. Having removed this huge weight of the
earth, I will proceed to the mansions of the celestials. Say
this to them.”

PaRasara said ; — 0 Maitreya, being thus addressed by
Vasudeva, the messenger of the celestials bowed an<l took
his heavenly course to the king of the deities. Th^ illus-
trious Krishna too now espied signs and portents b'’th on
«arth and in heaven prognosticating day and night the des-
truction of Dwaraka. Beholding those evil omens, be said
to the Yadavas ; " Behold these dreadful portents ; let us
hasten to Prabhisa to avert them.” When he had thus said
to the eminent Yadavas, the illustrious Uddhaba saluted
And said to him: "Tell me, 0 lord, what it is proper that


4i8


VISHNUPURANAM.


I should do, for it seems to me that thou wilt destroy all this
race. The signs that are manifes^eclare nothing less than
the annihilation of the race. ^'TheJAon Krishna replied : —
Do thou, by my favour proceed, this celestial course,
to the holy place Badrikasrama in the Gandhamadana
mountain, the shrine of Nara Narayana ; and on that spot
sanctified by them, thou, meditating upon me, shalt obtain
perfection through my favour. Having extirpated this Yadu
race, I shall proceed to Baikuntha ; and after I have quilted
Dwaraka; the ocean shall inundate it.'^

ParaSARA said : — Being thus addressed by him and ccfln-
manded by Kesava, Uddhaba proceeded to the holy shrine
of Nara Narayana. And the Yadavas, with Krishna, Balarama
and others, having ascended swift-coursing cars, proceeded
to Prabhasa. Having reached Prabhasa, the Kukkuras and
Andhakas bathed there and, being excited by Krishna, in-
dulged in liquor. As they drank, the destructive fire of
dessension was engendered amongst them by mutual colli-
sion and fed with the fuel of abuse. Worked up with ire
by the divine influence, they attacked one another with missle
weapons, and when these were finished, they had recourse
to the rushes growing nigh. The rushes in their hands
became like thunder-bolts, and they assailed one another
with them. Pradyumna, SyAmba, Kritavarman, Satyaki
Aniruddha, Prithu, Vipathu, Charuvannan, Charuka, Akrura,
and many others, struck one another with the rushes, which
became hard like thunder-bolts. Thereupon Krishna arriving
there prevented them : but they thought that he was taking
part with each severally and continued the conflict.

Thereupon, enraged, Krishna took up a handtui of rushes
to destroy them, which became a club of iron ; and with this
he killed many of the murderous YAdavas, whilst others
fighting fiercely destroyed one another. At this time i*'
the very presence of Krishna*s charioteer, his swift stee^
carried off his Jaitra car and entered into the sea. The dis


VLSHNUPURANAM.


419


cus, the club, the bow, the quiver, the shell and the sword of
l^esava, having circumambulated their master, flew along the
path of the sun. In M^ort time there was not a single
Yadava left alive sa^flRhe mighty Krishna and Daruka.
Going towards Rama, who was sitting at the root of a tree,
they saw a huge serpent coming out of his mouth. Having
issued out of his mouth, the mighty snake proceeded towards
the ocean hymned by saints and other -great snakes.
Bringing an offering of respect, the ocean came to him and
then the majestic being worshipped of all the attendant
snakes, entered into the waters of the deep. Beholding the
departure of the spirit of Baladeva, Ke^ava said to Daruka—
Do thou go to Vasudeva and Ugrasena and communicate
unto him this. Go and inform them of the departure of Bala-
bhadra, and the destruction of the Yadava race, and also that
I shall engage in religious meditation and renounce my body.
Do thou also inform Ahuka and the inhabitants of DwarakSl
that their city shall be inundated by the ocean. And do ye
await the arrival of Arjuna at Dwaraka. When Arjuna, the
descendant of P^ndu, shall issue out of the city, none of you
should wait there but go whither the descendant of Kuru
shall repair, Do thou also go to the son of Kunti and tell
him that he may at my’ request protect my family according
to his might. Then go to HastinSpur with Arjuna and all the
inhabitants of DwSraka and, let Vajra be installed king over
the race of Yadu.**

ParasARA said : — Thus instructed and having bowed unto
and circumambulated Krishna again and again, Daruka de-
parted as he had been desired ; and having conducted Arjuna
to DwSravati, the intelligent servant of Krishna established
Vajra as king. Thereupon having concentrated in himself
that supreme spirit which is identical with VSsudeva, the
divine Govinda was identified with all beings. Respecting
the worlds of the Brahmana, the curse of Durv§sas, the illus-
trious Krishna sat engaged in meditation, placing his foot


420


VISHNUPURANAM.


upon his knee. Then there came a hunter na’med JSra,
whose arrow was tipped with a blade made of the iron-
club, which had not been redu-c||k to powder ; and espy-
ing from a distance the foot of Krisma, he mistook it fora
part of a deer, and shooting his arrow, lodged k in the
sole. Approaching his mark, he saw the four-armed king
and falling at his feet, repeatedly besought his forgiveness,
exclaming, ** 1 have done this deed unknowingly, thinking
I was aiming at a deer. Have pity on me who am con-
sumed by my crime ; for thou art able to consume me."
Thereupon BhagavSn said ; “ Thou needst not have the least
fear, hunter ; by my favour, thou shall repair to the region of
the celestials.^' As soon as Krishna had said this, the celestial
car arrived there, ascending which the hunter repaired to the
region of the celesti.als.

Thereupon the divine Krishna having united himself
with his own pure, spiritual, inexhaustible, inconceivable,
unborn, undecaying, intperishable, and universal spirit, which
is one VSsudeva, renounced bis mortal frame and his connec-
tion with the three qualities.


SECTION XXVIIL

Pahasara said: — Having found the bodies of Krishna
and Rama, Arjuna performed for them and the rest of the slain
the obsequial rites. The eight queens of Krishna, who have
been named with Rukmini at the head, embraced Hari and
entered the funeral fire. 0 foremost of the pious, embracing
the corpse of Rama, Revati too entered fire which was cool to
her happy heart in contract with her lord. Thereupon bearing


VISHNUPURANAW


42f


all this Ugfasena and Vasudeva with Devaki and Rohini
entered fire. Having performed duly the obsequious rites of
the Yadavas, Arjuna, wyi the inhabitants of Dwlraki and
Vajra> issued out of thdHfcy. And Kunti’s son proceeded
slowly with thousands of Krishna^s wives and the residents
of DwSraka. With the departure of Krishna from the land
of mortals both the Sudharman palace and the Pdrijata
tree proceeded to heaven ; and on the same day that Hari de-
parted from the earth the dark-bodied Kali age set in. The
ocean rose and inundated the whole of DwSlrakS, except only
the jiwelling of the deity of the race of Yadu- The sea
has not been able to wash away that temple and there even
up to the present day Kasava constantly resides ; whoever
visits *'that holy shrine where Krishna pursued his sports is
freed from sins.

0 foremost of ascetics, one day while proceeding, Arjuna,
the son of Pritha, halted the people he had brought from
DwarakSl in the Panchanada country ; in a rich and fertile
spot ; the desires of the neighbouring robbers were excited
When they saw a number of widowed females and immense
riches in the possession of Arjuna alone. Worked up with
their cupidity they assembled their villainons herds and said
to them : — This Arjuna, alone with his bow, is passing amongst
us having immense riches and numberless women with him,
whose husbands have been slain ; cursed is thy strength there-
fore. His pride hath been increased by the death of Bhishma
Drona, Jayadratha, Kama and others; he is not cognisant
of the prowess of the simple villagers. Up, up, take your
long thick staves ; this stupid feilow hates us. Why should
we not lift up our arms Saying this they rushed armed
with cudgels and clods of ear A, upon the people who were
without their lord. Arjuna met them and said to them in con-
tempt ; Go away, 0 y6 wretches, ignorant of what is right,
if jou do not wish to die.*’ But they neglected his threats
seised his treasures and women, the wives Viswaksena*


422


VlSHNUPURANAM. '


f

Thereupon Arjuna began to brace his cdestial bow
GSndiva, irresistible in encounter, but it was in vain, for in
Spite of his eflorts to lighten it, i^ontinued flaccid ; neither
could he recollect the incantation superhuman weapons.
Losing all patience he discharged, as best as he could, his
asrows upon the foes, but they merely scratched the skin.
The shafts that were given him by Agni for certain destruc-
tion, were themselves destroyed and proved fatal to Arjuna in
his encounter with herdsmen. Thereupon he tried to recall
the prowess of Krishna by the strength whereof his shafts
had slain many a mighty king ; but he tried in vain,i for
they were either put a‘'ide by peasants or they flew at
random wide of their marks. His arrows being all exhausted
he beat the robbers with the horn of his bow. They laughed
at his blows and in the very sight of Arjuna the barbarians
carried off all the women of the Vrishni and Andhaka tribes
and went their way. Thereupon Jishnu was greatly sorry,
and lamented bitterly saying ‘*AIas \ Alas 1 I am deserted by
my lord.’^ And immediately the bow, the heavenly arms, his
car and steeds perished entirely like a donation to an un-
learned Brahmin. “Alas ! how powerful is the destiny^’ said
he deprived of my illustrious friend I have been defeated
by the base. These two arms are mine ; mine is this fist,
this is my place ; I am Arjuna, but without that righteous
help all these are pithless. The bravery of Arjuna, the
strength of Bhima was all his work ; without him I am
defeated by peasants ; it cannot be from any other cause.”
Saying this, Arjuna went to the city of Mathur2L and there
installed the Yadava prince Vajra as a king. There he
saw VysJa who was living in a forest and he approached
the sage and saluted him respectfully. The ascetic observed
him for some time as be lay prostrate at his feet and said
to him. '^How is it that I see you shorn of lustre ? Have
you been guilty of an illicit intercourse with a woman of
.Brahmiucide ? Or have you suffered any grevious disap-


ViSHNUrURANAM.


423


poiatment that you are so dejected. Have your prayers for
offspring or other good gifts proved fruitless ? Or have
you indulged improper passions that your lustre has been
clouded ? Or have you djpbured the meal given to Brah-
manas? Arjuna, say, have you seized upon the property
of the ^oor? * Has the wind of a winnowing basket lighted
upon you ? Or has an evil eye gazed upon you that you
look so miserable. Have you been touched by the water
of a finger nail ? Or has the water of a water-jar sprinkled
you ? Or, what is most probably the case, have you been
beaten by your inferiors in battle?”

Having sighed deeply Arjuna described to Vyasa all the
circumstances Of his defeat, and said : — Hari who was our
strength, our heroism, our might, our prowess, our prosperity
and brightness, has left us and departed. Deprived of our
illustrious friend who was ever kindly speaking we have
become as feeble as if made of straw. Excellent Purusha,
he, who was the living vigour of my weapon, my arrow, my
bow. has departed. When he looked upon us, fortune,
fame, wealth and dignity crowded us ; but Govinda has
departed from our midst. That Krishna has left earth by
whose power Bhishma, Drona, the king of Anga, Duryodhana
and the rest were slain. Not I alone but earth has grown
old, miserable and lustreless in the absence of the holder
of the discus. Krishna, through devotion to whom Bhishma
and other powerful men perished like moths in the flame
of my valour, has departed and I am now vanquished by
cow-herds. The bow GAndiva, that was celebrated all over
the three-worlds, has been foiled, on account of his deparure,
by the sticks of peasants. The numberless women, over
whom I wa« lord, have been carried off from me by thieves
4fmed only with cudgels ; the whole household of Krishna,
0 li^ishna, has been farcibly carried off by peasants, who
(heir staves have put my strength to shame. I do not
w^ndvr that I am shorn of my lustre; it is a marvel that


4?4


VfSHNUPURANAIM.


I live* Surriy grandstre, I am so shameless that I survive
the stain of indignity inflicted by the vile.

Vaysa replied to Arjuna and said. Think no more my
son of the indignity ; it does ffc behold you to grieve.
Know that time subjects all beings to similar vicissitude :
Time brings out the production and dissolution of all
creatures. All that exists is founded on time. Know thisi
Arjuna, and preserve thy fortitude. Rivers, oceans, mountains,
the entire earths, celestials, men, animals, trees, are all
created and will ail be destroyed by time. Be thou sober,
knowing that all that is the effect of time. These mighty wprks
of Krishna, whatever the} have been, have been performed to
relieve earth of her load; for this be has come down. Op-
pressed by her load earth has had recourse to the assembly of
the celestials and Janarddana, who is identical with time, has
descended on that account. This object has now been
accomplished : ail the kings of the earth have been destroyed;
no more remained for him to accomplish. Therefore tl»e
lord has departed whither he pleased, his ends being all
fulfilled. At the period of creation the god of gods creates;
in that of duration he preserves, at the end of all he is the
powerful destroyer. Now all is done. Therefore 0 Arjuna,
be not pained by thy defeat ; the power of mortals is the gift
of time. Bhishma, Kama and other kings have been slain
by this alone ; this was the work of time ; and why should
not therefore thy defeat by those inferior to thee occur? In
the same manner as through thy devotion to Vishnu these were
overthrown by tliee, so at has has thy discomfiture by
cursed thieves been brought about by time. That divinity,
assumlug various shapes, preserves the world ; and in the
end the lord of creatures destroys it. 0 son of Kunti, on
the occasion of thy good fortune, the illustrious JanArddana
was thy help ; in thy decline thy enemies have been favoured
by Kesava. Who will now believe, that thou didsj,
datot Bhispma and other Kauravas. Who would belieya


VISUNUPURANAM^


425


peasants have defeated thee f Know it for certain, 0 son
of Pritha, that it is but the sport of the Universal Hart
that the Kauravas have been slain by thee and thou hast
been' vanquished by he||iinen. As regards the women for
whom thou dost grieve and who have been carried off by the
thieves, hear from me an ancient story that will explain
why this has happened.

ftt ancient time, a BrShman, named Asht^lvakra, was pur-
suing his religious penances, standing in water and medi-
tating on the eternal spirit for many years. On account of
thegoverthrow of the Asuras there was a great festival on the
summit of Meru ; on their way to which RambhSl, TilottamA
and hundreds of other beautiful nymphs praised and hymned
him for his devotions. They bowed unto him and eulogised
him when he was immersed in water up to his throat,* his
hair twisted in a braid. They sang in honour of him what-
ever they thought would be agreeable to that most eminent
of BrShmanas. AshtSvakra at last said to them I am
well pleased with you, illustrious damsels ; ask of me, what-
ever you wish and I will give it however difficult it may be
of attainment.'' Thereupon all these nymphs, RambliA
Tillottama and others mentioned in the Vedas, replied;— “ It
i.s enough for us that thou art pleased, what el.se need we say,
0 Brahman ?" But some amongst them said “ If you are
indeed pleased with us, 0 illustrious sire, thou grant us a
husband, the best of men and sovereign of Brahmanas.*'
Thereupon saying so be it." AshtSvakra came up fiom the
waters. When the nymphs observed him coming out of th6
water and saw that he was very ugly and ctooked in eight
places they could not restrain their merriment and laughed
aloud. The Muni was very angry and imprecated them with
a curse, saying " Since you have been so impertinent as to
laugh at my deformity, I denounce upon you this curse ;
titrough the favour I have shown unto you, you shall obtaio the
males for your husband ; and on account of n>y, curse,


VISHNLiPURANAM,


4 ^

you shall afterwards fall into the hands of thieves. When
the nymphs heard this imprecation they tried to appease
the Muni, and they so far succeeded that he told them that
they should finally go to the region|p the celestials. It is on
account of the curse of the ascetic AshUvakra that these
women, who were the wives of Kesava, have fallen into the
hands of the barbarians; and there is nothing for you,
Arjuna to regret it in the least. All this destruction has
been brought about by the lord of all, and your end is also
near at hand, since he has withdrawn from your strength,
splendour, valour and pre-eminence. Death is the doom of
every one who is born ; fall is the end of exhaltation ; union
terminates in separation and growth tends only to. decay.
Knowing all this, wise men are neither subject to grief nor
joy ; and those who know these ways are equally free from
pleasure or joy. Do you therefore, most excellent prince,
understand this truth and along with your brothers relinquish
everything and repair to the holy forest. Go now and say
from me to Yudhisthira that he, to-morrow with his brethren,
will tread the path of heroes.*'

Thus instructed by Vyasa, Arjuna went and described to
the other sons of Fritha all that he had seen, experienced and
heard. When he had related unto them the message of
VySisa, the sons of Pandu placed P^rikshit on the throne and
went to the forest.

I have thus described to you, 0 Maitreya, in detail the
actions of V&sudeva when he was born in the race of Yadu*


End of Pakt V.


VI.


00 ^—^

SECTIONI.

— :o: —

I^Jaureya said : — Thou ha.st described unfo me in de-
tail, 0 illustrious sage, the creation of the universe, the genea-
logies of the Patriarchs, the duration of the Manvvantaras
and the dynasties of the princes. I am willing to hear from
you an account of the dissolution of the universe, the time
of total destruction and that which occurs at the expiration
of a Kalpa,

Parasara said .‘—Hear from me exactly, 0 Maitreya,
the circumstances attending the dissolution of the world
eitlier at the expiration of a Kalpa or that which occurs at
the dose of the life of BrahmL A month of men consti-
tutes a day and night of the progenitors; a year of men is a
day and night of the celestials. Twice a thousand aggregates
of the four ages is a day and night of Brahmli. The four
ages are the Krita, Treta, Dwipara and Kali, co<nprehending
altogether twelve thousand years of the celestials. There
are inlinite successions of those four ages of a similar des-
cription, the first of which is always called Krita and the
last the Kili. In the first, the Krita is that age which is
created by Brahm&; in the last, which is the Kali age, a disso-
lution of the universe takes place.

Maitreya said ?— 0 venerable Sir, It behoves thee to give
^ description of the nature of the Kali age in which the four-
failed virtue suffers total extinction.


4?8


tVIsMNUPURANAM,


Parasara said Hear, 0 Maitreya, of the nature of the
Kaii age, regarding which you have enquired and which b
' ROW approaching completion.

In the Kali age, people will not^serve caste, order and
institutes, nor the ceremonial enjoined by the Sima, Rik
and Yayur Vedas. Marriages in this age will be celebrated
according to the rituals, nor will the rulers that connect the
spiritual protector and his disciple will be in force ; the
laws that regulate the conduct of husband and wife will be
neglected and oblations to the celestials with fire no longer
be offered. A powerful and rich man, in whatever family
he may be born, will have right to marry maidens of every
tribe. In the Kali age, a Brihmana will be always regarded
as such even if he be not initiated properly, and many
forms of penance will be prescribed. 0 Maitreya, 0 twice-
born one, all texts will be considered as Sastras in the
Kali age ; all celestials will be considered in equal light
and all orders of life will be common alike to all persons.
In this Kali age, fasting, austerity, liberality practised accord-
ing to the pleasures of those by whom they are observed
will constitute piety. Every trifling property will make men
proud of their wealth. Pride of beauty will be inspired by hair.
Gold, jewels, diamonds, clothes will all have perished, and
then hair will be the only ornament with which women can
decerate themselves. Wives will desert their husbands when
they will lose their wealth; and the rich only will be considered
by woman as their lords'. He who will distribute immense
wealth, will be considered as master of men and prestige
of birth will no longer be a tittle to supremacy. Accu-
mulated wealth will be spent on ostentatious dwellings. The
minds of men will be wholly occupied with earding money
and that even will be spent on the gratification of selfish
desires. Women will follow their own inclibaiidn8> and be
up to pleasure-seeking. Men wilt endeavour to ac*
;,i^a:ficbes even disbotiesily. No waowill part whfcl^^


VISHNUPURANAM. 429

smallest fraction of his wealth at the sacrifice of his own
interest even when requested by his friends. In the Kali
age all people will consider themselves as equal with the
Brahmanas ; and cows vM be held in reverence only because
they supply milk. People wnll be always in fear of dearth
and scarcity and will watch accordingly the appearances of
the sky. They will all live, like anchorets, upon leaves and
roots and fruits and put a period to their lives through fear
of famine and want. Deprived of wealth, people will he
perpetually subject to famine and other afflictions; and they
wiU never enjoy pleasure and happiness. At the advent
of the Kali they will take their food without previous ablu-
tions and without worshipping fire, celestials or guests or
offering obsequial libations to their progenitors. The
women will be fickle, short of stature, gluttonous ; they will
all have many children and litlle means. And scratching
their heads with both hands they will pay no attention to
the commands of their husbands or parents. They will be
selfish, abject and slovenly ; they will be scolds and liars ;
they will be indecent and immoral in their conduct and
will ever attach themselves to dissolute men. And dis-
regarding the rules of studentship youths will study the
Vedas. Householders* will neither sacrifice nor practise
becoming liberality. Anchorets w'ill live upon food accept-
ed from rustics and mendicants will be influenced by re-
gard for friends and associates. Princes will plunder
their subjects instead of protecting them and under the
pretext of levying customs they will rob merchants of their
property. In the Kali Vuga every one, possessing cars and
elephants and horses, will be a Raja ; every one who is feeble
will be a slave. Vaisyas will abandon agriculture and
commerce and gain a livelihood by servitude or exercise of
mechanical arts; Sudras, seeking a subsistence by begging
and assuming outward marks of religious mendicants, will be-
come the impure followers of impious and heretical doctrines.
55


430


VISHNUPURANAM.


Oppressed by famine and taxation men will desert (berr
native countries and repair to the lands which are fit for
coarser grains. The path of the Vedas being obliterated
and people having deviated into he^y, iniquity will flourish
and the duration of life will therefore decrease. On account
of the horrible penances enjoined by scripture and of the
vices of the rulers, children will die in their infancy. Women
will bear children at the age of five, six or seven years and
men will beget then>, when they are eight, nine or ten. Men
will grow old at the age of twelve and no one will live more
than twenty years. Men will possess little sense, vigour
virtue and will therefore uie in a short time. O Maitreya,
the wise then estimate the approach of Kali when the
number of heretics increases. Whenever, O Maitreya,
number of the pious devoted to the lessons of the Vedas,
diminishes, the efforts, of the individuals who cultivate virtue,
become relax; the first of males becomes no longer the
object of sacrifice ; respect for the teachers of the Vedas
declines and regard is cherished for the dissiminators of
heresy, the wise estimate the augmented influence of the
Kali.

0 Maitreya, in the Kali age corrupted by unbelievers, men
will refrain from adoring Vishnu, the lord of sacrifice and the
creator and sovereign of all and will say Of what authority
are the Vedas? What are the celestials or Brahmanas? What
need there is of purification with water At the approach
of the Kali, O Vipra, the clouds will yield scanty rain ; the
corn vrill be light in ear and the grain will be poor and of
little sap : garments will be mostly made of the fibres of sun :
the principal of trees will be the Sami ; principle caste will be
the Sudra ; millet will be the more common grain ; the milk
in use will be chiefly that of goats ; unguents will be made
of Ushira grass. The mother and father-in-law will be vene-
rated in the place of parents: and a man's friend will be
l^is brother-in-law or one who has a wanton wife. Men will


ViSHNUSURANAM.


43*


say *‘Who has a father ? Who has a mother ? Every one is
born according to his deeds"; therefore they will regard the
wife’s or the husband’s parents as their own." Gifted with
little sense they will be sAject to all sorts of infirmities of
mind, speech and body and will daily commit sins ; and every
thing that is likely to afflict beings, vicious^ impure and
wretched will be generated in the Kali Yuga. Thus, 0
Brahman, when holy study^ oblations to fire and convocations
of the celestials shall be stopped some few people shall live
at a holy place. And at this place with the least trouble that
pieiy shall be accumulated which could be acquired with the
greatest exertions in the Krita age.


00 .


SECTION II.


P ARASARA said : — Hear, 0 highly illustrious one, I shall
describe fully what the great Vyasa has related upon the
subject.

Once on a time, the sages assembled and discussed at what
season the least morality obtained the greatest reward and
by whom it was most easily displayed. In order to terminate
the discussion they went to Veda Vyisa to remove their
doubts. They saw the illustrious sage, my son, immersed in
the water of the Ganges, and awaiting the close of his
ablutions, the sages remained on the banks of the sacred
river under the shelter of a grove of trees. As my son plunged
into the water and rose up from it the sages heard him
exclaim. '^Excellent is the Kali age." Again dived he and
egain did he exclaim in their hearing. "Well done, well done,
Sudra, thou art happy." Again he sank down and again did


43?


VISH^UPURANAM.


they hear him say Well done, well done, women, they are
happy who are more fortunate than they/' After tbie my son
finished his bathing and the sages met him as be approached
to welcome them. After tliey had fieen seated and offered
their respects the son of Satyavati said to them “ For what
you have come here The Rishis said. “Having entertain-
ed some doubts regarding a subject we have come here
to consult thee; but let that remain at present; explain to
us some thing else. We heard you say “Excellent is the
Kali Yuga i” We are anxious to learn why this was said and
why you repeatedly called them happy. Explain to us Jhe
meaning of it if it be not z. mystery. We will then place be-
fore you the question that engages our thoughts."

Being thus accosted by the ascetics Vyasa smiled and
said to them “Hear excellent sages, why I said “Well done
Well done i" The fruit of penance of continence, of silent
prayer and the like, practised in the Krita age for ten years,
in the Tieta for one year, in the DwSpara for a month is
obtained in the Kali age in a day ’and night; therefore I did
say “Excellent, excellent is the Kali age." The reward,
which a man obtains in the Krita age by abstract meditation
in the Treta by sacrifice, in the Dwapara by adoration, be
receives, in the Kali Yuga by merely reciting the mimes of
Kesava. 0 pious and great ascetics, in the Kali age,\by very
little exertion men attain to exalted virtue and it isUor this
reason I speak highly of the Kali Yuga. Formerly the Vedas
were to be acquired by the twice-Born through the o^iligent
observance of self-denial and it was their duty to celtjhwf®
sacrifices in accordance with the ritual. Thereafter* idle
prayers, idle feats, fruitless ceremonies were performed! only
to mislead the twice-born ; for although observed by them
devoutly, yet in consequence of some irregularity in their
celebration sin was incurred in all these works an4^^
they^ ate or what they drank did not bring about ths
n^j^i^tof their desires. In ail their objects the


VISHNUPURANAW


433 ^


enjoyeii no indepen Jencft and attained their respective sphereiS
only with exceeding pain. On the other hand, the Sudra,
more fortunate than they, attains to his assigned station by
rendering their service alltl performing merely the sacrifice
of preparing food in which no rules determine what may
or may not be eaten, what may or may not be drunk. There-
fore, excellent sages, the Sudra is fortunate.

Men should acquire wealth by means not incompatible
with their religious duties and it should be given to the worthy
and spent upon sacrifices. There is great trouble in their
acquisition as well as their preservation. And it is equally
difficult for them to spend them on pious observances. 0
excellent Brahmanas, by undergoing these troubles and other
diverses people attain to the holy region of Piajapati. A
woman has only to honour her husband in act, thought and
speech to reach the same region to which he is elevated
and she thus accomplishes her object without any great exer-
tion. This was the meaning of my exclamation ‘Well done*'
Ihe third time. I have thus related to you what you asked.
Now put to me in any way you please the question for which
you came and I will make you a clear reply.'*

The ascetics then said to VySsa. “The question that we
purposed to put to you . has already been answered by you
in your reply to our subsequent enquiry.’* Hearing this
Krishna-Daipayana laughed and said to the pious sages who
had come to see him whose eyes were wide open with sur-
prise. By virtue of my divine knowledge I perceived the
question you intended to put to me and in reference to this
I uttered the expressions “Well done \ Well doue T* fact
in tl^ Kali age duty is performed by the mortals with very
littletroubte, whose sins are all washed away by the water
of their individual piety-^by Sudras through the diligent
service of the twice-born ones and by women through the
slight effort of obedience to their husbands. It is for ibis reason
0 BrSihmaii&s, that I did thrice express my admiration of their


434


yiSHNUPURANAM.


happiness; (or in the Krita and 'other ages great were the
toils of the regenerate to perform their duty. 1 did not wait
for your enquiry but replied at once to the question you want-
ed to put. Now what do ye, convdfeant with virtue, wish me
to tell you ?

Thereupon the ascetics saluted and praised Vyasa and
freed by him from uncertainty departed as they came* I have
also communicated to you. O excellent Maitreya, the secret—
this one great virtue of the otherwise vicious Kali age. I
shall now describe to you the dissolution of the world and the
aggregation of the elements.


- 00 -


SECTION III


PaRASARA said The dissolution of existing beings is
of three kinds, incidental, elemental and absolute. The
incidental is that w’hich relates to BrahmS and takes place
at the end of a Kalpa : the elemental is that which occurs
after two ParSrdhasj the absolute is final liberation from
existence.

Maitreya said .—Tell me, 0 excellent preceptor, what is
the enumeration of a Parardha, the expiration of two of
which is the period of elemental dissolution.

ParASARA said Parardha 0 Maitreya, is that number
which, takes place in the eighteenth place of figures enu-
merated according to the rule of decimal notation. At the
end of twice that period elemental dissolution takes place
when all the discrete products of nature are withdrawn into
Ihejr indiscrete source. The shortest period of time is ^
^UtS which is equal to tbC' twinkling of the liuman eye j


VlSlINUPURANAM.


435


fifteen MltrAs make a Kastith^; thitty Kashth&s one KhIA:
fifteen KalAs one N&dhikSl. A N^dhikA is determined by a
measure of water with a vessel made of twelve Palas and a
half of copper in the bo^m of which there is to be a hole
made with a tube of gold of the weight of four Mashas
and four inches long. According to the MSgadha measure
the vessel should holJ a Prastha (or sixteen Palas) of water.
Two of these Nadis make one Muhurta ; thirty of which
make one day and night. Thirty such periods constitute a
month; twelve months make a year, or a day and night of
the •celestials; and three hundred and sixty such days, cons-
titute a year of the celestials. An aggregate of four ages
consists of twelve thousand divine years ; and a thousand
periods of four ages complete a day of Brahma. That period
is also termed a Kalpa during which fourteen Munis preside
and at the end of it takes place the incidental or Brahm^
dissolution. The nature of this dissolution is very dreadful ;
hear, I shall describe this as welf as that which takes place
as the elemental dissolution.

At the end of a thousand period of four ages the earth isi
for the most part exhausted. A total dearth takes place
which lasts for a hundred years; and on account of the
failure of food all beings become languid and exanimate and
at last entirely die. The eternal Vishnu then takes the
character of kudra the destroyer and comes down to reunite
all his creatures with himself. He enters into the seven
rays of the sun, drinks up all the waters of the earth and
causes all moisture, whatever in living bodies or in the soil
to evaporate, thus drying up the whole earth. Thus fed with
his intervention with profuse moisture, the seven solar rays
dilate to seven suns, whose radiance glows above, below
and on every side and sets the three worlds and PAtSlIa on
hre. The three worlds, consumed by these suns, become
rugged and deformed all over their mountains, rivers and
seas ; and the cartli bare of verdure, and destitute of moisture


4j6 ViSHHUPURANAM.

nione remains resembling in appearance the back of a
tortoise. Hari, the destroyer of alt things^ in the form of
Rudra, who is the flame of time, becomes the scorching breath
i of the serpent Sesha and thereby^ reduces PMAla to ashes.
The great fire, when it has reduced all the divisions of
PAtftla to ashes, proceeds to the earth and consumes it also.
A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then spreads to the
region of the atmosphere and the sphere of the celestials
and wraps them in ruin. The three spheres shew like a
frying pan amidst the surrounding flames that prey upon all
movable and stationary things. 0 great saint, the inhabiunts
of the two upper spheres, having satisfied their respective
duties and being assailed by the heat, repair to Maharloka.
When that becmes heated itsr inhabitants, who after the
full period of stay, are desirous of ascending to higher regions
depart lor the Janaloka.

Having consumed the whole universe in the person of
Rudra, Jan^rddana, breaAes fourth heavy clouds, and those
called Sainvartta resembling huge elephants in bulk over-
spread the sky, roaring and darting lightnings. Some are
as white as the water-lily, some are dusky like smoke ; some
are yellow; some are ol a dun colour, like that of an ass;
some like ashes sprinkled on the forehead ; some are deep
bliie, as the lapis lazuly ; some azure like the sappfiire ; some
are white at the couch or the jasmine; some are black as
colly rum; some are like the lady^bird; some are of fierce-
ness of red arsenic and some are like the wing of the
painted joy. Such is the colour of these massy clouds
in form some resemble towns, some mountains, some aie like
houses and hovels and some are like columns. Huge in size
and loud in thunder they fill space. Showering down
torrents of water, those clouds quench tl»e dreadful fires which
involve the three worlds and then rain incessantly
a litindred years and deluge the whole iiniverse# Showering
daiyii in drops as large at dice these rains overspread


VI5HNUPURANAM.


437


the earth and fill the middle region and inundate the celes-
tial sphere* The world is now enshrouded in darkness
and all things animate and inanimate having perished^ the
clouds continue to poUr d|Kvn waters for more than a hundred
years.


SECTION IV.

— ;o: —

Par^SARa said: — 0 great ascetic, the waters having
reached the region of the seven Rishis the whole of three
worlds becomes one ocean. The breath of Vishnu, there-
upon, becomes a strong wind, which blows for more than
a hundred years until all the clouds are dispersed. The
wind is then re-absorbed and he, of whom all beings arc
made, the lord by whom all things exist, he, who is incon-
ceivable, without beginning of the universe, reposes sleep-
ing upon Sesha in th.e midst of the ocean. The creator
Hari, sleeps upon the ocean in the form of BrahmS glorified
by Sanaka and the saints who had departed to the Janaloka
and contemplated by the holy inhabitants of Brahmaloka,
anxious for final liberation — involved in mystic slumber, the
celestial personification of his own illusions and meditating
on his own ineffable spirit which is called Vasudeva. This
0 Majtreya, is the dissolution called incidental, because,
Hari| ill the form of Brahml , sleeps there as its incidental
cause.

When the universal spirit wakes, the world revives : when
h^^plear^ bis eyes, all things fall upon the bed of mystic sleep.
% the sah]i© manner a thousand great eyes comprise a day

se


43«


VISHNUPURANAM.


of BrahmS) so his night consists of the same period : during
which the world is submerged by a vast ocean. A. waking at
the end of his nighty the unborn Vishnu, in the character of
Brahm§, creates the universe anf^v in the manner formerly
described unto you. I have thus related to you the inter-
mediate dissolution of the world taking place at the end of
every Kalpa. I will now, 0 Maiireya, describe to you ele-
mental dissolution. When by dearth and fire all the worlds
and Patalas are dried up and the modification of Mahat and
other products of nature are by the will of Krishna destroyed
the progress of elemental dissolution is begun. At fir$t .the
water swallow up the property of earth which is the rudiment
of smell ; and earth, deprived of its property, proceeds to
destruction. Devoid of the rudiment of odour the earth be-
comes identical with water. The water then being much in-
creased roaring and rushing along fill up all space whether
agitated or still. When the universe is thus pervaded by the
waves of the watery element its rudiinental flavour is licked
up by the element of fire and on account of the destruction of
these rudiments the waters themselves are destroyed. Devoid
of the essential element of flavour they become indentical
with fire and the universe is therefore entirely filled with
flame which drinks up the water on every side and gradually
overspreads the whole of the world. While space is enve-
lope in flame above, below and all around the element of the
wind siezes upon the rudimental property or form which is
the cause of li.i*ht, and that being withdrawn, all becomes
of the nature of air. The rudiment of form being des-
troyed and lire deprived of its rudiment, air extinguishes fii^
and spreads resistlessly over space which is deprived of
when fire mages into air. Air then accompanied by sound
which is the source of ether, extends everywhere throughout
the ten regions of space until ^her seizes upon contact,
rudimental property; by the loss of which air is des-
troyed and ether remains unc))anged: deyoid of fornJi


VISHNUPURANAM.


435


flavour, touch and smell, it exists unembodied and vast and
pervades the whole of space. Ether, whose characteristic
property and rudiment is sound exists alone occupying all
the vacuity of space. At then the radical element ego-
tism devours sound and all the elements and faculties are at
once merged into their original. This primary clement is
conscientiousness combined with the property of darkness and
is itself swallowed up by Mahat whose characterestic property
is intelligence ; and earth and Mahat are the inner and
outer boundaries of the universe. In this manner, as in the
creation were the seven forms of nature (Prakriti) reckoned
from Mahat to earth • so at the time of elemental dissolution
these seven successively re-enter into each other. The egg
of Brahmil, is dissolved in the waters that surround it, with its
seven zones, seven oceans, seven regions, and their mountains.
The investure of water is drunk up by fire ; the stratum of
fire is absorbed by that of air : air blends itself with ether ;
the primary element of egotism devours the ether and is
itself taken up by intellect, which, along with all those, is
seized upon by nature. Equilibrium of the three properties,
without excess or deficiency, is called nature (Prakriti), origin
(Hetu), the chief Principle (Pradhana) cause (KSLrana)
supreme (Param). This Prakriti is essentially the same,
whether discrete or indiscrete ; only that which is discrete
finally is lost or absorbed in the indiscrete. Spirit also which
is one, pure, imperishable, eternal, all-pervading is a portion
of that superme spirit which is all things. That spirit which
is other than embodied spirit, in which there are no attri-
butes of name, species or the like — which is one with all
wisdom and is to be understood as sole existence, that is
Brahma, infinite glory, supreme spirit, supreme power, Vishnu,
all that is from whence the perfect sage returns no more.
Prsikriti, which I have 4<iscribed to you as being essentially
lifeih discrete and indiscrete and spirit both resolve into
spirit, eXupreme spirit is the upholder of all things


440


VIsHNiJPURANAM.


and the ruler of all tilings and is glorified in the Vedas and
in the Vedanta by the name of Vishnu,

Works as sanctioned by the Vedas are of two kinds,
active and quiescent ; by both of wCicb the universal person
is worshipped by mankind. He« the lord of sacrifice, the
male of sacrifice, the most excellent Purusha, is worshipped
by men in the active mode, by rites enjoined in the Rik,
Yayur and Sama Vedas. The soul of wisdom, the person of
wisdom, Vishnu, the giver of emancipation is worshipped by
the sages in the quiescent form through meditative devotion.
The exhaustless Vishnu is whatever thing that is designated
by long, short or prolated syllables or that which is without
a name. He is that which is dissolute or that which is in-
descrete : he is exhaustless spirit, supreme spirit, universal
spirit, Hari, the assumer of universal forms. Nature, dis-
crete or indiscrete is absorbed unto him, and spirit also
merges into the all diffusive and unobstructed spirit. The
period of two ParSrdhas, as I have related to you, 0 Maitreya,
constitutes a day of that powerful Vishnu, and whilst the
products of nature are merged into this source, nature into
spirit and that into the supreme, that period is called his
night and is of equal duration with his day. But in reality, to
that supreme spirit there is neither day nor night and these
distinctions are only figuratively applied to the Almighty.
I have thus explained to you the nature of elemental dissolu-
tion and will now explain to you which is final.


SECTION V.


P ARASARA said 0 Maitreya,ohavlng investigated
pf worldly pain and having acquired true wisdoun apd
^iapMent from wordly objects the wt$e (pah obtaiae '


VISIINUPURANAM.


44 ^


liberation. The first of the three pains, or Adhyatmika is of two
kinds-^physical and mental. Bodily pain, as you shall hear,
is of many sorts. Affections of the head, catarrh, fever,
cholic, fistula, spleen, hdltorsboids, intumescence, sickness,
opthalmia, dysentry, leprosy, and many other diseases consti-
tute physical affliction. Mental pains are love, anger, fear,
hate, covetousness, stupefaction, despair, sorrow, malice, dis-
dain, jealousy, envy and many other passions that are creat-
ed in the mind. These and diverse other afflictions, mental
or physical, are comprised under the class of worldly sufferings
which is called Adhyatmika, The pain Adhibliautika, 0 ex-
cellent Brahman, is every kind of evil that is inflicted upon
men by beasts, birds, men, goblins, snakes, fiends, or reptiles
and the pain that is called Adhidaivika or superhuman is the
work of cold, heat, wind, rain, lightning and other phenomena.
Affliction, 0 Maitreya, is multiplied in thousands of shapes
in the progress of conception, birth, decay, disease, death and
hell. The tender animal exists in the embryo surrounded
by abundant filth, floating in water and distorted in its back,
neck and bones; enduring severe pain even in the course of
its development and disordered by the acid, bitter, pun-
gent and saline articles of its mother's food ; incapable of
extending or contracting its limbs, reposing amidst slime of
ordure and urine ; every way incommoded with conciousness
and calling to memory many hundred previous births. Thus
exists the embryo in profound affliction bound to the worlds
by its former works.

When the child is about to be born, its face is besmeared*
by excrement, urine, blood, mucus, and semen ; its attachment;
to the uterus is ruptured by the Praj§pati wind : it is turned
head downwards and violently expelled from the womb by the-
powerful and painful winds of parturition ; and the infant, losing;
for a time all sensation whan brought in contact with the ex-
ternal air^ is immediately deprived of its intellectual know-
Icidge. Then born the child is tortured in every limb, as jl


, 44^ vrSHNUPURANAM,

pierced with thorns or cut to pieces with a saw, and falls from
its fetid lodgement as from a sore, like a crawling thing upon
the earth. Unable to feel itself, unable to turn itself, it is de-
pendent on the will of others for beftg bathed and nourished.
Laid upon a dirty bed, it is bitten by insects and mosquitoes
and has not power to drive them away. Many are the pangs
attending birth and many are those which succeed to birth ;
and many are the afflictions that are inflicted by elemental
and superhuman powers in the state of childhood covered by
the gloom of ignorance; and internally bewildered man
knows not whence he is, who he is, whither he goeth*nor
what is fiis nature; by what bonds he is bound ; what is
cause and what is not cause ; what is to be done and what
is to be left undone ; what is to be said and what is to be kept
silent, what is righteousness and \vhat is iniquity; in what
it consists or how ; what is right, what is wrong ; what is vir-
tue, what is vice. Thus man, like a brute beast addicted only
to animal gratification, suffers the pain that ignorance brings
about. Ignorance, darkness, inactivity influence those de-
void of knowledge so that pious works are neglected; but
hell is the consequence of neglect of religious acts, accord-
ing to the great sages, and the ignorant therefore suffer afflic-
tion both in this world and in the next.

When old age comes in, the body is infirm, the limbs
are relaxed j the face is emaciate and shrivelled ; its skin
is wrinkled and scantily covers the veins and sinews ; the
eyes discern not a far off, and the pupil gazes on vacuity:
the nostrils are stuffed with hair ; the trunk trembles as it
moves ; the bones appear beneath the surface ; the back is
bowed and the joints are bent ; the digestive fire is extinct
and there is little appetite and little vigour ; walking, rising
sitting, sleeping are all painful efforts ; the ear is dull ; the eye

rjs dim; the mouth is disgusting with dribbling saliva; the

i^jtiKsno Ippger are obedient Co thp will; and as deati*
.^j^proathes, the, things that are perceived tyiffi /ai;e.;to"


ViSHNUPURANAM.


445


mediately forgotten. The utterance of a single sentence
is fatiguing and wakefulness is perpetuated by difficult
breathing, coughing and painful exhaustion. The old man is
lifted up by some body elffe ; he is an object of contempt to
his servants, his children and his wife. Incapable of
cleanliness, of amusement, or food, or desire, he is laughed
at by his dependents, and disregarded by his kin ; and
dwelling on the exploits of his youth, as on the actions of
a past life, he sighs deeply and is sorely distressed. Such
are some of the pains to which old age is doomed. I will
no^ describe to you the agonies of death.

The neck droops, the feet and hands are relaxed ; the
man is repeatedly exhausted, subdued and visited with
interrupted knowledge ; the principle of selfishness afflicts
him and he thinks what will become of my wealth, my lands,
my children, my wife, my servants, my house ? The joints of
his limbs arc tortured with severe pains as if cut by a
saw or as if they were pierced by the sharp arrows of the
destroyer; he rolls his eyes and tosses about his hands
and feet ; his lips and palate are prached and dry and his
throat obstructed by foul humours and deranged vital airs,
emits a rattling sound ; he is afflicted with burning heat, thirst
and hunger: and he. at last passes away tortured by the
servants of the judge of the dead, to undergo a renewal of
his sufferings in another body. These are the afflictions to
which a man is doomed when he dies. I will now describe
to you the tortures which they suffer in hell.

Men are bound, when they die, by the servants of the
king of Tartarus, with chords, and beaten witli their sticks
and have then to encounter the fierce aspect of Yama and
the horrors of their terrible route. In the different bolls
there are various intolerable tortures with burning sand,
hre, machines, and weapo#s ; some are severed with saws,
some roasted in forges, some are chopped with axes, some
buri^ Jo the ground, some are mounted on slakes, some


444


VISHNUPURAMAM.


cast to wild beasts to be devoured, some are gna\v«*d by the
vultures, some torn by tigers, some are boiled in oil, some
rolled in caustic slime, some are precipitated from great
heights, some are tossed upwards fiy engines. The number
of punishments inflicted in hell, which are the consequences
of sin, is infinite. But not in hell alone do the souls of the
deceased undergo pain : there is no cessation even in heaven
for its temporary inhabitant is even tormented with the
prospect of descending to earth again. He is again liable
to conception and to birth ; he is merged again into the
embryo and repairs to it when about to be born ; then 416
dies, as soon as born, or in infancy, or in youth, or in
manhood or in old age. Death sooner or later is inevitable.
As long as he lives he is immersed in manifold afflictions,
like the seed of the cotton amidst the down that is to be
spun into thread. In acquiring, losing, and preserving
wealth there are many griefs ; and so there are in the mis-
fortunes of our friends. Whatever is produced that is most
acceptable to man ; that, Maitreya, becomes a seed whence
springs the tree of sorrow. Wife, children, servants, houses,
lands, riches, contribute much more to the misery than to
the happiness of mankind. Where could man, scorched by
fires of the sun of this world, look for felicity, were it not
for the shade afforded by the tree of emancipation ? Attain-
ment of the divine being is considered by the wise as the
remedy of the three-fold class of ills that beset the different
stages of life, conception, birth and decay, as characterised
by that only happiness which effaces all other kinds of
felicity however abundant, and as being absolute and final.

It should therefore be the assiduous endeavour of wise
men to attain unto god. The means of such attainment
are said, great Muni, to be knowledge and works. Know-
ledge is of two kinds, that which i# derived from scripture,
and that which is derived from reflection. Brahma that is the
wnrd is compos^^ scripture. Brahma that is supreme is


VISHNUPURANA W


445


produced of reflection, fgnotance is utter darkness, in
virhich knowledge, obtained through any s^nse, shines like a
lamp; but the knowledge that is derived from reflection
breaks upon the obscurity. What has been said by Manu,
wl»en alppealing to the meaning of the Vedas with respect
to this subject, I will repeat to you. There are two forms of
spirit or god, the spirit, which is word, and spirit, which is
supreme. He who is thoroughly imbued with the word of
god obtains supreme spirit. The Atharva Veda also states
that there are two kinds of knowledge ; by the one, which
is ‘Dhe supreme, god is attained: the other is that which
consists of the Rik and other Vedas. That which is im-
perceptible, undecaying, inconceivable, unborn, inexhaus-
tible, indescribable; which has neithei form, nor hands nor
feet; which is almighty, omniprescMit, eternal; the cause of
all things, and without cause, permeating all, itself un pene-
trated, and from wliich all thing.s proceed, that is the object
whidh the wise behold, that is Brahma, that is the supreme
state, that is the thing spoken of by the Vedas, the infinitely
subtle, supreme condition of Vishnu. That essence of the
supreme is defined by the term Bhagavat : the word Bhagavat
is the denomination of that primeval and eternal Gad : and he
who fully understands the meaning of that expression, is pos-
sessed of holy wisdom, the sum and substance of the three
Vedas. The word Bhagavat is a convenient form to be used
in the adoration of that supreme being, to whom no term
is applicable; and therefore Bhagavat expresses that supreme
spirit which is individual, almighty, and tlic cause of causes
of all things. The letter Bh implies the cherisher and
supporter of the universe. By^^^^is understood the leader
impeller, or creator. The dissyllable Bha^a indicate the
six properties, dominion, might, glory, splendour, wisdom,
and dispassion. The pu|port of the letter va is that ele-
*nental spirit in which all beings exist, and which exists in all
i^eings. And thus this Great word Bhagav.^n is the name


4 57


446


VISHNUPURANAM.


of VSsudeva, who is one with the Supre me Brahma and of
no one else. This word therefore, whdich is the general
denomination of an adorable object, is not used in reference
to the supreme in a general but a spf.cial signification. When
applied to any other thing or person it is used in its custo-
mary or general import. In latter castf! it may purport one
who knows the origin and end and revolutions of being and
what is wisdom and what ignorance. In tbe former it denotes
wisdom, energy, power, dominion, might, \i;lory, without end
and without defect.

The term VSsudeva means that all bt ings abide in (bat
supreme spirit and that he abides in al.l beings as was
formerly explained by Kesidhwaja to KJiSndikya called
Janaka when he enquired of him an explanation of the name
of the immortal Vasudeva. He said “He dweJleth internally
in all beings and all things dwell in him ; and thence the lord
Vasudeva is the creator and preserver of the world. He
though identical with all beings is beyond and si^parate from
material nature, from its products, from properties and from
imperfection; he is beyond all investing substance ; he is
universal soul ; all the interstices of the universe are filled
up by him ; he is one with all good qualities ; and all created
beings are endowed with but a small portion of his indivi-
dualiiy. Assuming at with various shapes he bestows benefits
on the whole world, which was his work. Glory, might,
dominion, wisdom, energy, power and oth^r attributes arc
collected in him. Supreme of the supreme, in whom no im»-
perfections abide, lord over finite and infinite, god in indivi-
f*uals and universals, visible and invisible, omnipotent, omni*
present, onmicif'nt, almighty. The wisdom, perfect, pure,
supreme, undefiled and one only by wliich he is con-
ceived, contemplated and known, that is wisdom; all eiJ'®
Jgiionnce.


•00


SE17TI0N VI


ParASARA said: — The Purusottama is also known by
holy study and devout meditation ; and either, as the cause
of attaining him, is entitled Brahma. From study let a man
proceed to meditation and from meditation to study ; by
perfection in both supreme spirit becomes manifest. Study
is one eye wherewith to behold it and meditation is the
other: he who is identical with Brahma sees not with the
eye of flesh.

MaitREYA said .-—Revered preceptor, I am desirous to
know what is meant by the term Yoga, by understanding
which I may behold the supreme being, the upholder of the
universe.

PARASARA I will repeat to you, 0 Maitreya, the ex-
planation formerly given by Kesidhwaja to the high-minded
Khkndikya also called Janaka.

Maitreya : Tell me, first. Brahman, who Kliandikya was,
and who was Kesidhwaja ; and how it happened that a conr
versation relating to the practice of Yoga occurred between
them.

ParasARA. There was Janaka named Dharmadhwaja
who had two sons Amitadhwaja and Kritadhwaja; and the
latter was a king ever devoted to the existent supreme spirit ;
his son was the celebrated Kesidhwaja. The son of Amita-
dhwaja was Janaka called Kh^ndikya. Khandikya was
diligent and celebrated on earth for pious observances.
Kesidhwaja on the other hand was gifted with spiritual know-
ledge. These two were engaged in hostilities and KhSn-
dikya was driven from his principality by Kesidhwaja. Ex-
pelled from his dominioits he wandered with a few followers,
his priest and bis counsellors, amidst woods and mountains
where destitute of true wisdom, he performed many sacrifices


448


VISHNUPURANAM.


expecting thereby to obtasn divine truth and to escape from
death by ignorance.

Once on a time, while Kesidhwaja, the best of those who
are skilled in devotion, was engaged in devout practices
a fierce tiger slew his milch cow in the lonely forest. When
the Raja heard that the cow had been killed he asked
the ministering priests what sort of penance would expatiate
the crime They said that they did not know and neferred
him to Kaseru. And consulted by the king Kaseru told him
that he did not know and Sunaka would be able to tell
him. Accordingly the Raja went to Sunaka ; but he said
too. “lam as unable, O great king, to answer your ques-
tion as Kaseru has been ; there is no one on earth who can
give you the informatiQU except your enemy KhSndikya,
whom you have vanquished.”

Being thus accosted Kesidhwaja said “ I will go then
and pay a visit to my enemy; no matter, if he kill me, for
I shall then obtain the reward that attends , being slam in a

holy cause ; whereas if on the other hand he tells me what
penance to perform then my sacrifice will be unimpaired iii
efficacy.’' Accordingly he ascended his car, having clothed
himself in the deerskin and went to the forest where the
wise Khlndikya lived. When Khandikya saw him approach
his eyes reddened with ire and. lie took up his bow and
said to him “ You have armed yourself with deerskin to bring
about my destruction thinking that iu. such a.dress. you, will
be safe from me ; but fool, tbe deer upon whose backs this
skin is seen are slain by you and me with sharp , arrows^ so
1 will slay you ; you shall not go free whilst I lam living. You
are an unprincipled felon, who have robbed me ot nry. king-
dom and are deservjp^ of death.” To, this Kesidhwaja
replied : “1 have come here Khaodihya,. to.cpjiault yw ab^t
Hiy , doubts and not with any .hoetile iotenti.On .5 lay aside
tbetefore both your arrow and anger.’.’ TIiMa- addiessed
l^Siidikya letircd for a while , with lii* ami;


VISHNUPURANAM.


449


priest and :on9ulted with them what course to adopt, They
strongly urged him to slay Kesidhwaja who was in his grasp
and by whose death be would again become the monarch of
the whole world. Khaitiikya replied to them : It is un*-
doubledly true that by such an act I would become the
monarch of the whole world but he would thereby conquer
the next world : whilst the earth would be mine. And if 1
do not slay him I shall conquer the world to come and leave
him this earth. It appears to me that this world is not so
much valuable as the next : for the subjugation of the next
world continues for ever while the conquest over this is but
temporary. I will therefore not kill him but tell him what
he wishes to know.'"^

Coming accordingly to Kesidhwaja, KhJtndikya asked him
to propose his- question which he promised to sPnswer. And
Kesidhwaja related to him what had taken place, that death
of the cow and desired to know what penance be should per*
form. Kesidhwaja, in reply, explained to him fully the ex-
piation that was suited to tlie Occasion ; and then w'ith hte
permission Kesidhwaja returned to the place* of ^actifice
and regularly fulfilled every necessary act Having com-
pleted the ceremony with its suplementary rites Kesidhwa|a
accomplished all his -objects : but he then reflected thus
*‘The priests whom I invited to attend have all been duly
honoured ; all those who had any request to make have been
pleased with my complying with their desires ; all that is
proper for this w'orld,, has been effected' by me ^ why then my
mind should feel as if my duty had been unfulfilled.” Think-
ing this he remembered that lie had not presented to KhSlndi-
kya the gift that it is proper to offer to a spiritual preCAptor
and mounting his chariot ho imtnediaiely started fof the
dense forest where the sago residfed. Upon hfs reappearance
KhAndikya toolt up Sis «rms to slay him ; buf KosidhWaj'a
exclaimed ^TorBear, venerable sngfe;** I- have not come' hither
in jnre yon ; throw off your wmitt, Kliandlkyn, know that


4S0


VtSHNUPURANAM.


I have come here to offer you that present which is due to
you as my instructor. Through your lesson I have fully
completed my sacrifice and I am therefore desirous to give
you a gift. Demand what it shall bl/.”

Having once more consulted his counsellors^ KhAndikya
told them the purpose of his rivars visit and asked them what
he should demand. His friends recommended him to take
back his whole kingdom for prudent men acquire them with-
out conflicting hosts. The king Khandikya reflecting laugh-
ed and said to them ** Why should a person like me, be de-
sirous of a temporary earthly kingdom ? Indeed you are
very good advisers as regards the present worldly affairs —
but you are undoubtedly ignorant of the life to come.'* Say-
ing this he returned to Kesidhwaja and said to him *'Is it
true that you wish to make me a gift as to your preceptor ?

Indeed I do*' answered Kesidhwaja. Whereto KhSndikya
replied ‘Then, as it is known that you are learned in the
spiritual learning that teaches the doctrine of the soul, if you
will communicate that knowledge unto me you will have dis-
charged your debt to your preceptor. Communicate unto me
what acts are efficacious for the alleviation of human suffer-
ings.*'


SECTION VII.

—;o:—

Kesidhwaja said ** But why have you not demanded of
me my kingdom free from all troubles ; what else save domi-
nion is acceptable to the warrior r^e ?** Whereto KhAndi-
kyi replied ** 1 will tell you why I did not make such a demand
nor require that territory which is an obicct of ignorant


vishnupuranam.


451


ambition. It is the duty of the warrior to protect his sub-
jects in peace and to kill in fight the enemies of his way. It
is no fault that you should have taken my kingdom from one
who was unable to defend«t, to whom it was a bondage and
who was thus freed from the incumbrance of ignorance.
My desire of dominion originated from my being born to
possess it; the ambition of others which proceeds from human
frailties, is not compatible with virtue. To solicit gift is
not the duty of a prince and warrior. It is for this reason I
have not demanded of you the kingdom, a request which is
tlietoutcome of ignorance. Those only, who are ignorant^
whose minds are attached to selfishness? and who are intoxi-
cated with the liquor of self-sufficiency, desire kingdoms ; not
such as I am."

ParaSARA said : — Being greatly delighted, the king
Kesidliwaja praised Khandikya and said to him affectionately
^‘Listen to my words. Through the desire of escaping death
by the ignorance of works I exercise the regal power, cele-
brate various sacrifices and enjoy pleasures subversive of
purity. Fortunate it is for you that your mind has attached
itself to the dominion of discrimination. Pride of your racef
now listen to the real nature of ignorance. The mistaket^
notion that self consists in what is not seif and that property
consists in what is not one\s owm constitute the double seed
of the tree of ignorance. The ill judging embodied being,,
bewildered by the darkness of fascination situated in a
body composed of five elements, loudly asserts “This is
r* but who would ascribe spiritual individuality to a
body in which soil is distinct from ether, air, fire, water
and earth. What man of understanding assigns to dis-
emhadied spirit corporeal fruition or what lands, houses
and the like that it simuld say, '*These are mine ?’* What
wise man entertains the idea of property in sons or grand*
sons begotten of the body after the spirit has abandoned it ?
Man performs all acts for the purpose of bodily fruition


452


vishnupuranam.


and the consequence of such acts is ianother bofly ; so that
their result is nothing but confinement to botl.ly existence*
In the same manner as a mansion of clay is plastered wiih
clay and water, so the body which® of earth is prepetuated
by earth and water. The body consisting of five elements
is nourished by substances equally composed of those ele-
ments ; but since this Is the case, what is there in this life
that man should be proud of ? Travelling the path of the
world for many thousands of births, man attains only the
weariness of bewilderment and is smothered by the dust
of imagination. When that dust is washed away by#lhe
bland water of "real knowledge, then the weariness of be-
wilderment, sustained by the wayfarer through repeated
births, is removed. When that weariness , is ; relieved the
internal man is at peace and he obtains that supreme felicity
which is unequalled and undisturbed. This soul is pure and
composed of wisdom and happiness. The properties of
pain, ignorance and impurity are tliose of naiure and not
of soul. 0 Muni, there is no affinity between fire and water
but when the latter is placed over the former in a caldorn,
it bubbles and boils and exhibits the properties of fire. In
the same manner when soul is associated with Piiikriti it is
vitiated by egotism and the rest and assumes the qualities
of grosser nature although essentially distinct from them
and compatible. Such is the seed of ignorance as I have
explained it to you : there is but one remedy for earthly
sorrows — the practice of devotion; no other is known.”

Thereupon Khandikya said -“Do you then the foremost
of those versed in contemplative devotion explain to me
what that is, for in the race of the descendants of iNimi you
are best acquainted with the sacred writings in which it is
taught.^' Whereto Kesidhvvaja replied : “Hear the account
c»f the nature of cdi'empletive devoflon, which 1 am imparting
to you and by perfection in w'hich the sage attains mdlutron
and rtver stfftrs birth again. . The ;tnird


ViSHNUPURANAM.


453


of man is the cause both of his bondage and his liberation
its addiction to the objects of sense is the means of his
bondage ; its separation from objects of sense is the means
of his liberation. The sa<0, who is capable of discriminative
knowledge, must therefore restrain his mind from all objects
of sense and therewith meditate upon the supreme being,
who is identical with spirit, in order to obtain liberation ; for
that supreme spirit attracts to itself him who meditates upon
it, and who is of the same nature, as the loadstone attracts
the iron by the virtue which is common to itself and to its
products. Contemplative devotion is the union with Brahma
effected by that condition of mind which has attained
perfection through those exercises which complete the con-
trol of self ; and he, whose contemplative devotion is cha-
racterised by the property of such absolute perfection, is
in truth, 0 sage, expectant of final liberation from the
world.

The Yogi, when he first gives himself up to the practice
of contemplative devotion, is called the novice or prac-
titioner ; when he has attained spiritual union, he is called
the adept or he whose meditations are accomplished. Should
the thoughts of the former be unvitiated by any obstructing
imperfection, he will obtain freedom after practising devotion
through several lives. The latter speedily obtains liberation
in that existence, all his acts being consumed by the fire of
contemplative devotion. The sage, who would bring his
mind into a proper state for the performance of devout
contemplation, must be devoid of desire and observe invari-
ably continence, 1:6mpassion, ifuOi;ildnesty, and disinterested-
ness ; he must fix his mind upon the supreme Brahma, prac-
tising holy study, purification, contentment, penance and
ielftcontrol. These virtues, respectively termed the five acts
>f restraint and five of obligation bestow excellent rewards
^han practised for the sake of reward and eternal liberation
ind Mrben they are not prompted by the desire of transient

5 »


«4


VISHNUPURANAM.


benefits. Endowed with these merits, the sage, self-res-
trAined^ should sit in one of the modes termed BhadrAsana
and engage in contemplation. Bringing his vital airs called
PrAna under subjection, by freqii^nt repetition is thence
called PrAnAyAma which is^ as it were, a seed with a seed.
In this, the breath of expiration and that of inspiration are
alternately obstructed constituting the act two-fold; and
the suppression of both modes of breathing produces a third.
The exercise, of yogi, whilst endeavouring to bring before
^his thoughts the gross form of the eternal, is denominated
Alambana. He is then to perform Pratyahara, which i?on-
sists ih Vestraining His hrgarts of sense from susceptibility
to outward impressions, and directing them entirely to men-
tal perceptions. By these means the entire subjugation of
the unsteady senses is effected : and if they are not con*
trolljsd the sage will not accomplish his devotions. When
by the Pranlyama the vital airs are restrained and the senses
are subjugated by PratyAhAra then the sage will be able
to keep his mind steady in its perfect asylum.

KhAndikya then said to Kesidhwaja Illustrious sage, in-
form me what is that perfect asylum of the mind resting on
which it destroys all the products of human infirmity/* To
this Keshidhwaja replied. **The asylum of mind is Brahma,
which, of its own nature, is two-fold ; as being with or
without form ; and each of these, is supreme and secondary.
Apprehension of Brahroa or spirit is again three-fold. I
will explain the different kinds to you, they are that which
is called Brahma, that which is named from works, and that
which comprehends both is the third. So that mental ap-
prehension is three-fold. Sanandana and other were en-
dowed with the apprehension of the nature of Brahma. The
celestials and others whether animate or inanimate are
possessed of that which regards tets. The apprehension,
th)at comprehends both works and spirit, exists in Hiraftya-
and others, who are poAseised of eotltempfatiVe


VI8HNUPURANAM.


455


knowledge of their own nature and who also exercise cer-
tain active functions as creation and the rest. Until all
.acts, which are the causes of notions of individuality, are
discontinued, spirit is ojje thing and universe is another,
to those who contemplate objects as distinct and various ;
but that is called true knowledge or knowledge of Brahma
which recognises no distinctions, which contemplates only
simple existence which is undefinable by words and is to
be discovered solely in one*s own spirit. That is the supreme
unborn, imperishable form of Vishnu, who is without form
aryd characterised as a condition of the supreme soul, which
is variously modified from the condition of universal form.
The sages, in the early stage, cannot perceive this form so

I hey must direct their minds to the gross form of Hari,
vhich is of universal perceptibility. They must meditate
ipon him as Hiranyagarbha, as the> glorious VAtava a$
Praj^pati, as the winds, the Vasus, the Rudras, the suns, stars,
planets, Gandharbas, Yakshas, Daityas, all the celestials,
and their progenitors, men, animals, mountains, oceans,
rivers, trees, all beings and all sources of beings, all modifica-
tions of natures, and its products, whether sentient of un-
conscious, one-footed, two-footed, or many-footed ; all these
are the sensible form .of Hari, to be apprehended by three
kinds of apprehension. All this universal world, this world
of moving and stationary beings is pervaded by the energy
of Vishnu, who is of the nature of supreme Brahma. This
energy is supreme, or when it is that of conscious embodied
spirit it is secondary. Ignorance, or that which is denomU
nated from works, i$ a third energy ; by which the omni-
present energy of embodied spirit is ever excited and whence
it suffers all the pains of cepeated worldly existence. Obscured
by that energy, the energy that is denominated from em-
bodied spirit, is characte|ised by different degrees of perfec-
tion in all created beings. In inanimate things it exists in a
very small degree ; it is more in things that have life^ kui


456


VISHNUPURANAM.


are (without motion) ; in insects it is still more abundant, and
still more in birds : it is more in wild animals arid in
domestic animals the faculty is still greater : men have more
of this faculty than animals, and th^ce arises their authority
over them ; the faculty exists in a supreme degree in N2lgaa,
Gandharbas, Yakshas, celestials, Sakra, Prajapati and
Hiranyagarbha ; and is above ail predominant in that male
(Vishnu) of whom all these various creatures are but the
diversified forms, permeated universally by his energy, as
all-pervading as the other.

That state of Vishnu, which is without form, is to be medi-
tated upon the sages and this imperceptible and shapeless
foFm of Brahma is called by the wise ^'tliat which is'^ and
in which all the energies, described before, reside. 0 lord of
men, from this state of Vishnu and which is formless, proceeds
his universal form and other great form and other forms en-
dowed with his diverse energies. For the behoof of the
universe he assumes various forms, that of the celestial, birds
and men— but he is never born being influenced by his pris-
tine actions; he is all'Comprehending and irresistible. This
universal form of his is to be meditated upon by the sage for
the purpose of puriflcation for it washes away all sins. As the
fire, combined with wind, consumes twigs with its increased
flame, so this form of Vishnu, when meditated upon by the
; sage in his h -art, destroys all sins. Let us therefore flx
[our mind resolutely upon him who is the asylum of three
fold energies and this is the operation of the mind which is
called perfect Dh^ran§ : and thus the perfect asylum of in-
dividual as well as universal spirit, that which beyond the
three modes of apprehension, is attained for the eternal
emancipation of the sage. 0 foremost of men, the gods and
others who rest in the minds are impure and spring from
Acts. The apprehension by the mild, of that visible form of
Vfishriu without regard to subsidiary forms is thence called
0b|IA)tit and I will now desdribe to you the perceptible form


VISIINUPURANAM.


457


ol Hari which no mental retention will manifest except in a
mind that is fit to become the receptacle of the idea. The
meditating sage must think of Vishnu] as having a de
lightful and lovely countenance with eyes like the leaf of
the lotuS) smooth cheeks^ and a broad and brilliant fore-
head ; ears of equal size, the lob^s of which are embellished
with splendid pendants, a painted neck and a broad breast
on which shines the mystic mark of Sribatsa; a belly
falling in graceful fold, with a deep-seated navel ; eight
long arms or else four ; and firm and well knit thighs and
legs, with well-formed feet and toes. Let him, with well-
governed thoughts, contemplate, as long as he can persevere
with undivided attention, Hari as clad in a yellow raiment,
wearing a rich diadem on his head and brilliant armlets and
bracelets on his arms and bearing in his hands, the bow, the
shell, the mace, the sword, the discus, the rosary, the lotus
and the arrow. The Yogi may believe his retention to
be perfect when this image never vanishes from his mind,
whether he be going or standing, or be engaged in any
other voluntary act. The sage may then meditate upon
the form of Vishnu without his arms as the shell, mace, discus
and bow and as placid and bearing only bis rosary. When
the idea of this image is firmly retained, then he may
meditate on Vishnu wit^hout his diadem, bracelets or other
ornaments. He may next contemplate him as having but
one single limb and may then fix bis whole thoughts upon
the body to which the limbs belong. The process of form-
ing a lively image in the mind exclusive of all other objects,
constitutes DhySna, or meditation, which is perfected by six
stages and when an accurate knowledge of self, free from
all distinction, is attained by this mental meditation that, is
terme d Samadbi.

After accomplishingothis stage the Yogi acquires dis-
criminative knowledge, which is the means of enabling
litidg ifhen all the three kinds of apprehension are


458


VIsHNUPURANAM.


destroyed to attain the attainable supreme being. Embodied
spirit is the user of the instrument, which instrument is true
knowledge ; and by it that identification of the former is
attained. Liberation which is the ^object to be effected
being accomplished discriminative knowledge ceases. When
endowed with the apprehension of the nature of the object
of enquiry, then ther^is no difference between the individual
and supreme spirit ; difference is the ontcome of tlie^absence
of true knowledge. When that ignorance which is the cause
of the difference between the individual and universal spirit
b destroyed filially and for ever who shall ever make thjit
distinction between them which does not exist ? Thus I
have, 0 Khandikya, in reply to your question, explained to
you what is meant by contemplative devotion both fully and
summarily. What else do you wish to hear ? ”

Khandikya replied to Keshidhwaja and said i—The ex-
planation, that has been given by you of the real nature of
contemplative devotion, has satisfied all my wishes and re-
moved all impurity from my mind. The expression * mine *
that I have been accustomed to use is untruth and cannot be
otherwise declared by those who know what is to be known.
The words and ‘mine' constitute ignorance ; but practice
is influenced by ignorance. Supreme truth cannot.be defined
for it is not to be explained by words. Depart, therefore,
Keshidwaja ; you llave done all that is necessary for my real
happiness, in teaching me contemplative devotion, the ex-
haustible bestower of liberation from existence.^’

After receiving becoming homage from Khindikya, Keshi-
dhwaja came back to his capital. And having made his son Raja
be repaired to woods to accomplish bis devotions, his whole
mind being intent on Govinda. His whole mind being devo-
ted to one object only and being purified by the practice of
sdf^restraint, self-control and the rest be obtained absorption
into the pure and perfect spirit whicIL is termed Vishnu* And
prder to obtain liberation Kcsbidb.vraja became i^vorse from


VISHNUPURANAM.


459


his own perishable works and lived amidst objects of sense
and practised religious rites without expecting any benefit
thereform. Being freed from ail sins by pure and auspici-
ous fruition he obtainedPthat perfection which removes all
miseries.


- 00 -


SECTION VIII.


PaRaSARA said: — I have thus explained to you the
third kind of worldly dissolution, that which is absolute
and final which is liberation and resolution into eternal spirit.
I have related unto you the primary and secondary creation,
the families of patriarchs, the periods of the Manwantaras
and the genealogical histories of the kings. I have described
briefly to you, who were desirous of hearing it, the imperish..
able Vaishnava Purina which destroys all sins, the most
excellent of all sacred writings and the means of attaining
the great end of man. ‘ If you have any thing else to ask,
put the question and I will answer it.

Maitkeya said :~Holy preceptor, you have indeed said
unto me all I wished to know and I listened to it with dovoted
attention, 0 great saint, all my doubts have been removed
and my heart has been purified. By thy favour, I have been
acquainted with the account of creation, preservation and
destruction. I have also learnt from you of Vishnu in his
collective fourfold form ; his three energies; and the three
modes of apprehending the object of contemplation. By
thy favour I have acquirefl a thoroug knowledge of all this
and there Is nothing else worthy to be known when it is
ot^ce dnderstood that Vishnu and his world are not mutually


460


VISHNUPURANAM.


distinct. By your kindness, 0 great Muni, you have removed
all my doubts since you have instrt^cted in the duties of
the several tribes and in other deities ; the nature of active
life and discontinuance of action ana derivation of all that
exists from works. And I have nothing else to enquire of
you, 0 Venerable Brahmin ; and pardon me, if by answering
to my questions you have been fatigued in any way. Pardon
me for the trouble I have given you through that amiable
quality of the virtuous which makes no distinction between a
disciple and a child.

ParaSaRA said:— I huve related to you this PurSifa
which is equally as sacred as the Vedas by hearing which
all sins are expatiated. In this, have been described to you
the primary and secondary creation, the families of the
patriarchs, the Manwantaras, the regal dynasties ; the
celestials, Daityas, Gandharbas, serpents, R^kshasas,Yakshas,
Vidhyidharas, Siddhas, and heavenly nymphs; ascetics,
endowed with spiritual wisdom and practisers of devotion,
the distinctions of four castes, and the actions of the most
eminent amongst men ; holy places on the earth, holy rivers
and oceans, sacred mountains, and legends of the truly
wise, the deities of the different tribes and observances
enjoined in the Vedas. By hearing this, all sins are obli-
terated. In this also the glorious Hari has been revealed
the cause of the creation, preservation and destruction of
the world ; the soul of all things and himself all things ;
by the repetition of whose name man is freed from all
sins which fly to the wolves that are frightened by a lion.
The repetition of his name with devout faith is the best
remover of all sins, destroying them as fire purifies the metal
from the dross. By the mere recollection of the name of
Hari all the stains of Kali Yuga are removed and piety **
foereased. That Hari, who is all<?eaUting things, who is
t||ranyagarbha, Indra, Rudra, the Adilyas, the Afwins, the
Wikdf; the Kinnaras, the Vasus, the


VI5HNUPURANAM.


46i


the celestials, the Yakshas, serpents, Kikshasas, the Sidhas;
Daityas, Gandharyas, DSnavas, nymphs, the stars, aster-
ism, planets, the seven Rishis, the regents and warders
of the quarters, m/fi, Brahmans and the rest, animals
tame and wild, insects^; birds, ghosts and goblins, trees,
mountains, woods, river, oceans, legions living underneath the
earth, the divisions of the earth and all perceptible object — he
who is identical with all things, who knoweth all things, who
is the form of all things being himself without form and who
is everything from the mount Meru |o an atom, he the
gUrious Vishnu and the destroyer of all sins, is described
in this Purana. The reward, which one obtains by hearing
this PurSaa, is equal to that obtained by the performance of
a horse-sacrifice or by fasting at the holy places of Pryaga,
Pushkara, Kurukshetra or Arbuda, Hearing this PurSna
once only is as effciacious as offering oblations in a perpetual
fire for one year.

The man, who having controlled his passions, bathes at
Mathura on the twelfth day of the month of Jyeshlha and
beholds the image of Hari, obtains a great reward and so
does he who witi) his mind devoted to Kesava, recites this
Purina. The man, who bathes in the river Jamuna, on the
twelfth lunation of the light fortnight ol the month in which
the moon is in the mansion Jyeshtha, and who fasts and
worships, Achyuta in the city of Mathura, receives the recom-
pense of an uninterrupted horse-sacrifice. Beholding the
ancestors of some eminent amongst men, attaining prosperity
by the pious observances of their descendants, another man’s
parents and their parents exclaim, * If any of our descendants,
having bathed in the Jamuna and fasted, worships Govinda
in Mathura, in the light fortnight of Jyestha, he will secure
for us an elevated position.’^ Having worshipped Janarddana
in the light fortnight of Jyeshtha a man of good birth will
offer cakes to his fortiSinate ancestors in the Yamuna. By
reading wH^evgtion one section of this Purina one can


VrSHNUPURANAM.


acquire the same merit which he will reap by bathing If) tjbe
Jatnuni during the light fortnight of Jyeshtha, by giving oaktfs
to the manes and worshipping JanSrddana with a devoted
merit. Those, who have fallen into the ocean of wordlinesa
and been stricken with terror, may've liberated by reading
this Purina which frees one from bad dreams and imper-
fections.

This Purana was originally composed by the Risbi
Narlyana and was communicated by Brahml to Ribhu ; he
described it to Pryabrata who again related it to Bhlguri.
Bhlguri recited it to Tambamitra, and he to Dadicjia,
who gave it to Saraswata. Bhrigu received it, who
imparted it to Purukutsa and he taught it to NarmadI,
The goddess gave it to the Naga King, Dhritarashtra and to
Purli\a of the same race, by whom it was given to their king
Visuki. He imparted it to Vatsa and he to Ashawtara from
whom it successively proceeded the Kambala and Elapatra.
When the ascetic Vedasiras descended to Pltlla, he there
received the whole Purana from the Nigas and communicated
it to Pramati. Pramatijimparted it to the wise Jltukarna
and lie taught it to many other holy person. By the bless-
ing of Vasistha I have been acquainted with it and 1 havo
faithfully related it to you. 0 Mailroya, you will teach
it at the. end of the Kali age to Samika. Whoever hears this
great mystery which removes the stain of Kaly shall be freed
from his sins. He who hears this every day acquits him-
self of his obligations to his manes, celestials and men. Hear-
ing ten chapters of this Purina one obtains the rare and
great merit that a man acquires by the gift of a brown cow*
He who hears the whole of this Purina meditating on
his mind, Achyuta, who is all things and of whom all
tilings are made, who is the stay of the whole universe— ibo
a&ylum of spirit; who is knowledge and that which is to be
known ; who is without beginning 6r end and the benefactor
of the celestials— cer^tainly obtains tho reward wtiich. cm be


ViSliNOl^KAKAM.


46 $

Retired by the uninterrupted celebration of the borse>
sapfifice. He who recites and retains with faith this Purina
iti the beginning, middle and end of which is described the
giorious Achyuta, the lord of the univer^ in every stage — the
mister of all that is stationary or movable composed of
spiritual knowledge acquires such purity as exists not in any
world the eternal state of perfection which is Hari. Tl>e
man who fixes his mind on Achyuta does not go to hell : he
who meditates upon him considers even celestial bliss as an
impediment ; he, in whose mind he abides, thinks little of the
region of Brahma ; for when present in the minds of those
who are pure, he bestows upon them eternal freedom. What
wonder is there that all sins shall be removed by chanting
the name of this Vishnu? What else should be heard of but
tliat Hari, whom, those devoted to acts worship with sacri-
fices continually as the god of sacrifice; whom those
devoted to meditation contemplate as primary and secondary
composed of spirit ; by obtaining whom man is not born, nor
nourished nor subjected to death ; who is both cause and effect ;
who as the progenitors receives the libations made to them ;
who, as the gods, accepts the offerings addressed to them,
the glorious being who is without beginning or end ; whose
name is both SwahU andSwadha; who is the asylum of all
Spiritual power; in whom the limits of finite, things can*
:iii0t be measured, and who, when he enters the ear destroys
all sin.

, Salutation unto the first of gods, Purusottama who* is
without end and beginning, without growth and decay and
death, who is substance that knows no change. Salutation
unto that undecaying Purusha, Vishnu who assumed sensible
qualities, who though pure became as if impure, assuming
various shapes, who is gifted with divine wisdom and who
is the lord of the preservation of all creatures. Salutation
unto him who is the instrument of meditative wisdom and
IcUve virtue, who confers enjoyments upon buniaii beings^


w

Who is identical with three-fold qualities } who is
Wny change and is the cause of the evolution of the^
^nd who is without any birth or decay. Salutatiol
him who is called heaven, air, fire, water, earth and
who confers all objects that satisfy sense, who b ,
mankind, and who is perceptible, subtle, and imperce^
May that unborn eternal Hari, who is seen in manifold
whose essence consists of both nature and spirit, confer
humanity that blessed condition which is without bij'
decay.


Fims.


* A 1506
