WoL. L PARTS I-Iil,
THE
RAMAYANA.
TransLatTzn tro ENGLISH Prose FROM THE ORIGINAL
Saxsxert oy VALMIKI.
BALA KANDAM.
SDITED AND’ PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
Girise CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Passs, 65/2, Beadon Sraxet,
CALCUTTA.
1892.
{Adi rights reserved 1
FOR THE COMPLETE BET IN ADVANCE, INCLUDING POSTAGE,
ht Inpia Re. 36, Us Eunors £ 2.
THE
RAMAYANA.
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE FROM THE ORIGINAL
Sanskrit oF Vacmrxr,
EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
GiRISH CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Dava Press, 65/2, BrApon Street,
CALCUTTA.
1892.
[ Add rights reserved.]
THE RAMAYANA IN AN ENGLISH GARB.
The immortal Epic of Valmiki is undoubtedly one of the gems of
literature,—indeed, some considering it as the Kohinur of the literary
region, which has for centuries, and from a time reaching to the dim
and far past been shedding unparalleled and undying halo upon the
domain presided over by “the vision and the faculty divine.” The
burthen of the bard’s song {3 the perpetual contest between good and
evil, that is everywhere going on in this mysteriously-ordered world of
ours, and which seemingly sometimes ending in the victory of the
former, and at others in that of the latter, vitally and spirituaily
results in the utter overthrow and confusion of evil and in the triumph
and final conquest of good. Rama sprung from the bright loins of
the effulgent luminary of day, and bringing his life and being from a
long and illustrious ancestry of sovereigns, Rama taking birth athong
the sons of men for chastising and repressing rampant Iniqaity and
Injustice, typifies the spirit of good that obtains in this world,—
Ravana, that grim and terrible Ten-headed one. 2 Rakshasa by virtue
of birth,and worthy to be the chicf and foremost'of Rakshasas by virtue »
of his many misdeeds and impieties, who challenges and keeps in
awe the whole host of the celestials—‘‘to whom the Sun did not shine
too hot, and about whom the Wind did not dare to breathe,” represents
the spirit of unrighteousness and evil. Lakshmana, disregarding the
pomp and splendours of princely life, to follow his beloved brother _
Rama into the forest, and cheerfully undergoing there a world of
trials and privations, and daily and nightly keeping watch and ward
over his brother and his spouse in their cottage,—and Bharata,
stoutly and persistently declining, despite the exhortations of the
elders and the spiritual guides, to govern the kingdom daring Rama's
absence in the forest, “and holding the royal umbrella over his


brother's sandals, are personations of the ne p/us ulira of fraternal Jove,
and consummate and perfect ideals of their kind. The righteous
Bibhishana, who for Rama’s cause forsook his royal brother, and set
small store by the splendours of royalty, who suffered no earthly
considerations to interfere with his entire and absolute devotion to
his friend, embodies in his person the sterling virtues going under
the precious name of friendship. The ever-devoted Hanuman
glorying in the appellation of Rama's servant,—ever-prompt at the
beck and call of his master to lay down his life—is the grandest and
loftiest conception of the faithful servant that is to be found in all
literature. Shall we say aught of Rama and Sila, or keep silence
over themes too sacred for babblement and profane mouthing?
The kingdom is astir and alive with the jubilations of the populace
at the prospect of Rama’s coronation; pennons by thousands are
streaming like meteors in the air at the tops of stately edifices ;
and drums and pamavas and other musical instraments are sound-
ing forth the auspicious anouncement. The royal household
swims in a sea of bliss surging and heaving on all sides, Delight and
Joy move about and laugh and talk under the names of Dagaratha
and Kaugalya. Anon a thunder-clap bursts in the midst of the
merty-making, and converts delight into dole, the sounds of laughter
and hilarity into loud wails and lamentations issuing from hearts
knowing no consolation. All is lost! Rama is to be banished into
the woods for fourteen years. He cheerfully makes up his mind and
repairs to the forest in consonance with his father’s promise. Sita
© steps forth—a divinity clad in flesh—Sita would follow the fortunes
of her lord. She considers it as the height of undutifulness to remain
behind, continuing to enjoy the pleasures of the palace, while her
beloved Rama is leading a life of toils and privations in the remote
woods. The daughter as well as the daughter-in-law of kings,
brouglit up in the lap of luxury and amidst the soft ministrations of
those pleasures that pertain to a royat household, Sita, the idot of every
one’s love and regard, Loldly and with alacrity faces all the toils and
terrors of a forest-life, in prefereuce to remaining in Dagaratha’s
residence, bereft of the company of her sweet lord.
All these and various other characters that figure on the fascin-
ating and enchanting boards of Valmiki, have been developed


fully and elaborately, and with trath and perfect consistency of
portraiture through the length of his gigantic poem of Rama-
yana, Ravana standing before us in stupendous proportions as the
personation of terror and wrong-doing, before whom the human
spirit trembles as Sita in the Asoka wood; the lotus-eyed
Rama self-forgetful and heroic, and possessed of the highest
perfections that can adorn humanity, and through the extremes of
misery and misfortune ever abiding by righteousness and truth; Sita
the best and fairest of her sex, the embodiment of all loveliness and
grace physical and mental, she who rose from the sacrificial fire of
inspiration—a goddess in all her manifold perfections and unsurpassed
exellences, whose name carries in the very mention a world of pathos;
the faithful Lakshmana, aye cleaving to his brother on the perilous
edge of raging battle, and in the dreary forest leading a tife lorn
and desotate,—these and others whom we forbear reluctantly to
name,have been pourtrayed to the life ; they are quick with the Prome-
thean spark and occupy prominent positions in that ideal world
brought into being by those mighty intellectual wizards—the poets;
and are the perennial fountains of our joy and sorrow, never suffering
the good and the beautiful to degenerate into cant and commonplace
in our minds, Oh! the privilege of genius.

The influence exercised by the Ramayana upon the Hindus reach-
ing down to the lowest strata of the society, is literally and in actual
fact immense, Truly of the Ramayana it can be said in Baconian
language that it has come home to the business and bosoms of all
men. If there is one test which more than another distinguishes the
true from the false in Art, it is the circumstances of a work in-°
fluencing or not influencing life: a work that assimilates itself
with the mental constitution of a nation, lending energy to impulse,
contributing to clearness of thought, and ennobling and spititualis-
ing the higher emotions and aspirations, must by the very
reason of ils doing s0, be tre; while that which fails in doing
so, is not the real and genuine thing and can well.be spared.
The Ramayana has become a household-word in Hindu Society,
and expressions embodying the memories of incidents celebrated
in the epic, pass current amongst all ranks of the people, being
mouthed alike by high and low,by prince and peasant,by the aristocracy


iv


and the nobility of the land, by merchants and mechanics, by cultiva-
tors ploughing the field, and by shepherds keeping the flock, by
princesses and high-born dames in towering edifices, and the women
of the peasantry plying their daily tasks, by religionists and politicians
and men of letters,—in short by the community universally, Such
absolute and all-commanding and comprehensive sway and influence
of literature is perhaps unknown in the West, with the single excep-
tion of the Bible. Rama's regime embodies the popular conception
of administrative perfection—the ideal of a monarchy. Ravana is
remembered not only in consequence of the prominent part he
plays in the Ramayana, but also on account of his famous advice to
Rama immediately before his death,—namely that the execution of
evil projects should be deferred,but that good ones should be prompt-
ly executed,—a very sage counsel doubtless, answering partially to
Macbeth’s observation on hearing of Macduff’s escape :

“———~From this moment

‘The very firstlings of my heart shal] be

The firstlings of my hand-—————””

“The vow concerning the bow-breaking,” applied sarcastically
to a case of contumacy. “The war between Raina and Ravana is
matched by that war alone,” “Ravana's family,” “Ravana hath
been, ruined by domestic disclosure,” “Lanka hath met with des-
traction in consequence of excess of pride,” “That won’t render the
Ramayana incorrect,”—these are some of the adages universally
carrent in Hinde society, mixing coustantly into common talk.
Does not this unequivocally and unmistakably prove that the influence

° of Vatmiki has entered into the pith and marrow of the nation, and
vitally sways its intellectual and emotional tendencies ?

Sita has become the grand exemplar to Hindu women as the
embodiment of purity, chastity, and wifely fidelity. She has furnished
Hindy, ladies with the highest and noblest conception of their duties
in their various and manifold relations in life. Her empire is
both wide and deep over the hearts of her sex, peiforming for their
eternal behoof spiritual services of incalculable worth. She should
be looked upon as one of the greatest teachers of her kind—as a
teacher in that highest and best sense in which Christ and Chaitanya,
Nanak and Socrates aré called teachers. Ah, who can say how


v


many women have turned away in the budding prime of youth from
the primrose path of dalliance, and have in preference followed
Virtue, who alone is truly fair—khow many stirred and influenced
by the example of her matchless self-sacrifice have firmly made up
their minds to tread in her foot-steps? In like manner it may be
said of a)most all the principal characters of the Ramayana, that they
have more or less deeply influenced the thoughts and sentiments of
the people.

Further, the Ramayana has been all along a reservoir upon
which subsequent writers have drawn ceaselessly. Indeed most of
the succeediug poems owe to the Mahabharata and the Ramayana
for their subjects. Not to mentlon writers of less note, even
Kalidasa’s self has dronk deep of that fountain. Bhababhuti not
less celebrated has composed a poem treating of the latter part of
Rama's life and saturated with a pathos which perhaps no other pen
‘has surpassed.

To the antiquary and the student of oriental literature and
manners, a knowledge of the Ramayana is simply indispensable,
Together with the Mahabharata with which it is joined in popular
parlance, and with which it goes hand in hand in compass and
variety of information, but to which its superiority is pronounced in
point of epic excellence and consistency and unifurmity of execution,
the Ramayana constitutes the great repository of wisdom’ and
learning, the manners and customs of the ancient Hindus. Indeed,
the adage current in our society with regard to the Mahabharata, “What
is not in Bharat (Mahabharat), is not in Bharat (India)” applies to
the Ramayana as well. In it, cosmogony and theogony, the genealo-’
gies of kings and princes,—of human and extra-human beings,
of Ashuras and Daenavas, of Fakshas and Gandharvas, and Shiddhas
and Charanas; folklore and ancedotes and legends, and stories half-
mythical and half-historical; descriptions of cities existing at a
period long anterior to the age of Troy and Memphis, and the
chronicles of kings that reigned before Priam and Busiris,—all these
with -others too numerous to enumerate, have been woven into the
mighty web and woof of the magic drapery evolved by the so potent
art of Valmikt.

Nor is the poem Jess interesting in a political point of view. It


vi


can hardly be questioned that all progress to be real and intrinsic
must be developed out of the inherent tendencies of a nation—the
feelings and sentiments and idiosyncracies into which it is born as
well as those which have been stamped on its life and mind by the
stress and exigencies of circumstances, social and political. For
a nation, therefore, to govern another with such an object as that
with which England has taken upon herself the Government of this
country—namely, the progress and advancement of the children
of the scil—a close and wide study of its laws, and institutions,
manners and customs, modes of thought and emotional proclivities,
becomes a thing of paramount interest. It is clear, hence, that to our
rulers an acquaintance with such works as the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana is most important for wise and beneficient adminstration,
Nor can it avail one to advance the seemingly unanswerable objection
that treating of as they do a state of society divided from the real
present by a huge and abysmal gulf of time, such works can by no
means serve as useful and faithful guides to the life and manners of
Hinda society existing at this day. ‘In India,” as Professor Monier
‘Williams justly remarks, “the lapse of centuries is powerless in
effecting radical changes in the foundation and constitution of Tiindu
society.” The conservative character of the Hinda nation is proverbial.
In India usages and observances, the rituals prescribed by the scrip-
turef and the customs sanctioned by hoary age, are clnng to with a
tenacity that is proof against time and innovation ; and those who think
that England has materially swayed and influenced the social life of the
people, labour, we make bold to say, under a lamentable delusion.
« Having regard alike to the surpassing and matchless excellence
of the poem itself both in its dramatic and lyric character, the
extreme interest it possesses for antiquaries and students of oriental
literature, and the’ importance with which its study is fraught politi-
cally to Englishmen, it is most desirable that the Ramayana should
be prestnted before the public in an English garb. In consequence
of its being composed originally in Sanskrit, it literally remains a
sealed book to the majority of students, Few are the persons that
cam devote their time and energies to master Sanskrit—a language
which ‘of all languages existing on earth, is in consequence of its
highly complex and complicated grammar, as well as the indefiniteness


vii


which characterises it on account of its possessing countless
synonyms, most difficult to master by a foreigner. Nay, we can per-
haps safely go so far as to assert that very few amongst those Western
scholars who have devoted their lives to the study of Sanskrit litera-
ture, have been able to enter into the spirit of that part of its voca-
balary in which are couched those peculiarly Hindu ideas and senti-
ments that constitute the unique genius of the people. To translate,
therefore, such a work as the Ramayana from the dead and indefinite
Sanskrit into the living and reat English, is, like unearthening a fossil
and inspiring it with life ; or rather like transferring a light from a
bushel in which it has been hidden, to a mountain-top,—so that men
may behold it and the surrounding objects by help of its grateful rays.
Surely, to render a work from a dead tongue into a living language
and specially such a language as English with all its resources, is
literally taking it from its narrow and circumscribed sphere of
influence, and placing it before the world at large—in fact, making
it the common property and heritage of all mankind. The utility,
therefore, we flatter ourselves, of this present literary undertaking

wili recomend itself to all thinking-minds without any further elabora-
tion on our part. Indeed, it would argue no common hardihood
in him who despite common sense and reason, would endevour to
maintain that the Epic of Valmiki published in an English garb
\always provided that the execution do not fall far short of the
requirements) would prove valueless as a contribution to the case of
literature and culture.

In translating the Ramayana into English, we are concerned
with a work composed by an illustrious ascetic passing his days’
in a hermitage in devout contemplation and the practice of rigid
austerities and self-denial. * It behoves us, therefore, to approach the
task in a becoming spirit, with minds duly prepared and fitted. Let
us, accordingly, begin by invoking Him whose presence can convert
the foulest and the most unclean spot, pure and clean, “like the icicle
that hangs on Dian’s temple,” or the hearts and aspirations of the
Vestal Virgins, or pious saints ever engaged in meditating the Most
High. May He in His infinite and eternal grace vouchsafe to purge
our minds of all ignoble feelings and motives,—may He enable
us to find delight in duty and doing His will! May our energies


never flag while carrying the burden we have taken on our shoulders !
May He enlighten our understanding to interpret aright and convey
in clear and adequate language the great thoughts and sentiments of
the sublime bard,—so that the English Ramayana being read by all
the subjects of a Monarch on whose dominions the sun never sets, it
may contribute to their constant profit and delight.


RAMAYANA.


SECTION |.
eee


Tur ascelic Valmiki asked that best of sages and fore-
most of those conversant with words,ever engaged in austeri-
ties and Vaidika studies, Narada saying,—“Who at present
in this world is alike crowned with qualities,and endued with
prowess, knowing duty, and grateful, and truthful,and firm in
vow,-who is qualified by virtue of his character,and who is ever
studious of the welfare of all creatures ? Who is learned,hath
studied society,and knoweth the art of pleasing his subjects ?
And who alone is ever lovely to behold 7?Who hath subdued his
heart,and controlled his anger,is endowed with personal grace
and devoid of malice ; and whom, enraged in battle, do even ,
the gods,fear? Great is my curiosity to hear of such a person.
Thou canst,O Afaharshi,*tell me of a man of this description.”
Hearing Valmiki’s words, Narada, cognizant of the three
worlds, said with alacrity,—“Do thou listen ! Rare as are the
qualities mentioned by thee, I will, O sage, having dul con-
sidered, describe unto thee a person endued with them.
There is one sprung from the line of Ikshwaku,known by the
name of Rama. He is of subdued soul and exceeding prow-


* Lit, a great saint. The word, however, signifies one belonging to a parti-
cular order of saints —T.


z | RAMAYANA.


ess ; effulgent ; endowed with patience ; having senses under
control ; intelligent ; learned in morality ; eloquent ; crowned
with grace ; the slayer of foes ; broad-shouldered ; possessed
of mighty arms, a conch-shaped neck, fleshy jaws, and a
broad chest; a powerful bowman; the repressor of foes ;
having plump shoulder-blades ; of arms reaching down unto
his knees ; with a beautiful head,and a graceful forehead ; and
endowed with excellent might; having symmetrical limbs,;and
of a cool hue ; and possessed of prowess ; and having a well-
developed chest ; with expansive eyes ; crowned with auspici-
ousness and favourable marks ; knowing duty; firm in promise;
aye engaged in the good of his subjects ; of accomplished re-
nown ; furnished with knowledge ; pure in body and spirit ;
modest towards superiors ; versed in self-knowledge ; like
unto Prajapati himself ; blest wilh prosperity ; protecting all ;
the destroyer of enemies, and supporter of all living beings ;
and the stay of order,practising all the duties of his class; and
preserving those cleaving unto him ; versed in the profundities
of the Vedas and the Vedangas ; accomplished in archery ;
gifted with a good memory; ascertaining with rapidity
the truth of things; the darling of all; unreproved; of
unvanquished spirit ; discerning ; proficient in every branch
of learning ; ever resorted to bythe good even as the
ocean is, by the rivers ; worthy of being honored ; having
an equal regard for all ; and capable of filling the heart with
ever-new sensations. Crowned with every grace, he enhan-
ceth the joys of Kaugaly& ; being like unto the sea in gravity,
and unto the Himavat in patience. In prowess, he is like unto
Vishnu, and boasteth of the personal attractions of the Moon.
In anger he resembleth the fire raging at the dissolution of
all; and in forgiveness, he is like unto the Earth. In giving
away, he is like unto (Kuvera) the Bestower of riches, and in
truth, he is like another Dharma.

~ ° «Désirous of doing that which would be acceptable to his
subjects, king Dagaratha, from fullness of affection , wished to


BALARANDAM. 3


instal as lis associate in the kingdom his beloved and
meritorious eldest son, Rama, of infallible prowess, and
endued with sterling virtues, and ever intent on the welfare
of the people. Beholding the provisions for the installation,
that lady the king’s consort, Kaikeyi, who had previously been
promised two boons, even asked for these, v7s., the exile of
Rama, and the installation of Bharata. Bound by the ties of
duty in consequence of that promise of his, king Dagaratha
banished his favorite son Rama. In pursuance of his father's
promise, and with the view of compassing the pleasure of
Kaikeyi, that heroic one, commanded by his sire, wended into
the forest. And on the eve of his departure for the forest,
that enhancer of Sumitr&’s joy and favorite of his brother
(R&ma), his dear brother Lakshmana, endowed with humility,
displaying brotherliness, followed him out of affection. And
as Rohini followeth the moon, Rama’s beloved spouse, sprung
in Janaka’s line—like unto an embodiment of Divine power—
dear (unto Rama) as life itself, and engaged in acts of good,
and furnished with every auspicious mark, and the best
of wives, followed Rama. Having been followed far by
his father Dagaratha along with the citizens, Rama met with
the virtuous and beloved king of the Nish&das; and then in
company with Guha, Lakshmana, and Sita, dismissed his chari-
oteer on the banks of the Ganges at Sringaverapura. Then
wending from one wood to another, and having crossed many
broad rivers, they, in accordance with Bharadwaja's directions,
arrived at the Chitrakuta ; and constructing a romantic abode,
the three began to live there as they listed. And they spent their
days in delight, even like gods and Gandharbhas. And when
Rama had reached the Chitrakuta, king Dagaratha, distressed
on account of his son, went to heaven, bewailing the latter,
And when Dagcaratha had ascended heaven, the mighty
Bharata, although pressed by the Brihmanas headed by
Vasistha, to rule the kingdom, did not wish for dominion. And
that hero went after Rama into the forest, with the view of


4 RAMEYVANA,


propitiating that worshipful one. And having come to the
high-souled Rama, with truth for his prowess, he bosought
his brother, with every mark of respect. And Rama said unto
Bharata these words,—“Thou too, O thou conversant with
duty, art king.” And the exceedingly generous,” illustrious
and mighty Rama of a cheerful countenance did not wish for
the kingdom, in consonance with his father’s injunction. And
having made over unto Bharata, as his substitute on the
throne, his own sandals, Bharata’s elder brother repeatedly
forbade him. And then Bharata, finding his desire not obtain-
ed, touched Rama’s feet, and began to rule at Nandigrima,
expecting the return of Rama. And when the auspicious
Bharata, firm in promise and of subdued sense, bad gone
away, Rima again perceiving there the influx of citizens and
others, eagerly entered Dandaka. And having entered that
mighty forest, the lotus-eyed Rama slew the Rakshasa,
Viraidha, and saw Sarabhanga, Sutikshna, Agastya and
Agastya's brother. And he then, directed by Agastya, gladly
possessed himself of Indra’s bow, the inexhaustible arrows the
scimitar, and the quiver. And while Rama was dwelling there
with the rangers of woods, the sages came to him in a body
for the destruction of the Asuras and Rakshasas, Thereupon
in the presence of those ascetics like unto flaming fire, inhabit-
ing the Dandaka forest, he promised to slay those Rakshasas
in battle, And it was while he was living there that, that
dweller of Janasth&na, the R&kshasi Surpanakh&, capable of
assuming any form at will,was disfigured. And it was while
living there in the society of the inhabitants of Janasthana,
that Rama slew in battle the R&skhasas Khara and Trigira
and Dushana, together with their followers, who all had
been stirred up by the words of Surpanakba. And fourteen
thousand Rakshasas were stain in that battle. And learning
of ‘the destruction of his relatives, Ravana wrought into
frenzy by anger, sought the aid of a Rakshasa named Maricha.
And although strongly dissuaded by M4éricha, saying


BALAKANDAM. 5


“Thou ought not to enter into hostilities with that powerful
one. Do thou, therefore, O Ravana, excuse me!” Yet, dis-
regarding those words of his, Ravana, urged on by Fate,went
into that asylum in company with Maricha. And that one
(Maricha) commanding illusions, having drawn far the king’s
sons (Rama and Lakshmana), he(Ravana\carried away Rima’s
wife, slaying the vulture Jatayu. And beholding the vulture
slain and learning of the carrying off of Mithila’s daughter,
the descendant of Raghu, deprived of sense,bewailed in grief.
Aad having with unassuaged sorrow burnt the vulture Jatayu,
as he was searching for Sit& in that wood, he fell in with a
R&akshasa, Kavandha by name, of a dreadful and deformed
shape. Having slain him, the mighty-armed one burnt his
body,—and thereupon he went tolheaven. And the Rakshasa
addressed Rama, saying,“Do thou,O descendant of Raghu,re-
pair unto the female ascetic,Savari,conversant with all systems
of morality.”Reparing to Savari, that destroyer of foes, gifted
with exceeding energy, Rama, the son of Dagaratha, highly
honored by Savari, met with Hanuman on the banks of the
Pampa. Then, agreeably to Hanum4n’s advice, the exceed-
ingly prowerful Rama saw Sugriva and detailed unto him all,
specially touching Sita. Then the monkey Sugriva. having
heard all from R&ma, was well pleased with Rama and in the
presence of fire,made friends with him. Then the king of mon-
keys, out of friendship, mournfully related unto him all about
his hostilities with Vali. And then Rama vowed that he would
slay Vali, Thereupon the monkey described unto Raghava
the prowess of Vali,and he feared lest Rama should not prove
a match for Vali. And with the view of convincing Raghava
(as to Vali’s might),Sugriva showed unto him the huge corpse
of Dundabhi,resembling a large hill.And looking at the skele~
ton, Rima endued with exceeding prowess, smiling the
while, with his toe cast it off at the distance of full ninety
miles, And with a single mighty shaft he pierced seven
palmyra palms, a hill, and the sixth nether world, carrying


6 RAMAYANA,


conviction into Sugriva. Thus convinced, the mighty monkey
well pleased went with Rama towards the cave called
Kishkindh&. And having arrived there,that best of monkeys,
Sugriva of a tawney and golden hue, set up loud roars.
And at those mighty sounds, out came the lord of monkeys ;
and having obtained T4ra’s consent, came before Sugriva
for battle. Then Raghava killed Vali on the spot with a
single shaft. And, in compliance with Sugriva’s request,
having slain V&li in battle, Raghava conferred the kingdom
on Sugriva. Then that best of monkeys having summoned
all the various monkeys, sent them iv various directions in
search of Janaka’s daughter. Then at the suggestion of the
vulture Sampiti,th: mighty Hanuman crossed the salt sea ex-
tending for a hundred yojanas. And arriving at the city of
Lanka, ruled by Ravana,he found Sita in the midst of an Aso-
ka wood, absorbed in thought. And then having shown her
the sign,he related unto her all about the friendship between
Rama and Sugriva, and having cheered Videha’s daughter, he
smashed the gate of the palace.Then having slain five gener-
als,and seven counsellors’ sons,and grinded the heroic,Aksha,
hg was bound fast (by the arms of Indrajit), Then knowing
that in virtue of the grand-sire’s boon, he was free, he forgave
those Rakshasas that were leading him (to Ravana), Then
having burnt down the city of Lanka, with the exception of
the place occupied by Mithila’s daughter, the mighty one
returned, with the intention of delivering the glad tidings unto
Rama. And that one of immeasurable soul having come
before the bigh-souled Kama, and circled him, addressed him,
saying,—“I have truly seen Sita.” Then accompanied by
Sugriva, Rama repaired to the shore of the mighty ocean, and
with shafts resembling the sun, vexed the deep. Then that
lord of rivers—the Ocean—showed himself. And agreeably
to the advice of the Ocean, Nala constructed a bridge (over
the water). By that bridge Rama went tu the city of
Lank4,—and slew Ravana in battle. And having recovered


BALAKANDAM 7


Siti, Rama experienced high shame (in consequence of
Sita’s having lived so long in Ravana’s place), and used harsh
languaye towards Sit@ in the presence of all. Incapable of
bearing it, the chaste Sita entered flaming fire. Thereupon
assured by Agni as to the sinlessness of Sit§, Rima became
exceedingly pleased, and was honored by all the deities.
And at the great act of Rama's, the three worlds with all
that was mobile and immobile in them, as well as the sages
and gods, were well pleased with the mighty-souled Raghava.
Then installing that foremost of R&kshasas, Bibhisana, on
the throne of Lanka, Rama was perfectly easy, and rejoiced
exceedingly. Then Rama, obtaining a boon from the
celestials, revived the monkeys fallen in battle, and surround.
ed by friends, set out for Ayodbya4 on the car Pushpaka.
And repairing to Bharadw&ja’s hermitage, Rama, having
truth for his prowess, despatched Hanuman to Bharata.
Then talking over past aflairs, accompanied with Sugriva,
R&ma, mounted on the Pushpaka, departed for Nandigrama,
Having arrived at Nandigrima, the sinless Rama sheared
himself of his matted locks along with his brothers, and having
regained Sit3, got back his kingdom. And Dagaratha’s
son, the auspicious Rama, lord of Ayodhy&, hath been rulfng
those happy subjects of his, even like a father. (During bis
reign) his subjects will enjoy happiness, and contentment,
and become hale, and grow in righteousness, and be devoid
of mental disquietude and disease, and free from the fear of
famine. And no person is to witness his son’s death, and
women will be ever chaste, and never bear widowhood. And
no fear of conflagration (will exercise people), nor creatures
be drowned in water. And no danger will come from the
wind,—nor any suffer from fever. And no fear will come
from hunger, or from thieves. And cities and provinces will
be filled with corn and wealth. And all will live happily as at
the Golden age. And having performed with countless gold
an hundred horse sacrifices, and bestowed with due rites


8 RAMAYANA, -


ayutas and kotis* of kine on learned persons, and countless
wealth on famous Br&hmanas, Raghava will establish an
hundred royal families, and will employ each of the four
castes in its own duties. And having reigned for ten thousand
and as many hundred years, Rama will depart for the regions
of Brahma. He that readeth this sacred, sin-destroying,
merit-bestowing history of Rama like unto the Veda itself,
becometh cleansed from all sin. And the man that readeth
this RamSyana conferring length of days, after death, is
honored in heaven, along with his sons, and grandsons, and
relations. [{ a Bralimana readeth it, he attaineth excellence
in speech ; if a Kshatriya, he acquircth lordship over landed
possessions ; if a Vaisya, abundance of wealth in trade; and
if a Sudra, greatness.”


SECTION }I,


“Hearne those words of N&rada, that one of virtuous
soul, skilled in speech, together with his disciples, worshipped
that mighty sage. And having received due honors, that
celestial asking for and receiving permission (to depart),
went to the etherial regions. And when Narada had leit
for the celestial regions, that holy person went to the banks
of the Tamas& hard by the Jabnavi, And having arrived’
atthe banks of that river, the pious one, observing a
holy spot devoid of mud, spoke unto his disciple standing by,
saying,—"O Bharadwaja, behold this holy spot devoid of
mud. And it is beautiful, and contains pleasant water, even


* Ayuta is ten thousand; and fofi is ten millions.—-T


BILAKANDAM. 9


like the minds of good men. Do thou, O child, put down thy
pitcher, and give me my bark, I will bathe even in this
Tamas&, the best of holy spots.” Thus accosted by the high-
souled Valmiki, Bharadwaja ever intent upon serving his
spiritual guide, presented the sage his bark. And that one
of subdued senses, having received his bark from his disciple,
began to range around, surveying that extensive forest. In
the vicinity of the wood, that worshipful one espied a pair of
Kraunchas, emitting melodious notes, and ranging around in
perfect peace of mind. At this juncture, a wicked-minded
fowler, singling out the male without any cause of hostility,
slew him in the very presence of the holy man. And
observing him struggting on the earth, bathed in bloud his
help-mate began to bewail in piteous accents, at the prospect
of her separation from her copper-crested oviparous husband,
engaged in sport with extended plumage. Finding the
oviparous one thus brought down by the fowler, the piety
of that pious and righteous-souled Rishi was excited exceed-
ingly. Then considering it to be an unrighteous deed, with
a heart moved with pity, that twice-bora one, behotding
the weeping Kraunchi, spoke these words,—“O fowler,
since thou hast slain one of a pair of Kraunchas, thou shalt
never attain prosperity!” Having uttered this, he thought
within himself, ‘What is this that I have said, afflicted with
grief for the bird ?” Revolving thus in his mind, that
highly-wise one and best of sages addressed his disciple,
saying,—“This speech that Ihave uttered is of equal feet
and accents; and is capable of being chanted according
to measure to stringed accompaniment. Let it therefore
go forth as a sfoka as it has come out of my sorrow!” When
the ‘sage had spoken thus, his disciple, well pleased,
assented to his excellent speech; and thereat that pious
person was gratified. Then having duly performed his
ablutions at that holy spot, the reverend sage retraced his
steps, pondering over the incidents touching the s/oka.


10 RAMEP ANA.


And his disciple also, accomplished in learning, and of
meek demeanour, followed Valmiki, carrying on his back a
pitcher filled with water.

Having entered the hermitage afeng with his disciple,
that one knowing duty, while apparently engaged in diverse
kinds of talk, revolved in his mind the circumstances con-
nected with the verses. And it came to pass that desirous
of seging the best of sages, there arrived that lord and
creator of all, the effulgent Brahma, furnished with four
countenances. Beholding him, Valmiki rose up suddenly
and wondering greatly, humbly and silently stood before
him with folded hands. And duly bending low in reverence
Valmiki offered that deity water to wash his feet, and
other things for reception. And having sat down on a
highly-honored seat, that worshipful one enquired after the
welfare of that sage Valmiki knowing no deterioration; and
then asked him to be seated. And having been seated in
the presence of the Grand-sire of all, Valmiki, his mind run-
ning upon the self-same subject, became plunged in thought.
“What a sin hath been committed by that wicked-minded
one, incited by hostile feeling, when he without cause slew
that sweetly-singing Krauncha!” And thereupon, again
Jamenting that female Krauncha, he, in grief of heart,
mentally recited those verses. Then smiling, Brahma spoke

_ unto that excellent sage,—‘Those verses of thine which thou
hast composed shall attain celebrity : no doubt need be enter-
tained on this head. Ht is because I had intended so, that
those verses had come out of thy lips. Do thou now, O
best of saints. compose the entire history of Rama. Do
thou Felate unto the world the history of the righteous-souled
and intelligent Rama crowned with qualities. And do thou,
and thow hast heard it from Narada, relate all that is known,
and all that is unknown to thee, O wise one, concerning
Rama, and Lakshmana, and Videha’s daughter, and all the
Rikshasas. And even what is not known to Narada, shall


BALAKANDAM. it,


be unfolded unto thee. And no words of thine in this poem
shall contain an untruth, Do thou, therefore, compose into
verses this delightful story of Rama. And as long as the
mountains and the seas exist on earth, thy history of Rama-
yana will spread among men. And as long as thia story of
Ramayana shall retain currency, thou shalt reside both in
this world and in mine.” Having said this, the worshipful
Brahma disappeared there. And thereat the sage and his
disciples marvelled greatly. And his disciples sang those
verses again and again; and, momentarily experiencing
pleasure, said unto him with exceeding wonder,—"Those
verses, composed of equal accents, and furnished with four
parts, have been sung by the mighty saint, have, in virtue of
frequent repetition, been associated with a world of pathos,
and have attained the eminence of a s/oka. And now it is
the intention of that illustrious and self-centered sage to
compose the entire Ramayana in this metre.”

The great ascetic Valmiki of gracious appearance and
unparalleled renown has composed hundreds of verses in
melodious measure, couching the significance of the history
of Rama’s line. Listen to the annals of the foremost of
Raghu’s race, and the destruction of the Ten-headed one
composed by the ascetic, with Samasas, Sandhis, Prakritas,
and Pratayas; and lucid with sweet and equally-accented
words.


SECTION !1t.


Have heard the entire history of the intelligent
R&ma, capable of conferring religious merit and the two
other cognate objects, as well as emancipation, Valmiki again
sought to get insight into it. And, seating himself facing
the east on a cushion of éuse grass, and sipping water


/


a2 RAMALARA,


according to the ordinance, he addressed himself to the
contemplation of the subject through yoga. And by virtue of
his yoga powers, he clearly observed before him Rima, and
Lakshmana, and Sitd, and Dagaratha together with his wives
in his kingdom, laughing, and talking, and acting, and bear-
iug themselves as im real life. And he saw into all that was
endured by Rama firm in promise, with his wife for the
third. And like an emblic myrobalan on his palm, that
righteous-souled one, by virtue of his yoga, perceived all that
had happened as well as alt that would happen in future.
And having truly seen everything by virtue of his con-
templation, that magnanimous one set about recording the
charming Rama's history. And agreeably to what had been
related by the mighty-souled Narada, that worshipful saint
composed the history of Raghu's line, conferring profit and
pleasure, and impregnated with qualities fraught with them,
and, like unto the ocean, abounding in riches, and captivating
ear and mind. And Rama's birth, and mighty prowess, and
kindness to all, and popularity, and forbearance, and good-
ness, and truthfulness, and the wonderful converse he had
wit Viswamitra ; aad the nuptials of Janaki; and the snap-
ping of the bow; and the hostilities of Rama with Rama
(Parasurama) ; and the noble quatities of Dagaratha’s son;
and" R&ma's installation ; and the enmity of Kaikeyi; and the
obstacle in the way of the installation; and the exile of
Rama ; and the king’s grief, lamentations, and departure for
the other regions; and the grief of the subjects, and their
dismissal by Rima to Ajodhy&; and the tidings of the lord
of Nish&das ; and the charioteer's returo ; and the crossing of
the Ganges ; and Rama’s interview with Bharadwaja; and his
arrival at Chitrakuta in consonance with Bharadwaja’s injunc-
tion ; and R&ma’s building a mansion there and sojourn ; and
Bharata’s arrival, and his propitiation of Rima; and R&ma's
offering oblations to the manes of his father; and the install-
ation of the sandals; and Bharata’s dwelling at Nandigr&ma ;


BALASANDAM. 13


and R&ma’s removal to Dandaka and destruction of Viradha;
and Rama's interview with Sarabhanga and meeting with
Sutikshna ; and Sit&’s companionship with Anusuy&, and the
latter’s painting the former; and Rama’s interview with
Agastya,and his obtaining the bow from him; and the story of
Surpanakh& and her disfigurement ; and the slaughter of Khara
and Trigir& ; and the exertions of Ravana ; the destruction of
Maricha, and the carrying away of Vaidehi ; Raghava’s lamen-
tations, and the death of the king of vultures; Rama’s
encounter with Kavandha,(a headless demon) and his view of
Pamp& ; Rama’s interview with Savari, and his subsistence
there on fruits and roots ; Rama’s lamentations,at Pamp4,and
meeting with Hanuman ; the former’s sojourn to the Rishya-
mukha,and interview with Sugriva; Rama’s raising the confi-
dence of Sugriva, and his friendship with the latter ; and the
encounter between Vali and Sugriva ; the destruction of Vali,
and the establishment of Sugriva on the throne ; and Tara’s
lamentation ; the understanding between R&ma and Sugriva
as to the time for commencing the march ; Rama's stay during
the rainy season ; and the ire of the lion of Raghu’s race; the
levying of forces ; and the despatch of envoys in different
directions and the assignment by Sugriva of different quarters
to the monkeys; the making over of his ring by Rama to
Hanum4n ; Jambub&na's discovery of the cave ; the fasting of
the monkeys on the shore of the ocean ; Hanum&n’s interview ,
with Samp&ti ; Hanum4n’s ascension of the mountain,and his
bounding over the main ; and his sight of the Main&ka at the
injunction of Ocean ; the roating of Rakshasis ; Hanumn’s
meeting with the Rakshasa Chayagraha Hanumfn’s destruc-
tion of Sinhikdya ; and Hanuman’s sight of Lank&, ahd his
entrance by night into Lanka ; his ascertaining of conduct in
times of helplessness ; his journey to the tavern; and his
sight of the inner appartments ; and his sight of Ravana and
of his car Pushpaka ; his walk to the Asoka wood, and sight
there of Sit& ; his presentation of the ring to Sitf and con-


t4 KAMALANA.


verse with her; and the rearing of the Rakshasis; and the
dreaming of the dream by Trijaté ; 3118’s handing a gem to
Hanumin ; and the breaking down o/ trees ; and the flight of
the Rakshasis,and slaug!.tez of the sla7es; and the Wind-god’s
Son being taken captive; :.ad his terrible roars while burning
down Lank&; and his b: ‘ing back over the ocean; and
the forcible possession cf honey ; and Hanumin’s consoling
Raghava, and handing him the gem ; Rama's interview with
Ocean ; and N&la’s constructing the bridge, the army's cross-
ing of the ocean; and the nightly seige of Lanka; and
R&ma’s interview with Bibhishana : the communication as to
the means of destruction; and the destruction of Kumbbakarna
and Meghan&da ; and the destructi-.; of Ravana, and: the
recovery of Sit in the enemy’s cily ; and the sprinkling of
Bibhisbana, and the sight of Pushpaka ; Rata’s return. to-
wards Ayodhy&, and meeting with Bharadwaja; despatch of
Hanuman; and Rima’s mecting with Bharata; and the
installation of Rama; and the dismissal of all the forces ;
and Rama's pleasing his subjects, and renunciation of Sita,—
all else besides concerning Rama on earth, that hath not yet
taken place,—have been dealt with by the worshipful sage in
the last book.


SECTION IV.


Wuer Rama had obtained his kingdom, that ‘worshipfut
sage Valmiki, composed the entire hisory [of that hero}
in excellent metre and fraught with high meaning. The saint
-four thou thousand _slokas ; and it consists: of five


incidents to happen afterwards, that lord reflected as to who
should publish the same before assemblies. And as that great
sage of purified soul was thus pondering, in came Kusi


BALAKAND4&&M. 15


and Lava, in the guise of the sons of ascetics, and touched
his feet. And he found those illustrious princes, the
brothers Kusi and Lava, knowing morality, and living ina
hermitage, and endowed with sweet voices,—apt at taking in
the meaning of poetry. And finding them of a retentive
endowment, and initiated into Vedic studies, that lord taught
them how to interpret the Vedas, and that vow-observing
one taught them the great Ramf&yana in full, treating of
Sita’s life, and the destruction of Paulastya. And those
sweet-voiced brothers, resembling Gandharbas in grace,
accomplished in music and dancing, and cognizant of
Sthana and Murchhana, began to chant this poem delightful
iu recitation and in singing, set in three measures, and seven
notes, and sung according to time to the accompaniment
of stringed instruments, and fraught with the sentiments
of love, pathos, risibility, the irascible, the terrible, and the
heroic. And knowing the characteristics that go to make
up the Drama, and gifted with mellifluous voices, those
blameless princes, coming from Rama’s body, and resembling
him, even as the reflection of the solar or the lunar dise
resembles that disc, got by heart that excellent and moral
story in its entirety ; and those princes versed in the Fine
arts, with a concentrated mind chanted it as they had
learnt it, in the assemblies of ascetics and Brahmanas and
good men.

Once upon a time, those high-souled and pious ones
furnished with every auspicious mark, chanted this poem
in an assembly of ascetics of purifled souls. Having heard
this music, all the ascetics were seized with surprise, and
with eyes flooded with tears, exclaimed, “Well done! «Well
done!’ And well pleased, those saints cherishing Duty,
praised the praiseworthy Kusa and Lava as they sang,
saying,—“Ah! what charming music!. What sweetness of
the verses! Ail this happened long ago, yet it seems as
if we saw it before us.” And unified with the theme,


16 HAMUAPANA.


both of them singing together sweetly, and at a high pitch,
by means of saraja and the other notes, they entranced the
audience. And the two thus went on sweetly singing at
_a high pitch, praised by those mighty sages priding in their
asceticism. Sume one in the assembly pleased with them
presented them with a water-pitcher; and some one of high
tame, being delighted,made them a present ofa bark garment ;
and some one gave them a dark deer skin ;—and someholy-
thread,—and some, a damandalu,* and some great saint
conferred un them a maunjat made girdle ; and some person
granted them a urishi,t and some, a Aaupina.§ And thea
some ascetic, well-pleased, gave them an axe; and some, a
red cloth ; and some, a thread for tying up their matted locks ;
aud some gladly gave a twine for binding faggots with,—
und some, ascetic presented them with a sacrificial pot;
and some, a quantity of fire-wood; and some, a seat made
of adumvari.|| And some exclaimed, “Swast7;’ and some
foyfully cried,—“May ye be long-lived!” And all those
ascetics of truthful speech conferred on them blessings.
And the sages said,—"Wonderful is the story! And, O ye
accomplished in all kinds of music! beautifully have ye
chahted and finished this poem, charming ear and heart,
and conferring long life and prosperity—which will afford
themes to poets.” And admired everywhere, on one occasion
those singers were seen by Bharata’s elder brother, ina
“street of Ayodhy&, sparsely scattered with stalls, Aad
having had the brothers Kusa and Lava brought under his
roof, that destroyer of enemies, Rama, accorded those ones
worthy of houor, a respectful reception. And having seated
himself on a throne of excellent gold, in’ the midst of his


* An earthen or wooden waterepot used by an ascetic,
+ A kind of grass.

$ The seat of an ascetic,

§ A small piece of cloth worn by ascetics,

1 The glomerous fig tree.


BALAKANDAM, 7


brothers and counsellors, that lord, Rama, behulding both
the brothers, handsome and of mudest demeanour, spoke
unto Lakshinana, Bharata and Satrughna, saying,—-"Do ye
listen to the story,fraught with excellent sense and composed
in excellent measure, as sung by these ones endowed with the
divine afflatus.” And then he orlered the singers to begin.
Thereupon causing the down of the audience to stand on end,
and ravishing their minds and hearts,they began to sing melo-
diously and distinctly and in as high a pitch as they could com-
mand, and in strains rivalling the notes of a Vind. And that
song of theirs enchanted the ear of that assembly. And Rama
sail,—"Although these Kusa and Lava, of rigid penances,
look like ascetics, yet they ber on their persons the signs
ot royalty. And, besides, the stury conduces to my fame.
Do ye, therefore, listen to that history fraught with great
worth !” And then commanded by RAma, they began to
chant according to the d/arvga mode, and Rama seated in
the midst of his court, was drawa to the music, anxious for
the perpetuation of his history.


SECTION V.


ce


Tus great story of Ram4yana treats of those victori-
ous kings commencing with Praj&pati, and having IkshwAku
for their founder, who ruled the entire earth as no other
kings had done so before them, and in whose line Sagara
was born—Sagara who dug the ocean, and whom, while out
in progress, his sixty-thousand sons followed. We shall now
chant the entire history of that dynasty from the beginning.
Do ye, with minds free from ill will, listen to that stury con-
fetring merit, profit and pleasure.

There is on the banks of the Sarayu a great and flourish.
ing country called Kosala abounding in cora and wealth, in
which the inbabilants passed their days pleasantly. And


18 RAMAPANA.


the capital of that country was Ayodhy’ famed among men,
which was founded by Manu himself—that foremost of
men. Aad that beautiful and mighty city was twelve yojanas
in length and ten in breadth ; and was intersected outside
with spacious roads laid out orderly. And scattered with
blown blossoms, and regularly sprinkled with water, the well-
arranged broad high-ways looked beautiful. And that one
bringing prosperity unto mighty kingdoms, King Dagaratha,
lived in that city, like unto the lord of the deities inhabiting
the celestial regions. And the city was furnished with doors
and gates, and well-arranged rows of shops, And it con-
tained all kinds of instraments and arms, and was inhabited
by all classes of artizans, And that graceful and matchlessly
brilliant city abounded in eulogists and genealogists, And
it was crowned with stately edifices with flags, and guarded
by hundreds of Sutaghnis.* And the mighty city contained
theatres for females, and gardens, and mango-groves ; and
was enclosed by a wall. And encircled by a deep moat, the
city was accessible neither to friend nor foe. And it
abounded with elephants and horses, and kine and camels
and asses. And it was thronged with neighbouring kings
come to pay tribute, and inhabited by merchants from various
countries, and adorned with mountain-like palaces glitter-
ing with gems, and filled with sporting-places for females,
and like unto Indra’s Amaravati. And the city was wonder-
fnl to behuld, gleaming with gold-burnished ornaments, and
inhabited by troops of courtezans, and abounding in all
kinds of gems, and graced with royal places. And it abound.
ed in paddy and rice, and its water was sweet us the juice of
thesugar-cane. And it resounded with the sounds of Duxz-
dubhis and Mridangas and Vinds and Panavas. And that
foremost spot of all the earth was like unto an zrial car
obtained in heaven by the Siddhas, through force of ascetic


* A weapon commonly described as a stoné set round with iron spikes.—T.


BALAKANDa rg


austerities,and thronged with the best specimens of humanity.
And that city was filled by king Dagaratha with thousands
of such Maharathas* light-handed and accomplished in fight,
as could by force of arms or sharpened shafts slaughter
infuriated lions and tigers and boars roaming in the forest ;
yet as would not pierce with arrows persons lorn or abandoned
or hiding or fugitive. And it abounded mostly in excellent
Brabmanas, lighting the’ sacrificial fire, and crowned with
qualities, and versed in the Vedas and the Vedangas, and
giving away thousands, and ever abiding by truth, and high-
souled, and resembling mighty ascetic.


SECTION vi.


Ano in that city of Ayodhy& resided king Dacaratha
versed in the Vedas, commanding all resources, far-sighted,of
mighty prowess, dear to the inhabitants both rural and urban,
an Athirathat in the Ikshw&ku line, performing sacrifices,
engaged in the performance of duties, self-controled like
unto a Maharshi, a royal saint famed in the three worlds,
possessed of strength, the destroyer of foes, having friends,of
subdued senses, comparable unto Sakra and Vaisravana by
virtue of accumulated. riches and other possessions, and pro-
tecting people even as the highly energetic Manu protected
them. And as Indra rules Amardvati, that one firm in pro-
mise, and following duty, profit, and pleasure, ruled that best
of cities. And in that excellent city, the men were happy
and righteous-souled, and widely-read, and each contented
with his possessions, and devoid of covetousness,and spéak-
ing the truth. And in that prime of cities, there was none
who had not at his command a plenteous supply of the good’


* A warrior coping with ten thousand persons, aid protecting both his
charioteer and steeds.—T.
+ A warrior fighting ten thousand Makarathas.—P.


22 RAMAYANA,


SECTION vil.


Baar high-souled one of Ikshw&ku’s tine had competent
counsellors, capable of administering business, of diving into
the motives of others, and ever intent upon the good of the
monarch. And that heroic king had eight famous counsellors,
pure and devoted to the royal service,—viz., Dhrishti, and
Vijaya, and Surashtra, and Rashtravardhana, and Akopa, and
Dharmapila, and Sumantra the eighth, conversant with profit,
And he had two family priests after his heart: viz, those
foremost of saints, Vasistha and Vamadeva. And he had
other counsellors besides ; vis., Suyajna, and Javali, and
K&cyapa, and Gautama, and the long-lived Markandeya, and
the regenerate KatySyana, Ever associated in counsel with
these Brahmarshis, his priests and counsellors serving the
dynasty from father to son, were learned yet modest,
and bashful, and conversant with policy, and of subdued-
senses, and auspicious, and high-souled, and accomplished in
the art of arms, and of high renown, and cautious, and acting
according to their word, and possessing energy, forgiveness
and fame, and ever preluding their speech with a smile, and
never committing themselves to a lie either from anger or
interest or desire, and ever employing spies noting what was
qloing. or done in the midst of their own or a bostile party,
And they were adepts in intercourse with people, and well-
tried in friendship by the monarch. And they were ever busy
in replenishing the exchequer and in levying troops, And they
did not cherish il! will even towards enemies, when innocent.
And they were heroic, and ever high-spirited, following policy,
and protecting those citizens that were pure, and not bearing
ill will towards Brihmanas and Kshatriyas, and filling the
treasury, by inflicting punishments according to the offences of
the persons guilty. And during the time when those pure ones
of one mind presided over the justice of the kingdom, there


BALAKANDAM. 23


was neither in the city nor the provinces any that was a liar,
or wicked, or going alter others’ wives. And peace reigned
all around the city and the provinces. And the ministers
wore excellent raiment, and ornaments, and were engaged in
observing pure vows, and ever kept their eye of policy open,
in the interests of the monarch. And the king considered
them as crowned with virtues; and they were famed on
account of their prowess, concluding unerringly in consequence
of their intelligence of other countries. And in all climes
and times they could manifest their noble qualities; and they
were cognizant of war and peace, and possessed of goodness,
passion und ignorance. And they could keep their counsel,
and judge of things finely, a d were well-versed in the art of
policy, and ever fair-spoken. Surrounded by such counsellors
endowed with various qualities, the faultless king Dagaratha
tuled the earth, gathering intelligence by means of spices,
and righteously protecting the subjects, and preserving’ the
people, and not sacrificing his duties,—{amed over the three
worlds. And munificent, and firm in promise in battle, that
best of men ruled there this earth. Nor did he ever meet
with a foe that was either his equal or superior. And
possessed of Iriends, and having obedient commanders and
extricating bis thorns by his might, that king ruled the earth,
even as the lord ot celestials ruleth heaven. And surrounded
by those counsellors studious of his welfare, and bearing
affection towards him, and clever, and competent, that king?
by virtue of his prowess in subduing others, resembled the
Sun surrounded by his rays.


SECTION vill.


Ano although engaged in austerities with the view of
having sons born to him, the powertul and bigh-souled king,
had no son capable of perpetuating his line. And wmenally


4 akudvawa.


arning the matter over, the high-souled one thought, “Why
ot nut celebrate a horse-sacrifice with the intention -of
btaining a son?” And that highly-energetic, pious and
itelligent monarch, in consultation with all his counsellors
fsedate minds, having made up his mind to celebrate the
acrifice, said unto that best of counsellors, Sumantra,—"Do
hou speedily summon my spiritual guides, along with the
amily priests.” Thereupon, going out speedily, Sumantra of
wift moveinents called together all the spiritual guides, as
vell as others versed in the Vedic ritual; v/z., Suyajna, and
/amadeva, and Jasali, and Kagyapa, and Vasistha, and
ther principal twice-born ones. And having paid homage
mto them, the virtuous king Dagaratha then spoke unto
hem these sweet words, consistent with duty and interest,
—"Ever pining on account of a son, I know no happiness,—
sherefore it is my intention that [ should celebrate a horse-
sacrifice. I intend to celebrate it according to the ordinance.
Do ye, therefore, consider how I may attain my object.’
Thereat, the Bramanas with Vasistha at their head, exclaim-
ing “Well! Well!" approved the words that had fallen
from the lips of the monarch. And exceedingly pleased,
they spoke unto Dagaratha saying,~—"Do thou order the
necessary articles, louse the horse, and prepare the sacrificial
ground on the north bank of the Sarayu., And, O king,
since with the intention of obtaining offspring thou
purposest so piously, thou wilt surely obtain sons alter
thy heart.” Aud hearing these words of the regenerate
ones, the king was highly grautied. And with eyes expanded
in dehght, he spoke unto his ministers,—‘Do ye procure
the necessary sacrificial articles, according to the injunction
of my spiritual preceptors; and loose a horse protected
by a competent person, and followed by one of the chief
family priests; and do ye prepare the sacrificial ground on
the north bank of the Sarayu; and do ye in due order and
according to the ordinauce perform the rites required to


BALAKANDAM. a5


secure an uninterrupted completion to the ceremony. This
reremony is incapable of being celebrated by every
sing. Particular care should be taken that the sacrifice is
not defective on account of any serious omission; inasmuch
as with learned Brahma-R&kshasas ever on the look-out to
espy shortcomings in the ceremony, the performer thereof
speedily perishes, should anything take place not consonant
to the ordmance. And do ye possessed of ability so-arrange,
that this sacrifice may he completed in harmony with the
ritual.” Thus addressed with due respect, the counsellors
listened to the words of the monarch, and said, ‘So be it.”

Then taking the permission of that best of kings, those
regenerate ones knowing duty, having blessed the monarch,
returned to their respective quarters. _ And dismissing those
Brahmanas, the king spoke unto his minister, saying, —“Do
ye, even as the family priests have ordered, arrange for ethe
sacrifice !” Having said this, that mighty-minded and beat of
men dismissed his minister, and himself entered into the
inner apartment. And coming there, that lord of men said
unto his favourite wives,—"Du ye kuow it for certain that in
order to obtain ason | am going to perform a sacrifice”,
And hearing those sweet words, the cuuntenances of those
shining cames looked resplendent, like lotuses after the cold
Season is over. .


SECTION IX.


EARING al! about it, the king’s charioteer addressed
the monarch in private, saying.—“Do thou listen to what is
related in ancient history, and to what I have heard myself 1
This horse-sacrifice is enjoined hy the family priests ; and 1
have myself heard the following story celebrated in ancient


af RIMIYANA


chronicle. And what the worshipful Sanat Kumira had ssaid
formerly in the presence of the saints, applies, O king, to
the case of thy having a son. “Kagyapa hath a son known
by the name of Bibhandake. He will get a son called
Rhishyasringa. Aud be will grow up and pass his days
in the woods, And that foremost of Brahmanas_ will
not know aught else save following his father, And,
O king, it is rumoured abroad, and also always said by
the Vipras, that that high-souled one will practise the
two modes* of Brahmacharya life. And he will spend some
time in serving the sacrificial fire and bis famous sire. At
this time, the powerful Romapada of exceeding strength will
be famed as king of the Angas. And in consequence of
some default on his part, there will occur in his kingdom a
terrible and dreadful drouth, capable of striking terror into
all. And filled with grief on account of this drouth, the king
will call about him Veda-accomplished Brahmanas, and speak
unto them saying--"Ye are conversant with the Vedic ritual
and the social duties. Do ye, therefore, tell me how to
expiate for this evil.’ And thus accosted by the king,
thoge excellent Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, will say unto
that ruler of earth,—"Do thou, O monarch, by all means,
bring Bibhdndaka’s son. And having, O king, brought
that Brabmana versed in the Vedas, Bibh&udaka’s son
; Rhishyasringa, and duly honored him, do thou, Q monarch,
with a concentrated mind, bestow upon him thy daughter
Sant’, accurding to the ordinance.” And hearing those
words of theirs, the king will begin to think as to how be can
bring over that one endowed with energy. Then in consulta-
tion With his counsellors, the prudent king baving come to
# conclusion, will, honoring them duly, desire his. prieat and
bis courtiers to set out in quest of Rhishyasringa. There-


* Those’ that assume the staff and the Aamandels are reckoned. the first
order; while those that continue to live with their wives are considered as next
ja worth —T. i %


BALAKANDAM. Df


Tepon hearing the king's wards, with aggrieved hearts, and
with heads hanging down, they will beseech the monarch,
saying,—'Afraid of the saint, Bibhandaka, we shall not be
able to repair thither.” Anon hitting upon the appropriate
means, they say,—‘We will search for the Vipra, and no
blame shall attach unto us.’—

Thus, by help of courtezans, the saint’s son was brought
by the lord of the Angas. And then the god (Indra) poured
down showers; and the king conferred on him Sant&.° And”
now thy son-ia-law Rhishyasringa will help thee in obtaining
a son. Now I have related unto thee what Sanat Kumara
had communicated.” Thereupon king Dagaratha, © well
pleased. spoke unto Sumantra,—"Do thou now tell me by
what means Rhishyasringa was brought over (by the lord
of the Angas).”


SECTION X.


Tuvs asked by the king, Sumantra said these words,—
“T will relate unto thee how the counsellors brought Rhishya-
sringa. Do thou listen with thy counsellors! The priest
together with the counsellors spoke unto Romap&da,saying,—
‘The means that we have hit upon can never fail of effect.”
Rhishyasringa hath been brought up in woods; and is
engaged in austerities and the study of the Vedas; and is
ignorant of the pleasure that ensueth trom contact with
women. By help of things agreeably ministering unto the
senses, and ravishing the soul, we shall bring him to the
city.. Do thou, therefore, arrange for them! Let courtezans
of comely presence, clad in ornaments, repair thither. And
if well treated, they will by various means bring him hither.’
Hearing this, the king said nto the priest,-'So be it?
and laid the charge upon him,—who, however, made it over
to the courtiers, And the latter acted accordingly.


38 RAMAFANA.


And in accordance with the instructions, the courtezins
entered that great forest; and remaining at some distance
from the hermitage, endeavoured to meet with the sober son
of the saint ever dwelling in the woods. And satisfied
with serving his sire, he never strayed [rom the hermitage ;
and consequently had never seen men and women, or any
other creatures living in cities and towns. And it came to
pass that on one occasion.walking about at will, Bibh&udaka's:
son came to that spot and beheld the courtezans. And
n sweet voices, the women
said unto the saimt’s son,—'Who art thoup And what
dost thou, O Brabmana? We wish to learn all this, And
why is it that thou rangest alone this far-off forest? Be-
holding these beautiful damsels never seen before, he from
delight. hastened to inform them of his lineage, ‘My father
is Bibh4ndaka; and [ am his son, having sprung from his
loins. My name is Rhishyasringa; and my occupation is
known the world over. And this auspicious hermitage hard
by belongs to ns; and there I shall receive you all in due
form.’ Hearing the words of the saint’s son, they all con-
sented, and the women went to behold that asylum. And
wher they had come there, the saint's son received them
hospitably, saying.—'Here is Arghya’ ‘Here is water
for washing the feet’ “Here are fruits and roots.” And
thereupon they readily received his hospitality, And
actuated by the fear of the saint, Bibh‘ndaka, they bent
their minds upon departing saan, And they said —'Do


excellently attired, and


thou also, O twice-born one, receive from us these excellent
fruits! And, good hetide thee, O Vipra, do not tarry!”
And thereupon, embracing him joyfully, they gave unto
him sweetmeats and various kiuds of savoury viands. And
$asting those things, that one of exceeding energy took them
for fruits, never tasted before by the dwellers of the forest.
Bt ban, having accosted him, the women, feigning the observ-


B,.of some vow, went away, inspired with the fear of


BALAKANDAM. 29


his father. And when they had gone, that twice-born one,
K&cyapa’s son, hecame sad, and from grief of heart went
this way and that. And the next day his mind momentarily
running upon it, the graceful son of Bibhandaka, endowed


with prowess, came to that spot where he had encountered


the comely courtezans, aderaed with orniments. And as
soon as they observed him com
4
There are in that asylum diverse kinds of fruits and roots;


ing, they came forward, and


,—Do thou, O Brahmana, come unto our hermitage !


and there thou wilt surely feed thy fill. Thereupon, hear-
ing those words of theirs capable of influencing the heart,
hie became bent upon going,—and the women brought him
away. And when that high-souled) Vipra had been brought
over, the god, Indra, suddenly poured forth plenteous show-
ers, enlivening the spirits of men. And when the ascetic
had arrived, with showers, the king approached him.in
humble guise, bending his head to the ground, And he
offered him Arghya, in due form, and with a collected mind,
asked for his favor, so that wrath could not influence
the Vipra. And taking him into the inner apartments, and
in due form conferring upon him in sober mood his
daughter S&nt%, the king hecame happy. Thns the highly
powerful Rhishyasringa together with his wife Sant& began
to live there, respectfully ministered unto in regard to every
desire.”


SECTION XI.


Anp he said aguin,—“O foremost of monarchs, do thou
listen to meas I relate how that intelligent Sanat KumGra,
best of deities, spoke. ‘In the line of Ikshwaka will be born
a righteous king, named Dagaratha; fair of form, and firm
in promise. And that king will contract friendship with the


jo RAAAVPANA.


ruler of the Angas. And the latter will have a highly pious
daughter, Santa by name. And the (old) king of the Angas
will have a son, named Romap&da. And repairing unto him,
the highly famous king Dagaratha will speak unto Roma-
pala —O righteous-souled one I am without issue. Let
Santa's husband, desired by thee, take charge of this sacrifice
of mine, lo be celebrated with the object of my obtaining
a son to perpetuate the race.—Hearing these words of
the king, and having pondered well, he will make over unto
him Rhishyasringa of subdued senses, together with Sant
and his children. Aad taking that Vipra, that king, his
mind free from anxiety, with a glad heart, will prepare
for that sacrifice. And king Dagaratha, knowing duty and
desirous of fame, with the intention of obtaining off-pring
and heaven, with joined hands, will appoint that best of
Byalmanas, Rhishyasringa, to conduct the ceremony, And
that bringer of yood will attain his object at the hands of
that foremost of Brahmanas ; and four sons will be born to
him of immeasurable prowess, bringing fame unto the family,
and known by all.’ Thus spoke formerly in the divine age,
that worshipful and foremost of deities, Sanat Kumara.
Therefore, do thou, O best of men, repairing thither, accom-
panied with thy forces and equipage, thyself, O mighty king,
bring Rhishyasringa over with due honors.” And hearing
Sumantra’s words, Dagaratha was exceedingly delighted. And


hearing these words, and permitted by Vasishtha, he accom-
panied with the ladies, and his courtiers, set out for the place
where that twice-burn one was. And gradually passing by woods
and fells,he arrived at the place where that foremost of ascetics
was. And coming before that best of regenerate ones, he
saw that sage’s son near Romap§da, like unto flaming fire.
Then the king received him respectfully, and with a delighted
mind, on account of the friendship he bore him. And he
communicated unto the intelligent son of the saint, the fact
of their intimacy, and then the latter paid homage unlo


BALAKANDAM. ge


Dagarntha. Having passed seven or eight days with
RomapSda, receiving high honors, that foremost of men,
Dagaratha spoke unto Romapada, saying — Let thy daughter,
O king, together with her husband, O lord of men, repair unto
my cily, Iam going to be engaged in a mighty enterprise.”
Hearing this as to the journey ot that intelligent one, the
king said unto that Vipra,—“Do thou repair with thy wife !"”
Thereupon the saint’s son, promising to go, said unto the
king,—"So be it!” And then with the kiny’s permission,
he set out with his wife. And Duacaratha and the puissant
Romapada clasping each other by the palm, and embracing
each other in affection, attained excess ol joy. ‘Then Raghu's
son, bidding farewell unto his friend, set out. And he
despatched swift messengers to the citizens, saying,—" Let
the entire city be embellished; let it be perfumed with
dhupa, aud watered and decked with pennoas.” And heanag
of the king’s approach, the citizens joyfully did every
thing as they had been commanded. Then the monarch,
with that foremost of Brahmanas: before him, entered the
decorated city, to the blares of conchs avd drums. And
beholding that Brahmana entering the city, duly honored by
the prime of men, subservient unto Indra, like unto Kagyapa’s
son entering the celestial regions, honored of the thousands
eyed lord ot the celestials, all the citizens rejoiced exceeding-
ly. Then taking him into the inner apartment, and paying
him homage according to the ordinance, the king considered
lumself as having gamed his object, in consequence of the
presence of that Brahmana. And all the inmates of the inner
apartment, seeing the large eyed S&utd thus arrived with her
husband, experienced excess of joy. Then honured by them
and the king in especial, she happily spent there some time
along with that twice born one.


32 RAVAY ANA,


SECTION XII,


"Tren after a tong: while, when the charming spring had
appeared on the earth, whe king conceived the desire of
celebrating the sacrifice. Then bowing down the head unto
that Vipra effulyent tike a celestial, he appointed him to
undertake the ceremony, for the purpose of obtaining off-
xpring to perpetuate his lime. ‘Phen that Bralimana said unto
“So be it! Do thou order
the necessary provisions, loose the horse, and prepare a


that lord of the earth, the kin.


sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu.” Then the
king spoke unto Sumantra, saying,—"O Sumantra, do thou
summon speedily Biabmanas versed in the Vedas and priests
professing the Vedanta philosophy—-Suyajna, and Vamadeva,
and Javali, and Kacyapa, and the priest Vasistha, together
with other excellent twice-born ones.” Thereupon Sumantra
endowed with activity, bestirring himself, summoned all Uhose
versed in the Vedas. ‘Then, honoring them duly, the virtyous
hing Dagaratha spoke unto them these amiable words, con-
sistent with duty and interest,—'Apgrieved on account of
a son, I have no happiness on earth,—and therefore, I have
intended to celebrate a horsc-sacrifice. And by the grace
of the saint’s son, 1 shall obtain my desire.” Thereupon,
the Brahmanas with Vasishtha at their head honored the
words that fell from the king’s lips, saying—“Well.” And
the Brahiwanas headed by Rhisbyasringa addressed the king,
saying,—Do thou arrange for the provisions, louse the
horse, and prepare the sacrificial ground on the worth bank
of the Sarayu! And since thou purposest so virtuunsly for
obtaining off-pring, thou shalt obtain fuur sons of
And hearing those words of the


immeasurable prowess.”


regonerate ones, the king was exceedingly delighted. And
cheerfully he spoke these auspicious words to his courtiers,—~
“In accordance with the direction of my spiritual guides,


BALIKANDAY. 33


do ye speedily procure these provisions,--loose the horse
well protected, and followed by a priest,—and prepare the
sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu. And
do ye perform the ceremonies capable of securing the rites
from disturbance. Surely every king is competent to per-
form this sacrifice. Yet care must be taken that no default
occurs in it. For flaws in this foremost of sacrifices are
watched by learned Brahma-Rakshasas. And should it come
to be celebrated in violation of the ordinance, the performer
thereof shall meet with instant destruction. And do ye so
order that this sacrifice of mine may be completed accord-
ing to the prescribed ritual.” Thereupon honoring those
words of the king, the ministers did as ordered. And
having eulogized the king knowing duty, the twice-born
ones, with the Monarch's leave, departed for their respective
quarters, And when the Vipras had gone, the mighty-
minded lord of men dismissing his counsellors, entered the
inner apartment.


SECTION xt.


Av when after afull one year, spring had. again
appeared on the face of the earth, the puissant king, intent
upon getting offspring through the horse-sacrifice, saught
Vasishtha's side. And having saluted Vasishtha and duly
paid him homage, he humbly spoke unto that best of twice-
born ones, with the intention of having offspring. “Do thou,
© Brahmana, undertake to perform this sacrifice of mine,
according to the ordinance, O foremost of ascetics! , And
do thou order so that no impediment may happen to the
sacrifice! Thou art my kind friend, and prime and mighty
spiritual guide. Engaged in it, thou wilt have to bear the
entire burden of the ceremony.” Thereupon that best of
Brihmanas said—‘So be it! 1 will do ail that thow


34 : RAMAYANA.


askest.” He then said unto old Brahmanas well-up in
sacrificial affairs, and experienced car-makers, and highly
pious aged people, and servants, carrying on the ceremonial
operations till the end, and artists, and carpenters, and
diggers, and astrologers, and artizans, and dancers, and con-
ductors of theatres, and pure and learned persons variously
versed in knowledge,—Do ye, in obedience to the royal
mandate, engage in the sacrificial work! And fetch
! Do ye raise structures for the kings,
1 And do ye rear goodly


cks


by thousand


commanding every convenienc
and comfortable buildings by hundreds for the Brahmanas,
replenished with various meats and drinks. Ye should
provide spacious apartments for the citizens and the dwellers
of provinces,—-aud separate quarters for the princes, comng
from forvign parts; and stables fur horses, and dressing-
rooms,—and wide apartments for native and forcign warriors.
And dwellings filled with diverse kinds of viands, and
commanding everything desirable,—and mansions for the
lower orders of the citizens, exceedingly beautiful to behold.
And meats should be duly dispensed with respect, and not
in the indWWerence of festive occasions,—so that all


may regard themselves as honorably entertained. None
should be disregarded out of tust or passion, Those


persons, and arizans, that wil! labor cagerly in the sacrifice,

_ should by turus, be especially entertained ; and servants,
who, being entertained with gifts, do every thing completely,
aud omit nothing, And do ye, with hearts mollified by love,
act so, that all our friends be well pleased with us.”

Then they approached Vasishtha, saying,—*Everything
hath Leen performed properly, without anything being left
out. And what thou sayest shall be performed, and rothing
omitted” Then summoning Sumantra, Vasishtha said these

words,—'Do thou invite all those kings that are pious,—
and Br&hmanas, and Kshatriyas and Sudras, by thousands.


And do thou with due honors bring people from all countries.


EBRLAKENDAM 35


And, with proper honor thyself bring the righteous, truthful,
aud heroic Janaka, lord of Mit And _ it is because he
is our old friend that [ first mention him. Then’ do thou
thyself bring the amiable and ever fair-spoken lord of Kasi,
of excellent character, resembling a celestial. Then do


thou bring hither along with his son, the highly-pious, old
king of Kekaya, who is the father-in-law of this best of
monarchs! Then do thon bring with due honors thé puissant
king of Kogala, and that mighly archer, the illustrious
Romapada, the friend of that lion of a king.and that foremost
of men—the heroic, and highly generous lord of Magadha,
versed in alt branches of learning. And in accordance with
the mandate of the king,do thou invite the foremost monarchs !
Aud do thou summon the kings of the East, of the Sindhu
and Sauvira countries, and of Suurashtra, and of the South!
And do thou speedily bring those monarchs that are attached
unto us, together with their friends and followers. Do thon
in obedience to the mandate of the monarch, bring over
these, despatching dignified emissaries !”

Having heard those words of Vasishtha,Sumantra speedily
ordered faithful persons anent the bringing over of the
kings. And the virteous Sumantra, in accordance with {he
injunction of the asc himself speedily set ont fur the
purpose of bringing the monarchs. And then the servants
came and informed the intelligent Vasishtha as to the


articles that had been got ready for the sacrifice. Then well-
pleased that best of twice-born ones, the ascetic Vasishtha,
said unto them,—“Do not give away disrespectfully or
lightly. A gift bestowed with disrespect, indubitably destroy-
eth the giver.” .
Then for several days, kings began to pour into Dacaratha's
city daily and nightly, bringing with them various kinds
of gems. Thereupon Vasishtha well-pleased said unto
the king,—‘O best of men, obeying thy mandate the
hings have come here; and I too, according to merit, have


36 RAMAPANA,


received those excellent kings with respect. And every-
thing hath been carefully made ready for the sacrifice by
the persons concerned. Do thou, therefore, repair to the
sacrificial ground, for performing the sacrifice. And, O
foremost of monarchs, it behoveth thee to view the place,
filled with all desirable objects, and looking as if prepared by
imagination herself.”

Then in accordance with the injunctions of both Vasishtha
and Rhishyasringa, the king came to the sacrificial spot on
a day presided over by an auspicious star. Then with,
Rhishyasringa at there head, Vasishtha and the other prin-
cipal Brahmanas wending to the sacrificial ground, began
the ceremony, according to the ordinace ; and in dune form.
And the auspicious king, in company with bis wives, was
initiated into the ceremony.


SECTION xiv.


Avo after the expiry of full une year, when the sacrificial
horse had returned, the sacrifice of the king commenced
on the north bank of the Sirayu. And with Rhishyasringa
at their head the principal twice-born ones began the
proceedings in that mighty horse-sacrifice of that high-souled
monarch. And the priests, each duly and according to
the ordinance performing his proper part, engaged in the
weremony in consonance with the scriptures. And the
regenerate ones, having performed the pravargya as well
as the xpasada according to the ordinance, duly completed
the additional ceremonies. Then, worshipping the deities
with glad hearts, those foremost uf ascetics duly performed
the morning ablutions and the other prescribed rites,
The oblations of clarified butter first having been offered
unto Indra, according to the ritual, the king with a puii-
fied heart performed his ablutions. And then the mid-day


BALAKANDAM 37


ablutions took place in proper sequence. And those fore-
most of Br&hmanas, in due form, and according to the ordi-
nance,officiated at the third bath of that high-souled monarch.
And the priests presided over by Rhishyastinga, invoked
Sakra and the other deities, reciting measured mantras.


And the sacrificial priests, chanting sweet Sdmas and soft
mantras, duly invoking the dwellers of the celestial regions,
offered each his share of the oblations. And no part
of the ceremony was performed improperly, or left out—
and every thing was satisfactorily celebrated with mantras.
And on that day no Brahmana ever felt tired, or hungry;
and there was none that was not learned, or that was not
followed by an hundred persons. And Rrahmanas, and
Sudras having among them ascetics, and Sramanas, and the
aged, and the infirm, and women, and children, were con-
tinually fed. And although they ate their fill, yet they
knew no repletion, And ‘Give fond, and clothes of various
kind"—(was heard all around), And those employed
in the task gave away profusely. And every day food
dressed properly in due form was to be seen in countless
heans resembling hills. And men and women coming from
various countries to tho sacrifice of that high-souled one
were excellently entertained with meats and drinks. And
the foremost regenerate ones said,—The viands have been
prepared in the prescribed form, and they taste excellent.
We have been gratified. Good betide thee!” All this was
heard by that descendant of Raghu. And persons adorned
with ornaments distributed the victuals among the Brilimanas,
and they were assisted by others bearning jewelled pendants.
And in the interval between the completion of one ‘bath
and the beginning of the next, mild and eloquent Vipras,
desirous of victory, engaged in various disputations, And
every day in that sacrifice, skilful Brahmanas, engaged
in the ceremony, did every thing, according to the ritual.
And there was no twice-born one that was not versed in the


38 RAMAYANA,


Vedas and the Vedaneas, or that did not observe vows, or
that was not profoundly learned,—nor did any assist at the
sacrifice that could not argue ably. And when the time came
for planting the Vupas, persons cognizant of arts and sacri-
ficiat rites, prepared six Fupas of Vilwa. as many of catechu,
and as many of Padasa, and one of Sleshmataka, and two of
Devadaru well-made and measuring two outstretched arms,
Persons versed in the arts ard science of sacrifice constructed
these Yupas. And at the time of throwing up the Vxpas,
for embellishing the sacrifice, these one and twenty Yupas,
each measuring one and twenty Aratnis, having eight
angles, and smooth-faced were decked out in one and twenty
pieces of cloth, and were firmly planted with due ceremonies
by arlizans. And being wrapped up in cloths, and worshipped
with flowers. they looked lke the seven Rishis appearing
in the welkin. And an adequate number of bricks was
also duly made (for the ceremony.) And Br&hkmanas accom-
plifhed in the arts constructed the sacrificial fire place with
those bricks. And that fire-place of that lion among kings,.
set by skilful Brahmanas, consisting on three sides of eighteen
bricks, looked like the golden-winged Garura. And for the
purpose of sacrificing them unto the-respective deities were
collected beasts and reptiles, and birds, and horses, and
aquatic animals. And the priests sacrifized all these in
proper form. And to these Yupas were bound three hundred
heasts, as well as the foremost of the best horses belonging
to king Dagaratha, Then Kaugalya, having performed the
preliminary rites, with three strokes slew that horse, experi-
encing great glee. And with the view of reaping merit,
Kaugalya, with an undisturbed heart passed one night with
that borse furnishd with wings. And the Hotds and
Adhwaryus, and the Udgatas joined the king's Vdudtd
along with his Afak/skt and Partoriti. * And priests of
~~ # Phe Kshetriya kings could marry wives from among Kshetriyas, Vaishyas


and Sudras. The Kshetriya is called Mukéshee, the Vaishya wife Vézate
and the Sucha wife Parieriti—T.


TPA AKENDAM, 39


subdued senses, well-up in sacrificial rites, began to offer
oblations with the fat of the winged-horse, according to the
ordinance. And that lord of men, desirous ol removing his
sing, at the proper time smelt the odour of the smoke arising
{rom the fat, agreeably to the scriptures. And then sixteen
sacrificial priests in the prescribed jorm offered the various
parts of the horse unto the fire. It is customary in other


sacrifices to offer the oblations by means of a Péaksha bough;
but in the borse-sacrifice a cane is used instead. The lorse-
sacrifice, according to the Kalap Sutras and the Bralimanas,
extend over three days. here after, on the first day was the
Chatushtoma celebrated; and on the second the Uktha—
and on the third the Afératra. And then the Fyolish-
foma, and then Ayushtoma and the Afiratra, and the
Abhijit, aud the Wiswajit, and the Aptoryama—al) these
various great sacrilices were celebrated with due rites. And
in this mighty horse-sacrilice founded of yore by Sayambhu,
that porpetuator of his line, the king, bestowed the Eastern
quarter on his chief sacrificial priest, the Western on bis
Adhwaryu, the Southern on Brahma, and the Noithern on
the Udgath, as Dakshinas. Aud having completed that
sacrilice, Lhat perpetuator of his race, aud foremost of men,


the king, conferred on the pricsts the earth ; and having con-
ferted it, that auspicious descendant of Iskhaku experienced
high delight. And then the priests spoke unto that monarch,
who had alt Ins sins purged off, saying,—"Thuu alune art
worthy to protect the entire world. We do not want the
O Jord of Earth, constantly
engaged in Vaidika studios. Do thou, therelore, conter
upon us something instead, as the price thereot. Do thou


earth; nor can we rule it,


confer upon us gems, or gold, or kine, or anything else, tur,
O foremost of monarchs, we do not want Earth.” Thus
addressed by the Brahmanas versed in the Veda, that best
of kings bestowed upon them ten lacs of kine, and ten Kotis
of gold, and forty of silver. Then those priests in a budy,


ao KAMEPANA,


accepting the wealth, brought it unto the ascetic Rhbishya-
stinga and the intelligent Vasishtha, Then having received
exch his share, those foremost of regenerate ones were
exceedingly pleased, and said—“We have been highly
gratified” ‘Then unto those Bralhmanas that had come there,
the king with due regard gave Kot’s of gold. And then
unto a certain poor twice-born one that asked for gifts, the
descendant of Raghu gave an excellent ornament from his
own arm, And, whea the regenerate ones were thus properly
gratihed, that one cherishing the Brahmanas, with senses
intoxicated by excess of joy, reverentially bowed unto them.
And thereupon the Bréhmanas uttered various blessings upon
that generous king, bending low te the earth, Then having
celebrated that excellent and sin-destroying sacrifice, bring-
ing heaven, and incapable of being celebrated by foremost
mgnarchs, king Dagaratha, well pleased, spoke unto Rhishya-
stinga. saying, —"O thou of excelleut vows, it behoveth thes
todo that whereby my line may merease.” Thereupon the
best of Brdbmanas said,—"Be it so! Uato thee, O king, will
be born four sons,—perpetuators of their race.” Hearing
these sweet words of Ins, that foremost of movarchs bended
low unto him with controlled faculties, and experienced the
excess of joy, Aud then that high-souled one again spoke
uato Rhishy asringa.


SECTION xv.


"Daen that one of cupacious intelligence, versed in the
Vedas, having pondered for a time, and regained his senses,
returned unto the king this excellent answer,—‘On thy
behalf, and with the view of obtaining sons for thee, I will
by help of mantras laid down in the Atharva Veda, duly
celebrate the famous ceremony, capable of crowning thee
with offspring.” And then with the view of obtaining sons


BALAKANDAM. at


(for the king), that effulgent one set about the son-coferring
ceremony; and in accordance with the ordinance, and with
mantras, offered oblations unto the sacrificial fire. And the
deities, with the Gandkaréas, and the Stddhas, and the
principal saints, assembled there duly, with the object ot
each obtaining his share of the offerings. And having
duly assembled there, the deities addressed these words unto
Brahma, the lord of creatures,—“O thou possessed of the six
attributes, through thy grace, a Rakshasanamed R&vana
oppresses us all by his prowess—nor can we bafite him,
And, O lord, as thou hast well-pleased conferred on hima
boon, we always suffer him in deference to it. And
the wicked-minded one harasseth the three worlds furnished
with prosperity, and beareth ilf will unto them. And blinded
by the boon he hath received, that irrepressible one
intends to bring down the lord himself of the celestials, and
the Yakshas, and the Gandharbas, and the Brahmanas, and
the Asuras. And the Sun doth not burn him, or the wind
blow about him; and at sight of him, that one engarlanded
with billows, the Ocean, dares not stir. Therefore, great is
the fear that afflicteth us, coming from that Rakshasa of
dreadful appearance. And O lord, it behoves thee tode-
vise some means for destroying him.” Thus addressed by the
deities in a body, he said,—“ Alas ! I have, however, decided
on the means of destroying that wicked-souled one. He had
asked,—-‘ May I be incapable of being slain by dharbas
and Yakshas, and gods, and Rékshasas !—whereat | said—
‘Be itso! Through disdain, the Rakshasa did not at that
time mention men, Therefore, by men alone he is capable cf
being slain; nor can his end be compassed by any other
means.” Hearing this welcome speech uttered by Brahma,
the deities and the Maharshis became exceedingly delighted.
At this juncture, that lord of the universe, the highly-efful-
gent Vishnu, clad in yellow apparel, and bearing in his hands
the conch, the discus, and the mace, and adorned with bur-
6


az RAMAYANA,


nished Xeyuras,* arrived there, riding Vinat4's son ; like unto
the Sun riding the clouds. And worshipped by the foremost
‘of the celestials,he drew near Brahin&, and sat down with
acollected mind. And bending low before him, the deities
spake unto him, saying,—“O Vishnu, for the benefit of the
worlds, we shall appoint thee to some work. Do thou, O
tord, dividing thyself into four, O Vishnu, become born as
sons in the three wives, resembling Modesty Auspiciousness,
and Fame,—of Ayodhya’s lord, king Dagaratha, cognizant of
Duty, and munificent, and possessing energy, and like unto a
Maharshi. Do thou, O Vishnu, becoming man, slay in battle
this thorn of the worlds, the pampered RAvana, incapable
of being slain by the gods; for the foolish Rakshasa
by virtue of sublimated prowess, baffles the deities, and
the Gandharbas, and the Srddhas, and the foremost of
scints. And by him bereft of the sense of right and wrong,
have saints and Gandharbas and Apsaras sporting in the
groves of Nandana, been wantonly slain. It is to com-
pass his death that accompanied by the ascetics, we have
come hither: it is for this that the Siddhas and the Gan-
dharbas and the Yakshas have taken refuge in Thee! Thou,
O God, art the prime way of us all, O ropressor of foes! Do
thou, for bringing destruction unto the enemies of the gods,
turn thy thoughts to being born as man.” Thus besought,
that foremost of gods and chief of celestials, Vishnu, wor-
shipped of all creatures, addressed the assembled deities,
following Duty, with the Grand-sire at their head, saying,—
“ Do ye renounce fear! For your behoof, slaying in battle
the wily and irrepressible Ravana, dreadful unto the saints
and the celestials, together with his sons, and grandsons,
and friends, and counsellors, aud relatives, and acquaint-
ances, I will abide among mortals, ruling this earth for ten
thousand and as many hundred years’. Having thus con-


* A bracelet worn on the upper arm-—T.


BELARANDAM 43


ferred a boou upon the gods, the god Vishnu of subdued
soul fell to thinking asthe place where he would be born
among men. Then that one of eyes resembling lotus-petals,
dividing self into four parts, chose even king Dagaratha for
his father. Thereat the celestials and the saints and the
Gandharbas and the Rudras and the Apsaras hymned the
Slayer of Madhu in excellent hymns:

“Do thou utterly uproot the haughty Ravana of fierce
prowess and enhanced insolence—that foe of the lord of
celestials, who is the occasion of the tears of the three
worlds,* and dreadful unto ascetics ! Slaying that one of
terrible prowess, who distresses the three worlds, with his
forces and friends, do thou, O foremost of gods thy fever of
heart removed, repair unto the celestial regions protected by
thee and purged of all its faults and sins.”


SECTION xvi.


Thus besought by the foremost of the celestials,
thatt searcher of hearts, Vishnu, although cognizant of the
means whereby Ravana was to be destroyed, spake unto the
gods these amiable words,—‘ What, ye gods is the means
of compassing the destruction of that lord of the Rakshasas,
by adopting which I could slay that thorn of the ascetics ?”
Thus addressed, the deities answered Vishnu, incapable of
deterioration, saying,—‘Assuming the form of a human
being, do thou in battle slay Ravana! He, O repressor of
foes, had for a long course of time performed rigid austeri-
ties ; and thereat, that creator of all, the first-create Brahm&


* Lit. the thorns of pious ascetics —T.

+ Néra means a multitude, and Ayana, dwelling-place. He whose dwell-
ing-place is a multitude, is Nérdyana, Metaphorically, the word means
evidently, the Searcher of hearts—T.


a4 RAMAYANA.


was well pleased. And propitiated by his penances,the
Master conferred a boon on the Rakshasa to the effect
that, save man, no fear should come to him from the vari-
ous beings. And in the matter of that boon-bestowing,
man had formerly been disregarded by (Ravana). And puffed
up with pride in consequence of the boon he received from
the Grand-siie, he commits ravages upon the three worlds
and carries away the fair sex by violence. Therefore, O
subduer of enemies, we have even fixed upon man for
bringing about his death.” Hearing this speech of the
celestials, Vishnu of subdued soul chose even king Dagaratha
for his father. And at that time, eagerly wishing to
have sons, that destroyer of enemies, the effulgent king
Dagaratha, who was sonless, was celebrating the sacrifice
that conferreth male offspring. Then, having ascertained the
course to follow, Vishnu, having greeted the Grand-sire,
vanished there, worshipped by the deities and the Maharshis.

And then himself bearing in his hands a capacious vessel
made of burnished gold, witha silver cover,—dear like unto
a spouse, and resembling the divine Creative energy, filled
with celestial Pdyasa,* from out the sacrificial fire of Dagaratha
initiated into the ceremony, there arose a mighty being, of
unparalleled prowess, high energy, and huge strength, black,
and wearing a crimson apparel, with a red face, uttering the
blares of a trumpet, and having a body covered with leonine
hair, having whiskers and an excellent head of hair, furnished
with auspicious marks, and adorned with celestial ornaments,
and resembling a mountain-peak, and bearing the prowess ofa
flaming tiger, and like unto the Sun or tongues of flaming fire.
And, with his eyes fixed upon Dagaratha, he addressed the
king, saying,—“'O monarch, take thou me as a person commis-
sioned by Prajapat:. ” Hearing him speak thus, Dagaratha,with
joined hands, said,—‘Lord, art thou welcome? What can I


A preparation of milk, and sugar—T .


BALARANDAM 45


do for thee?” Thereupon, that person despatched by Praja-
pati again spake thus,—"'O king, having adored the deities,
thou hast to- day obtained this. Do thou foremost of kings,
accept this excellent and divinely-prepared Payasa,conferring
sons, health, and affluence,—which thou art to give unto thy
worthy consorts, saying,—Paertake tf, Through them thou
wilt, O monarch, obtain sons,—for obtaining whom thou hast
performed this sacrifice.’ Thereupon, saying,—'So be it,”
the lord of men delightedly placed that divinely-bestowed
golden vessel filled with the celestial Péyasa upon his head.
And having saluted that wonderful being of gracious presence,
he in excess of joy began to go round him again and again.
Then Dagaratha, having received that divinely-prepared
Pédyasa, waxed exceeding glad; like unto a pauper attaining
plenty. Then that highly effulgent being of a wonderful
form, having performed that mission of his, vanished even
there. And Dagaratha’s inner apartment, being graced with
the rays of joy, looked like unto the welkin flooded with the
lovely beams of the autumnal moon, Then entering the inner
apartment, he spake unto Kaucaly&, saying,—Take thou
this Pdyasa ; for this will make thee bear a son.” Having
said this, the king offered unto her a portion of this Pdyara.
Then he conferred upon Sumitra a fourth of it. Then inorder
that she might have a son, king Dagaratha made over unto
Kaikeyi an equal portion of what remained. And then having
reflected, the mighty-minded one gave unto Sumitra the
remaining portion of the Pdyasa resembling ambrosia. Thus
the king dispensed the Péyasa unto each and all of his wives.
And those foremost wives of the king, having received that
Pdyasa, became exceedingly delighted, and considered them-
selves as highly honored. Then those excellent consorts of
the lord of earth, having separately partaken of that choice
Péyasa, shortly bore offspring, resembling fire or the Sun.
And the king, beholding those wives of his bearing children,
obtained his desire and became delighted; even as that fore-


46 KAMAP ANA.


most of the celestials, Indra, while being worshipped by the
Stddhas and the ascetics.


SECTION XVII.


Wiuen Vishnu had accepted the sonship of that high-
souled king, the self-create Lord addressed the celestials,
saying,—For assisting the heroic Vishnu firm in pormise,
always seeking the welfare of us all, do ye create powerful
beings, assuming shapes at will, cognizant of illusions, heroic,
furnished with the celerity of the wind, versed in morality,
possessing intelligence, like unto Vishnu in prowess, unslay-
able, knowing the ways and means (of war and peace) gifted
with excellent bodies, capable of resisting all weapons, and
resembling immortals. And from forth the bodies ot the
foremost Apsaris, and Gandharbis and yakshr, and Pane
nagis, and Rikshis,* and Vidhyddharis, and Kinnaris, and
Vanaris,t do ye produce sons weariug the shapes of monkeys.
Formerly I had created that foremost of bears, Jambuv&na,
who suddenly came out of my mouth as J was yawnity.”
Hearing this mandate of Him possessed of the sta attri-
but s they began to produce sons endowed with monkey-
“forms. And high-souled ascetics, and Siddhas, and Vidyd-
dharas, and Uragas, and Chdranas, generated heroic sons,—
rangers of woods. And Indra begat as his son that fore-
most of monkeys, Vali, resembling the Mahendra hill,—and
that best of those imparting heat, the Sun, Sugriva And
Vribaspati begat the mighty ape named Jara, the most
excellent and intelligent of the prime monkeys. And
the Bestower of riches begat as his son the graceful cpe

~ She-bears.—T. aide
+ She-monkeys.—T.


BALAKANDA SM. 47


vandhamadana. And Vigwakarma begat that mighty
monkey named Nala; and Agni begat as his son the powerful
and graceful Nila in effulgence like unto the fire, who
surpassed even his sire in energy, prowess, and renown.
“nd he beautiful Agwins, endowed with the wealth of
loveiness, begat Maindra and Dwivida. And Varuna begat
the named Sushena; and Paryyanya begat Sarava,
pos» of great strength, And the Wind-god begat
tie graceful monkey named Hanuman, endeued with a frame


hard as auamant; in fleetness like unto Vinat&'s offspring ; and
the mos: juteliivent as well as the most powerful amongst all
the princapal monkeys. Thus produced, there suddenly came
iato beit.g by thousands, mighty bears, and monkeys, and Go-
fechchhas? of ammeasurable strength, and heroic, and power-
fe:, assuming shapes at will, endowed with bodies resem-
ving clephants of hills,—even those who would engage
ik ompassing tho destruction ui the Ten-headed one. And
- tons or the denics retained distinctly the respective
voces, faums, ana prowess that characterized their several
. ts And those tbat sprang from the Golangulas,t possess-
ae? nor iban the might of the gods. Likewise, on
nd Avanaris were gladly begot thousands upon
Novsipds ot .nonkeys, by gods, and Makarshis, and
haracavoas, aud Tarkshyas, and famous Yakshas, and
ANagds, and Kimpurushas,t and Siddhas and Vidyddherasy,
auc Urayas. And upon the principal Afsaris, and the
Vidyddharis, and the vaughters of the Nagas, and the Gan-
tharbis were begot by the Cidranas as sons, heroic monkeys
“| yigantic bodies, ranging the forests and living on fruits
ad vocts And ali these monkeys were endowed?* with
st.engih , and could assume shapes and repair everywhere,


* Cowdtailed monkeys —T.
+ Cowetailed monkeys —T.
1 Being hatf-man and hali-beast—T.


48 RAMAYANA,


at will. And they were Jike unto lions and tigers, both in
pride and in prowess, And they faught with crags and hurled
hills, And they faught with nails and teeth,~and were accom-
plished in all weapons. And they could move the largest
hills; and crush the fixed trees ; and with their impetus, vex
that lord of rivers—the Ocean. And they could with their
kicks rend the Earth, and swim over the mighty main. And
they could penetrate into the welkin,—and capture the
clouds. And they could subdue mad elephants ranging the
forest. And with their roars, they could bring down birds
singing. Thus came into being Kotts of high-souled leaders
of monkey-herds, assuming forms at will. And these became
the leaders of the principal monkey-herds ; and they, in their
turn, generated heroic monkeys, the foremost of the leaders
of herds.

Some of these monkeys began to dwell on the top of
the Rikshavana mountain ; while others inhabited various
other mountains and forests. And all the leaders of monkey-
herds stayed with those brothers,—-Sugriva, the son of the
Sun-god and Vali, that of Sakra—and also with Nala, and
Nilajand Hanuman,and other leaders of monkey-herds. And
endowed with the might of Garura, and accomplished in fight,
they ranged around, pounding lions, and tigers, and mighty
Uragas. And the mighty-armed Vali of great prowess and

_Fedoubtable strength protected by virtue of the energy of
his arms Rrkshas, and Gopuchchhas, and monkeys. And
this earth, furnished with mountains, and forests, and oceans,
began to teem with those heroic lords of leaders of monkey
herds, inhabiting different places, bearing characteristic
marks, resembling masses of clouds, or mountain-peaks,
possessed of mighty strength, and of terrible bodies and
visages,—in order that they might assist Rama.


BALAKANDAM 49


SECTION xvilr.


HEN the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Dagaratha
had been completed, the immortals, accepting each his
share, returned whence they had come, And the monarch,
having observed all the rules of initiation, entered the
‘palace with his equipage and retinue. And the lords of
the earth, having been received suitably by the king, with
glad hearts set out for their own countries, saluting that
foremost of ascetics (Rhishyasringa). And clad in bright
apparel, the delighted forces belonging to those graceful
kings repairing to their own homes, looked exceediug!y
beautiful. When the lords of the earth had gone away, the
graceful king Dagaratha re-entered his palace, with the
foremost of regenerate ones at his head. And followed by
the intelligeut monarch with his retinue, Rhishyaringa,
having been duly honored, set out with Santa. Having thus
dismissed them all, the king, his object attained, began to
dwell there happily, expecting sons.

And then when the six seasons had roiled away after the
«completion of the sacrifice, in the twelfth month, on the
ninth lunar day, under the influence of the Punarvasu
asterism, when the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, Fupiter, and
Venus were at Arius, Capricorn, Libra,Cancey,and Pisces,—
and when $¥upiter had arisen with the Moon at Cancer,
Kaugaly& gave birth to that lord of the universe, bowed
unto by all the worlds, Rama, the descendant of Ikshwaku,
furnished with excetient marks,—the one half of Vishnu,—
exceedingly righteous, with rosy eyes, and mighty arms, and
crimson nether lip, and endowed with a voice like the sound
of a kettledrum. Then on having given birth to that son
of immeasurable prowess, Kaugalya looked resplendent, like


7


50 RAMAYANA,


Adition having brought forth that foremost of celestials—the
wielder of the thunder-bolt. And then was horn of Kaikeyi,
Bharata, having truth for prowess, endowed with all the
virlucs, and the very fourth part of Vishnu. And then
Sumitré gave birth uoto Lakshmana and Satrugbna, heroic.
and skilled in all weapons, and endowed with the half of
Vishnu. And Bharata of purged
the asterism Pushkyd, when the Sun had entered Pisces; while
tho two sons of Sumitra were born when the Sun arose in
Cancer, under the.asterism of As/eshd.*

And thus were separately born four high-souled sors
unto the king, crowned with qualities, and gracetul, and in
loveliness resembling the constellaiions Prosthapaday.
Thereat the Ganxdharbas began to chant sweetly, and the
Apsards to dance. And the celestial ketUedrums sounded ;
ayd there showered down blossoms from the sky. And high
festivities were commenced Ly the multitude in Ayodhya.
And the spacious high ways became filled with players and
dancers, glitlering with all kinds of gems, and resounding
with the music of singers and performers on instruments,
And the king bestowed gifts upon bards and genealogists
and penegyrists, and he also gave kine by thousands to
Brahmanas,


ntelligence was bora under


. And when the eleventh day hal gone by, the king per-
formed the Naming ceremony of his seas. And experiencing
great delight, Vasishtha conferred the names. And the high-
souled eldest one was called Rama; and Kaikeyi’s son was
called Bharata; and Sumitra’s son was called Lakshmana,—
and the last was named Satrughna. And the king fed the
Bidimanas as well as the inhabitants rural and urban; and
he bestowed heaps of jewels upon Brahmanas. Thus did
he celebrate the natal rites of the princes. And among all


* The ninth lunar mansion—T.
+ Otherwise called Uiterabhddrapada and Purvabhdédrapada—t.


BALARANDAM. st


those princes, the eldest, Rima, like unto Ketu,* and the
special delight of his father, became the object of general
regard, even as the self-create Himself. And all of them were
versed in the Vedas, and heroic, and intent upon the welfare
of others. And all were accomplished in knowledge ; and
endowed with virtues. And among them all, the exceeding-
ly puissant Rama, having truth for prowess, was the desire
of every one, and spotless like unto the Moon himselft,
He could ride on elephants and horses, and was an adept
in managing cars. And he was ever engaged in the study
of arms, and aye occupied in ministering unto his sire. And
even from early youth, that enhancer of auspiciousness,
Lakshmana, was ever attached unto his eldest brother Rama,
that delight of all, And ike unto another life of Rama,
Lakshmana furnished with auspiciousness was in everything
attentive to Rama’s wishes, even at the neglect of his own
person. And that foremost of persons did not oven attain
sleep without Rama’s company,—nor did be partake any
sweetmeat that was offered, unless R&ma portook it with him,
And when mounted on horse-back, Raghava went a-hunting,
Lakshmana went at bis back bow in hand, protecting hia,
And that younger brother of Lakshmana, Satrughha, likewise
became ever dearer unto Bharata than life itself.

And on account of those exalted and well-beloved sous
of his, Dagaratha experienced the excess of joy, like unto
the Grand-sire on account of the celestials. And when- €hty
came tu be furnished with knowledge, and crowned with
virtues, and endowed with bashfulness and fame, and to
attain wisdom in everything, and to be far-sighted, Dagaratha
the father of such powerful and flamingly effulgent sons,
ecame delighted: even like that lord of worlds—Brahm&.
And those best of men, ever engaged in the study of


* The nincth of the-planets.—T.
+ The Moon is a male in Sanskrit.—T,


52 RAMAYANA,


the Vedas, were accomplished in the art of archerys-and
always intent upon ministering unto their father,

And once upon a time, when the virtuous king Dagaratha,
surrounded by his priests and friends, was reflecting about
the nuptials of his sons, unto that high-souled one engaged
in thonght in the midst of his counsellors came the mighty
ascetic Viswaimitra. And desirous of seeing the king, he
said unto the warders,—“Do ye speedily announce that I,
Gadhi’s son sprung in the Kugika line, have come!” Hear-
ing those words of his, they urged on by them, all hurriedly
began to run towards the royal chambers. And coming to
the royal apartments, they communicated to Ikshwaku’s
descendant the arrival of the ascetic Viswamitra. Hearing
those words of theirs, Dagaratha surrounded by his priests,
went out delightedly to meet him, like Vasava going out to
meet Vrihaspati.* And having come unto that ascetic
observing vows and of flaming energy, the monarch with a
cheerful countenance offered him the Avghya. And there-
upon, having accepted the king’s Arghya in accordance:
with the ordinance, he enquircd of the lord of men as to his
cqntinued prosperity and peace. And the exceedingly virtu-.
ous descendant of Kugika asked the king concerning the
welfare of the exchequer, and the provinces ; and the peace
of his friends and acquaintances. “And are thy captains sub-
missive : and hast thou vanquished thy foes? And hast thou
performed well the human and the divine rites?” And
approaching Vasistha and the other anchorites, that foremost
of ascetics of exalted piety duly asked them touching their
welfare. And having been properly received by the monarch,
they with glad hearts entered the royal residence, and sat
them down according to precedence.Then gladly worshipping
the mighty ascetic, Viswamitra,the exceedingly generous king,


* The text has Brakmanam, Vrihaspati is the Brahma of the gads—
Vrihaspatir devanam Brakme,—according to Sruti—T.


BILARANDAM. 33


well-pleased, addressed him, saying,—"Like unto the obtain-
ing of ambrosia, like unto a shower in a land suffering from
drouth, like unto the birth of sons of worthy wives to him
without issue, like unto the recovery of a lost thing, yea,—
like unto the dawning of a mighty joy, I consider this thy
arrival. O illustrious ascetic, thou art welcome. What is
even that which is nearest to thy heart. What shall I do for
thee, experiencing sincere pleasure ?_ Thou, O Brahmana, art
worthy of my best services. By luck it is that, O bestower
of honor, I have gained thee. To-day my birth hath been
crowned with fruit—to-day hath my life attained its object.
And truly yesternight hath heen succeeded by an auspicious
morning, since I have beheld thee. Having first attained
excceding effulgence by virtue of austerities performed
for obtaining the title of Réyarshi, thou hast afterwards
obtained the status of a Brakmarsht. Thou art worthysof
manifold homage from me. This thy exceedingly holy arrival
appeareth wonderful. O lord, by beholding thee, surely my
body hath been rendered pure. Tell me, what is it that
thou wouldst have,~and what is the purpose of thy coming ?
I wish that I may be obliged by doing thy will. And,O
thou of excellent vows, thou ought not to hesitate. I will
every way accomplish thy will; for thou art my god.
O regenerate one, surely great prosperity cometh to me in
consequence of thy coming, in as much as it shall be the.
means of bringing me entire and excellent merit, O Brah-
mana!” Hearing this soul-soothing, ear-charming, and
free-humble speech that was uttered, that illustrious prime
of ascetics crowned with virtues, and furnished with all
perfcctions, experienced exceeding delight.


54 RAMAYANA,


SECTION XEX,


Hearne those astonishing words of that lion-like king,
the highly-energetic Viswamitra with his down standing on
end, said,—"O foremost of kings, sprung from an illustrious
line, and having Vasishtha for thy guide, these words become
thee alone on earth and no oneelse. Do thou, O best of
kings, ascertain thy course in respect of the matter I bear
in my’ heart; and do thou prove firm in promise! For
celebrating a sacrifice, I, O foremost of men, abide by some
prescribed coarse. And it comes to pass that two Rakshasas
assuming shapes at will, have become bent upon disturbing
Ue ceremony. And in that sacrifice which I have determined
to bring to a completion, and which is on the eve of being
completed, both these Rakshasas, Maricha and Suvahu,
accomplished in arms and possessed of prowess, shower flesh
and gore upon the alter. And on that ceremony being
thus disturbed and my purpose thus frustrated, I considered
my labors as all lost, and, therefore, have left my country
indejection. And, O monarch, I cannot bring myself to
vent my wrath; for such is the nature of that business, that
it is not proper for onc engaged in ittoutteracurse. There-
fore, O foremost of monarchs, it behoves thee to grant me

sthy eldest son, the heroic Rama of genuine prowess, with the
side-locks. By virtue of his own divine energy, he, being
protected by me, is capable of even destroying those R&ksha-
sas disturbing the ceremony. And I will, without doubt, confer
upon him manifold blessings,—by mcans of which he will
secure the golden opinions of the three worlds. And en-
countering Rama, they will by no means be able to stand him,
nor is there any other who dares to slay them. And puffed
up with energy, they have become ensnared at the hands of
Kala,*—and, O best of monarchs, they are no match for


* Yama, the god of death,


BALAKANDAM, 55


Rama. Nor, O king, ought thou to indulge in paternal
affection. For ten nights only Rama is to remain there, with
the object of slaying those foes to my sacrifice, those
Rakshasas disturbing the rites. I tell thee, do thou consider
the Rakshasas as already slain. [ know full well Rama of


sterling prowess,—as also the highly energetic Vasishtha and
the other ascetics present here. And if thou, O king, set thy
heart upon acquiring religious merit and high fame on earth,
do thou thea grant me Rama! Aud, O Kakutstha,* if thy
counsellors together with the Bralmanas having Vasishtha
at theie head, consent, do thou then dismiss Rama! Even


this is my wish,—and he also hath come of age. Do thou,
thereforc, part with thy son, the lotus-cyed Rama, for the
ten days of the sacrifice! Do thou act so, O descendant of
Raghu, that the time appointed for the ceremony may not be
overpassed. Good betide thee! Let not thy mind indulge
in grief!"

Having said these words consistent with virtue and
interest, the mighty-minded and highly-powerful Viswamitra
paused. And hearing the auspicious words of Viswamitra,
that foremost of kings shook with a mighty sorrow, apd
became bewildered. Then, having regained his sense, he rose
up and hecame cast down through apprehension. Elaving
heard the words of the ascetic, capable of rending the mind
and heart, the high-souled king of men became stricken with
grief and shook on his seat.


SECTION xx.


Fleanwne the words of Viswamitra, that best of
monarchs remained insensible for a time,—and then regaining


* From Kakud, an emblem of royalty and Stha, residing —meaning a
prince, the grandson of Ikshwaku.—T.


i56 RAMAVANA.


his sense, spake thus,—“My lolus-eyed Ramais not yet
turned of sixteen ; and I do not perceive his fitness to cope
with Rakshasas in battle. Iam the lord of this AdshauAini*®
of forces. Marching with this, will I engage with the night-
rangers. And these servants of mine are valiant, and
warlike, and accomplished in weapons, and capable of
fighting the Rakshasas,—therefore, it behoveth thee not to
take Rama. And myself bow in hand, stationed at the van
ofthe array, will battle with the rangers of the night as long
as life is spared unto me. And then well protected, thy
sacrifice will hold an unimpeded course. Therefore, I will
repair thither,—and it behoveth thee not to take Rama.
And youthful, and unaccomplished, and not knowing what
constitutes strength and what oot, and not equipped with
the energy of science,—and unskilful in fight, he is not
a match for Rakshasas,—they being deceitful warriors.
Bereft of Kama, O best of ascetics, I cannot live fora
moment, Therefore, it behoveth thee not to take him. If,
O Brahmana, it is thy intention to take Rama, then, O thou
of excellent yows, do thou also take me along with the
Chaturangat forces! O Kucika’s son, I am sixty thousand
years old; and (at this age) I have obtained Rama after
undergoing extreme troubles,—it therefore becometh thee
not totake Rima. And among the four sons of mine, I find
«my highest delight in Rama, my first-bora, and the most
virtuous of them al!,—therefore, it behoveth thee not to take
Rama. What is the prowess of the Rakshasas 7 And whose
sons are they? And who, pray, are they 7 And what are the
proportions of their bodies? And who protecteth them, O
foremost of ascetics? And by what means shall either Kama,
or my forces, or, O Bralimana, I myself be able to slay in fight
those deceitful warriors—the Rakshasas? Do thou tell me,


*Acomplete army consisting of 1,09,350 foot, 6s, 610 horse, 21,870
chariots, and 21, 870 elepbants-—T.
+ An army consisting of foot, horse elephants, and cars.—T.


BALAKAENDAM. 57


© adorable one, ‘inflated as they are by virtue of their prow-
ess, how can I stand them in fight ?” Hearing that speech
of his, Vigwmitra said — There is a Rakshasa named
Ravana, sprung from the line of Pulastya. Having obtained
a boon from Brahma, he boldly opposeth himself to the three
worlds, being possessed of great strength and prowess, and
backed by innumerable Rakshasas. And, O mighty monarch,
1 also hear that that lord of the Rakshasas is the very brother
of Vaigravana and the son of the ascetic Vicravan. And
when that one possessed of mighty strength does not
stoop to disturb the sacrifice himself, those powerful
Rakshasas, Maricha and Suvahu, being incited by him, dis-
turb the rites.” The ascetic having spoken thus, the king
then answered him,—“ Iam incapable of standing that
wicked-souled one in fizht. Therefore, do thou, O thou,
versed in morality, extend thy fave: unto my son! Of slender
fortune asIam, thou art my guide and my god. Even the
celestials and the Dénavas and the Gandharbas and the
Birds and the Snakes are incapable of bearing Ravana in
battle—-what thea is man? jie depriveth in conflict even
the puissant of their prowess. I cannot fight either with him
or with his forces. And, O foremost of ascetics, whether
thou art accompanied with my son or my forces, thou wilt
not be able to stand him. And how can I, O Brahmana,
make over unto thee my son, of tender years, resembling an ,
immortal, who is ignorant of warfare? I will not part with
my son. The sons of Sunda and Upasunda resemble Kala
himself in battle,—and it is they who are disturbing thy
sacrifice. Therefore I will not part with my son. And
Maricha and Suv&hu are possessed of prowess, and aceom-
plished in weapons. But with my friends { will repair to
encounter one of them. If thou do not consent to this, I
beseech thee with my friends, (do thou desist!)" Hearing
these words of the lord'of men, a mighty ire took possession
of that foremost of regenerate ones, Kugika’s son; and the


58 RAMAYANA,


fire of the Maharshi’s wrath famed up even like unto a fire
fed by fuel and clarified butter.


SECTION xx.


Hearexc those words of Dagaratha’s, composed of
letters faltering with affection, Kugika’s son, stirred up with
anger, answered the monarch, saying,—‘Having promised
me first, thou endeavourest to renounce that promise of thine.
This surely is unworthy of a descendant of Raghu,—and_ this
can bring destruction upon the dynasty. If, O king, acting
thus, thou hast acted properly, I will then repair to the place
whence I had come. O Kakutstha’s descendant false in
promise, do thon attain happiness, being surrounded by thy
friends.” And when the intelligent Vign.amitra was exercised
with wrath, the entire earth began to tremble, and the gods
even were inspired with owe. And knowing that the entire
universe was in trepidation, that mighty saint, the sedate
Vasishtha of excellent vows, said these words unto the king,
—Born in the line of Ikshwaku, thou art the very second
self of virtue. And endowed with patience, and auspicious,
and observing excellent vows, thou ought not to renounce
virtue. The descendant of Raghu is famed over the three
worlds as righteous-souled. Do thou maintain thy habit of
adhering to promise; for it doth not behove thee to act un-
righteously. If having promised,—‘I will do so,’ thou dost not
act up to thy word, the merit thou hast achieved by digging
tanks &c, shall come to naught,—therefore do thou renounce
Raima! Accomplished or not accomplished in weapons, the
Rakshasas cannot bear him protected by Kugika’s son, like
ambrosia, by flaming fire. This one is Virtue incarnate: this
one is the foremost of those possessing prowess. This one
surpasseth all others in learning, and is the refuge of


BALAKANDAM. 39


asceticism. This one is cognizant of all that existcth in the
three worlds furnished with mobile and immobile things; but
others do not know him,~-nor yet shall know him hereafter.
And neither the gods, nor the saints, nor the immortals nor
the Rakshasas, nor the foremost of Gandharbas and Yakshas,
nor the Kinnaras, nor the mighty Serpents can know him.
And formerly while the descendant of Kugika was ruling
his kingdom, Siva conferred upon him the highly famous sons
of Krigagwa in the shape of all weapons, And those sons of
Krigagwa were the offspring of Prajipati’s daughters. And
they were endowed with various forms,and were effulgent and
dreadful. And Daksha’s daughters of elegant waists, Jaya and
Suprabha, brought forth an hundred exceedingly effulgent
weapons. And by virlue of her boon, Jay& obtained filty sons
of immeasurable strength and endeued with the power of
becoming invisible for the purpose of slaughtering the hosts of
the Asuras. And Suprabb& also brought forth fifty sons
named Sanxhdras, incapable of being borne, and infallible,
and powerful. Kugika’s son is adequately conversant with
all those weapons. And that one knowing duty is also
capable of creating wonderful weapons, And, O descendant
of Raghu, there is nothing present, past, or future which is not
known by that foremost of ascetics of high soul, aud cogniz~
ant of morality. Such is the prowess of that highly famous
Vigwamitra possessed of mighty energy. Therefore, O king, ,
it behoveth thee not to hesitat« in the matter of Rama’s
going. The descendant of Kugika is himself capable of
repressing the Rakshasas; and it is in order to thy son’s
welfare that coming unto thee, he asketh for him of thee.” At
this speech of the ascetic, that foremost of Raghus, the king,
well-pleased, became exceedingly delighted. And that famous
one, relishing the journey of Rama, began to reflect in his
mind about consigning him unto Kugika’s son.


0 RAMEP ANA,


SECTION XXit.


PON Vasishtha’s representing this, king Dagcarathe
‘himself, with a complacent countenance, summoned unto him
Rama and Lakshmana. And when the auspicious rites had
been performed by both Rama’s father and mother, and when
the priest Vasishtha had uttered mantras, king Dagaratha,
smelling his son’s crown, with a glad heart, made him over
unto the descendant of Kucika. Then there blew a Breeze tree
from dust and of delicious feel, on witnessing the lotus-eyed
Rima at the hands of Vigwmitra. And as the high-souled one
was about to set out, blossoms began to shower down copi-
ously, accompanied with the sounds of celestial kettle-drums
and the loud blares of conchs, Vigw&mitra went first, and
next the highly famous Rama with the side-locks, holding
the bow. And him followed Sumitra's son. And equipped
with quivers, and with bows io hand, gracing the ten cardinal
points arid resembling three-hooded serpents, they followed
the high-souled Vigwamitra, like the two stalwart Aswins
following the Grand-sire. And those effulgent ones of faultless
limbs went in the wake of use ascetic, iumining him with
their grace. And like unto those sons of his, Skandha and
Bis&kha following the incomprehensible deity, Sthanu,
those youthful brothers of comely persons and faultless
limbs, Rama and Lakshmana, highly effulgent, carrying
bows in hand, adorned with ornaments, and equipped
with scimitars, with their fingers encased in Guana skin,
flamingly followed Kugika’s son, beautifying him with
their splendour. And having proceeded over half a Yojana,
and arriving at the right bank of the Sarayu, Vigw mitra
addressed these sweet words unto Rama,—“O Rama! do
thou, O child, take of this water: let no delay occur. Do
thou receive the mantras Vala and Ativala,—and thou wilt
not feel fatigue or fever or undergo any change of look, and


BALAKANDAM. 61


whether asleep or heedless, the R&kshasas will not be able to
surprise thee. And,O Rama,the might of thy arms will be un-
equalled in this world,—nay,in all the three worlds. Do thou,
O Raghava, recite Vala and Ativala, O child! And, O sinless
one, when thou hast secured these two kinds of knowledge,
none in this world will equal thee in good fortune,or in talent,
or in philosophic wisdom, or in subtle apprehension, or in
the capacity of answering a controversialist ; for Vala and
Ativala are the nurses of all knowledge. And, O Rama, O
foremost of mén,if thou recitest Vala and Ativald on the way,
neither hunger nor thirst will exercise thee, O descendant of
Raghu ! And tf thou recitest these, thou wilt attain fame on
earth, Those sciences fraught with energy are the daughters of
the Grandsire. I intend to confer them upon thee, O Kakut-
stha ; and, O lord of earth, they are worthy to be conferred
vpon thee ; and they are possessed of various virtues, Thou
need not entertain any doubt about it. And if thou bear them
in consonance with the precepts, they will prove of manifold
good unto thee.” Threat Rama with a cheerful counten-
ance sipping water, with a purified body received those
sciences from the Maharsk: of subdued soul. And furnished
with the sciences, Rama of dreadful prowess appeared res-
plendent, even like the adorable autumnal Sun invested with
a thousand rays. Then Rama having rendered unto Kugika’s
son all the duties appertaining to a spiritual guide, the three
happily spent that night on the banks of the Sarayu. And al-
though those excellent sons of Dagaratha lay down on an
unbeseeming bed of grass, yet in consequence of the sweet
converse of Kucika’s son, the night seemed to pass pleasant-
ly away. , .


62 KAMAYANA.


SECTION xxii


Ann when the night had passed away, the mighty
ascetic spoke unto Kakutstha, lying down on a bed of leaves,
—"O Rama, surely hath Kaugalya given birth to an excellent
son} The first Sandhy4* should now be performed. Do thou,
O tiger among men, arise! Thou shouldst perform the
purificatory rites and contemplate the gods.” Hearing those
proper words of the ascetic, those foremost of men, endowed
with heroism, bathed, and, sipping water, began to recite the
G&yatri.{ And having performed these daily duties, those
exceedingly powerful ones, greeting Vigwamitra] having
asceticism for wealth, stood before him, with the object of
starting on their journey. And as those ones endowed with
exceeding prowess were proceeding,at the shining confluence
of'the Sarayu and the Ganga they beheld a noble river flowing
in three branches. And there lay a holy hermitage, belonging
to ascetics of subdued souls, where they had been carrying on
their high austerities for thousands of years. And belolding
that sacred asylum, those descendants of Raghu, exceedingly
delighted, spake unto the high-souled Vigwdmitra, these
words,—“Whose is this sacred hermitage ? And what man
liveth here ? O worshipful one, we are desirous of hearing
this, Surely,great is our curiosity.” At those words of theirs,
that foremost of ascetics, smiling, said,—“Hear,O Rama,as to
whom the asylum hath belonged in time past. Kandarpa,
called Kama by the wise, was once incarnate (on earth.) And
it came to pass that as that lord of the deities, Sthauu,having
performed here his austerities in accordance with the prescri-
bed restrictions, was wending his way in company with the
Maruts, that fool-hardy wight dared disturb the equanimity


* Brahmanas have to perform their daily devotions thrice,—in the morning,
at noon, and in the evening —T.
+ The solar hymn of the Veda.—T.


BALAKANDAM. 63


of his mind. Thereupon, O descendant of Raghu, uttering a
roar, the high-souled Rudra eyed him steadfastly. And
thereat all the limbs of that perverse-hearted one became
blasted. Audon his body being consumed by that high-
souled one, Kama was deprived of his person in consequence
of the ire of that foremost among the deities; and, O Ra
ghava, from that time forth, he hath become known as
Ananga.* And the place where he was deprived of his body is
the lovely land of Anga. And this sacred hermitage belongs
to Siva ; and these ascetics engaged in pious acts, O hero, have
been from father to sun his disciples. And no sin toucheth them,
Here, O Rama, inthe midst of the sacred streams, will we
spend the night, O thou of gracious presence, crossing over
en the morrow. Let us then, having purified ourselves,
enter the holy hermitage! Stis highly desirable for us to
sojourn here,—-here will we happily spend the night, having
bathed, and recited the mantras, and offered oblations unto
the sacrijicial fire, O best of men !”

As they were conversing thus, the ascetics were highly
ted on discovering them by means of their far-reaching
spiritual vision,—and they rejoiced greatly. Then giving
Kugika’s son water to wash his feet and Arghya, and extend-
ing unto him also the rites of hospitality,they next entertained
Rama and Lakshmana. And having experienced their hospi-
tality, they (the guests) delighted them wilh their talk. And
then the saints with collected minds recited their evening
prayers. And having been shown their destined place of rest
along with ascetics of excellent vows,they happily passed that
night in that hermitage affording every comfort, And that
foremost of ascetics, the righteous-souled son of Kugikd, by
means of his excellent converse, charmed the prepossessing
sons of the monarch.


* Lit, the bodiless—T,


64 RAMAYANA,


SECTION XxIv.


Tren next morning which happened to be fine, those
repressors of their foes, with Vigwamitra at their head, came
to the banks of the river.* And those high-souled ascetics
observing vows, having brought an elegant bark, addressed
Vigwamitra, saying —‘Do thou ascend the bark with the
princes at thy head! May thy journey be auspicious : let no
delay occur !” Thereupon saying,—“So be it !”, and hav-
ing paid homage unto those ascetics, VigwAmitra set about
crossing that river, which had replenished the ocean-t And
it came to pass that while thus engaged, they heard a sound
augmented by the dashing of the waves.} And having come
to.the middle of the stream, the highly energetic Rama
with his younger brother, became curious to ascertain the
cause of that sound. And reaching the middle of the river,
Rima asked that best of ascetics —‘What is this loud up-
roar that seemeth to come riving the waters?” Hearing
Raghava’s words dictated by curiosity, that righteous-souled
one spake, unfolding the true cause of that noise,—"'O
Rama, there is in the Kail&ga mountain an exceedingly
beautiful pool, created mentally by Brahm&, O foremost of
men,-and hence this watery expanse goeth by the name of
Ménasa Pool. And the stream that issues from that liquid
lapse, flows through Ayodhya: the sacred Sarayu issues
from that pool of Brahma. And as the Sarayu meets the
Jahnavi, this tremendous uproar is heard, being produced by
the clashing of the waters. Do thou, O Rama, bow down
unto them with a concentrated mind.” Thereupon, both of


* Ganges.—T.

+ The legend is that when the saint Agastya had sucked up the ocean, the
Ganges reptenished it —T.

t The text has Cucrdva—be heard. Another reading is Tatas Cucruvatus
Cabdam—then they heard a sound,—which 1 adopt.—T.


BELAKANDAM, 65


those exceedingly righteous ones, bowed down unto those
streams; and betaking themselves to the right bank, began
to proceed with fleet vigour. And beholding a dreadful
and trackless forest, that son of the foremost of men,
Ikshwku’s descendant, asked that best of ascetics, saying,—
“Ant deep is this forest abounding in crickets; and
filled with terrible ferocious beasts, and various birds possess-
ed of shocking voices and screaming {rightfully ; and graced
by "ous, and tigers, and boars, end elephants; and crowded
with Dhavas*® and Acwas end Karnast rad Aukubheas and
Vilwast and Tindukas§ and Pacalas| and Badar’s4) whence
is this dreadful forest?” {lim answered thus the mighty
ascetic Vigwdmitra endowed with high energy,—"Do thou,
Jisten, O Kakutstha, as to whom belongeth this dreadful
forest! Here were formerly, O foremus: of men, tivo
flourishing provinces, named Malada, and ‘arusha, built By
celestial architects. In days of yore, O Rama, on the occa-
sion of the destruction of Vritra, the thousand-eyed one
came to have hunger, tobe besmeared with excreta, ana
tu slay a Bratimana. And when lndra had been thus
besmeared, the dcitics, and the saints having asceticism fer
wedth, washed him here, and cleansed his persun from the
dirt. And tie deities, having, renounced here (he filth that
had clang unto the person of the mighiy Indra, as well as
his hunger, attained exceeding delight. And thereat Indra
becoming purified, attained Lis former brightness, and became
devoid of hunger. And mightily pleased with this region, he
conferred on it an excellent boon, saying,—"Since these twa


* Gristea Tomentosa—=T.
+ Cassia fistuta—T

$ 4igle marmalos—T.

$ Diospyros glutinosa—T-
4 Bignonia suave-olens—T.
T Fujnde—T.


66 : RAMAYANA.


places have held excreta from my body, they going by the

names of Malada and Karusha, shall attain exceeding pros-

perity and fame among men.” And beholding the land thus
honored by the intelligent Sacra, the deities said unto the

subduer of Paka,—“Well1” “Well!” And, O repressor of
foes, these two places, Malada and Karusha, enjoyed pros-

perity for a long time and were blessed with corn and wealth,

Then after a space of time, was born a Yakshini capable of
assuming forms at will, and endowed with the strength of a

thousand elephants. Her name, good Letide thee! was Tarak&

andshe wasthe spouse of the intelligent Sunda—she whose son

is the Rakshasa, Maricha, possessed of the prowess of Sacra;

having round arms, with a huge head, a capacious mouth and a.
cyclopean body. And that Rakshasa of dreadful form daily

frightens people. And, O descendant of Raghu, Tarak& of

sticked deeds, daily commits havoc upon these countries,

Malada and Karusha. And now at the distance of over half

a Yojana, she stayeth, obstructing the way. And since this

forest belongeth unto Taraka, thou shouldst x pair thither ;

and, resorting to the might of thy own arms, slay this one

6f wicked deeds. And, by my direction, do thou again rid

this region of its thorn ; for no one dareth to approach such

a place, infested, O Rama, by tne dreadful and unbearable

Yakshini. And now Ihave related unto thee all about this

fearful forest. And to this day that Yakshini hath not
desisted from committing ravages right and left.”


SECTION xxv


Hearine this excellent speech of that ascetic of im-
measurable energy, that foremost of men answered him in
this happy words,— O best of ascetics, I have heard that
the Yaksha race is endowed with but small prowess. How


BALARENDAM. 67


can then that one of the weaker sex possess the strength
of a thousand elephants?’ Hearing this speech that was
uttered by Raghava of immeasurable energy, Vi¢wamitra,
delighting with his amiable words that subduer of foes, Rama,
and Lakshmana, said—“Do thou listen as to the means
whereby attaining terrible strength, that one belonging to
the weaker sex hath come to possess strength and prowess
by virlue of a boun. In former times there was a mighty
and exceedingly powerful Yaksha, named Suketu. And he
had no issue. And he was of pure practices, and used to
perform rigid austerities. And, O Rama, the Grand-sire,
well pleased with that lord of Yakshas, conferred upon him
a gem of a daughter, by name Taraka. And the Grand-sire
endowed her with the strength of a thousand elephants; yet
that illustrious one did not bestow a son on that Yaksha, And
when she had grown, and attained youth and beauty, he
gave that famous dxmsel unto Jambha's son, Sunda, for wife,
And alter a length of time, that Yakshi gave birth to a son,
named Maricha, possessed of irrepressible energy—him who
became a RA&kshe<a in consequence of a curse. And, O
Rama, when Sunda had been destroyed, Taraka along with
her son, set her heait upon afflicting that excellent
saint Agastya. Ant enraged with Agastya, she rushed at
him with a roar, intending to devour him. And on seeing


her thus rushing, that worshipful saint, Agastya, said unto
Maricha, “Do thou become a Rakshasa!”, and, in exceeding
wrath, he also cursed Taraka. “And, O mighty Yakshi
since in frightful guise with a frightful face thou hast desired
to eat up a human being, do thou immediately leave this
(thy original) shape, and become of a terrible form!”
Thus cursed by Agastya, Tarak4, overwhelmed with rage,
lays waste this fair region, where Agastya carrieth on his
austerities. Do thou, O descendant of Raghu, for the wel-
fare of Brahmanas and kine, slay this exceedingly terrible
Yakshi of wicked ways and vile prowess! Nor, O son of


68 RAMAYANA.


Raghu, doth any one in the three worlds, save, thee, dare to
slay this Yakshi joined with a curse. Nor shouldst thou, O
best of men, shrink from slaying a woman; for even this
sbould be accomplished by a prince in the interests of the
four orders. Aud whether an act be cruel or otherwise,
slightly or highly sinful, it should for protecting the subjects,
be performed by aruler. Of those engaged in the onerous
task of government, even this is the eternai rule 01 conduct.
Do thou, O Kakuteba, slay this impious one: for she
knoweth no righteousness! We hear, O king, that in days
of yore, Sakra slew Virochana’s davghter, Mantha:%, who had
intended to destroy the earth. And formerly, O Rama,
Vishnu destroyed K3eya's mother, the devoted wife of Bbrigu,
who had set her heart upon making the world, devoid of
Indra, By these as well as innumerable princes—foremost
of men—have wicked women been slain. Therefore, O
kthg, renouncing antipathy, do thou, by my command, slay
this one.”


SECTION xxvt


“Hearixe those bold words of the ascetic, the son of
that foremost of men, Raghava firm in his vows, with clasped
hands answered,—iu accordance with the desire of my
sire, and in order to glorify it, I ouht fcarlessly to do even
as Kugika’s son sayeth. And having been desired to that end
while at Ayodhya by that high-souled one,my father Dagaratha,
in the midst of tho spiritual guides, I ouglt not to pass
by thy words. Therefore, commanded by that upholder of
the Veda, I, agrecalty to my father’s mandate, will, without
doubt, bring about that welcome event—the death of Taraka.


BALARANDAM. 69


And in the interests of Br&hmanas, kine, and celestials,
I am ready to act as desired by thee of immeasurable energy.”
Having said this, that repressor of foes, with clenched fist,
twanged his bow-string, filling the ten cardinal points
with the sounds. And at those sounds, the dwellers in Tra-
ka’s forest were filled with perturbation,—and Taraka also
amazed at those sounds, became exceedingly wroth. And,
rendered almost insensible by anger, that Rakshasi furiously
rushed in amain towards the spot whence had come the
report, And beholding that firightful one of hideous visage
and colossal proportions, transported with rage, Raghu’s
descendant spake unto Lakshmana.—"Behold, O Lakshmana,
the terrible and hideous body of yonder Yakshini! The
sight of her striketh terror into the hearts of even the brave,
Mark! This irrepressible one, possessing all the resources
of illusion, will J oppose, and deprive her of ears and nose,
But I dare not slay her, she being protected by virtue of Rer
feminineness. I intend only to oppose her course, and
deprive her of her prowess.” As Rima was speaking thus,
Tarak&, deprived of sense through ire, uttering roars, with
uplifted arms rushed against him. And thereat the Brahkmar-
shi, VigwAmitra, uttering a roar, upbraided her, and said,*—
“Swasti!* May victory attend the descendants of Raghu!”
And raising thick clouds of dust, Tarak& instantly bewildered
both the descendants of Raghu, And then by help of illusion, |
she began to pour upon them a mighty shower of crags.
And threat Raghu’'s descendant was wroth. And resisting
that mighty shower of crags by vollies of shafts, Raghava
with arrows cut off her hands. And with the fore-parts of
her arms lopped off, as she was roaring before them,
Sumitra’s son waxing wroth deprived her of her ears and
nose. Thereupon that one capable of assuming forms at
will, began to assume various shapes ; and to vanish from


* A particle of benediction, indeclinable—T.


70 RAMAPANA.,


sight, bewildering her antagonists with her illusory displays.
And terribly ranging the field, the Yakshi showered crags
upon her antagonists. And beholding them enveloped on
all sides by that cragey down-pour, the auspicious son of
Gadhi spake these words,—O ama, renounce thy anti-
pathy, This one of wicked ways is exceedingly impious.
And this sacrifice-disturbing Yakshi will, by virtue of her
power of illusion, come to increase more and more in energy.
Do thou, therefore, against the arrival of dusk, slay her!
The Rakshasas are incapible of being controlled when even-
ing sets in.’ Thus addressed, Rama, displaying his skill
in aiming by sounds, enveloped with arrows that Yakshi
showering crags. Being thus hemmed in with a network of
shafts, she possessed of the powers of illusion, rushed
against Kakutstha and Lakshmana, uttering terrible roars,
And as that Yakshi, in prowess like unto a thunder-bolt, was
rushing on, Raima pierced her chest with arrows,—and there-
atshe dropped down and died. And upon seeing that
grim-visaged onc slain, the lord of the celestials together with
the celestials themselves honoring Kakutstha, exclaimed
“Well”, “Well!? And exceedingly pleased, the thou-
sahd-eyed Pucandara, together with the delighted deities, said
unto Vigwamitra,—"'O ascetic, O Kugika’s son, good betide
thee! all the Maruts with Indra at their head, have been
gratified with this act (of Rama's). Do thou therefore show
“affection unto Raghava! Do thou, O Brahmana, con-
fer upon Raghu's descendant the sons of Praj&pati Kri-
gigwa, of true prowess, and charged with ascetic energy.
And ever following thee, he, O Brahmana, is fit to receive
them of thee. And this son of the king is to accomplish a
mighty task in the interests of the celestials.” Saying this,
the deities, having paid homage unto Vi¢wdmitra, joyfully
entered the celestial regions.

And now came evening on, when that best of ascctics,
gtatified at the destruction of Taraka, smelt Rima’s crown


BALAKANDAM. 7”


and said these words,—“Here, O Rama of gracious presence,
shall we pass the night; and morrow morning, wend unto
that hermitage of mine.” Hearing VigwAmitra’s words,
Dagaratha’s son, glad at heart, happily passed that night in the
forest of Taraka. And being thus freed from all disturbances,
from that day forth that forest appeared charming, even
like unto the forest of Chaitraratha. Having thus slain the
Yakshw’s daughter, Rama, eulugized by celestials and Siddhas,
spent there that night with the saint, being awakened by the
latter at the break ol day.


SECTION xxvit,


Havine passed that night, the illustrious Vigw&mitra,
smilling complacently, sweetly spake unto Raghava, saying,—
“Pleased um I with thee, Gvod betide thee, O highly famous
prince! With supreme pleasure, do I confer upon thee
all the weapons; by means of which subduing such
antagonists as celestials and Asuras backed on earth by
Gaudharbas and Uragas, thou wilt in battle be crowned
with victory. And all those celestial weapons, good betide’
thee, I will confer upon thee. And I will confer upon thee,
O Raghava, the celestial and mighty Dandachakra,* and
Dharmachakra, and also Kalachakra. And O foremost of
men, I will confer upon thee the fierce Vishnu Chakra,—
and Indra Chakra, and the Vajra, and Siva’s Sulavata,
and the weapon Brahmagiras, and Aishika, O mighty.
armed descendant of Raghu! And, O best of men, I will,


* Chakra means discus. These enumerations specify different kinds of the
diseus.—T,


72 RAMAYANA,


O king’s son, bestow upon thee the matchless Brahma wea-
pon, and O Kakutstha,; the two excellent maces, the flaming
Modaki and Cikhari. And O Rama, I will confer upon thee
Dharmapiga,* and Kélap&ga, and the excellent Varunapaga.
And, O descendant of Raghu, I will bestow upon thee the two
Ashanis,—Sushka and Ardra,and the Pinaka weapon, aad the
Narayana, and the Agneya weapon called Sikhara, and the
Vayavya, called Prathama, O sinless one! And, O Raghava,
Iwill confer upon thee the weapon called Hayagiras, and
the Krauncha weapon, and, O Kakutstha, a couple of darts,
And I will confer upon thee Kankdla, and the dreadful
Mushala, and Kapala, and Kinkini—ail those that are intended
for staughtering Rakshasas. And, O mighty-armed one, O
son of the best of men, 1 will confer upon thee the mighty
weapon Vidyadhara, and that excellent scimitar named
Neudana, and the favorite Gandharba weapon, Mohana,
aod Praswapana, and Pasamana, and Saumya, O Raghava!
And, O best of men, do thou accept Varshana, and
Soshana, and Santapana, and Vil4pana, and Madana hard
to repress, beloved of Kandarpa, and that favorite Gandharba
wsapos, Manava, and the favorite Pichdsa wespon, O
highly famous prince. And do thou, O mighty-armed
Rama, speedily accept the Tamasa, O best of men,
and the exceedingly powerful Saumana, and the irrepress-
*ible Samvarta and Maushala, O son of the king, and the
Satya weapon, and the supreme Mayamaya, and the Saura,
Tejaptabha, capable of depriving foes of energy, and the
Soma, and the Sisira, and the Tashtra, and the terrible
Daruna belonging unto Bhaga, and Sileshu, and Madana—alt
assuming form at will, and endowed with exceeding prowess,
and highly exalted.” Then with his face turned towards
the east, that foremost of ascetics having purified himself,
gladly conferred the mantras upon Rama. And the Vipra


* Pica means noose —T.


BALAKANDAM. 2B


also bestowed upon Raghava those weapons, of which even
the celestials are incapable of holding all. As that intelli-
gent ascetic, VigwAmitra, recited mantras, all those invalu-
able weapons appeared before that descendant of Raghu.
And, with clasped hands, they well-pleased, addressed Rima,

—"These, O highly generous one, are thy servants, O Ragha-
va. And whatever thou wishest, good betide thee, shall
‘by all means be accomplished by us.” Thus addressed by
those highly powerful weapons, Kakutstha Rama, with a
delighted soul, accepting them, touched them with his hand,
and said,—"Do ye appear before me as I remember you !”
Then the exceedingly energetic Rama, well pleased, paying
reverence unto the mighty ascetic, Vigwamitra, prepared
to set out.


SECTION xxviit.


-AVING accepted those weapons with purity, Kakut-
stha while proceeding, with a complacent countenance spake
these words unto Vigwamitra,—“'O adorable ore, I have
received these weapons, incapable of being repressed even
by the celestials themselves. Now, O best of ascetics, I
would acquire a knowledge of withdrawing them.” Upon
Kakutstha’s representing this, VigwAmitra of high austerities,
endowed with patience, of excellent vows, and pure in spirit,
communicated unto him the mantras for restraining the
weapons. “Do thou, O Rama, accept Satyavat, and Sataykirti,
and Dhrista, and Rabbasa, and Pratiharatara,- and
Paranmukha, and Avaamukha, and Lakshya, and Alakshya,
and Drihranabha, and Sun&bha, Dag&ksha, and Satavaktra,
and Dagagirsha, and Satodara, and Padmanabha, and
Mabanabha, and Indun&bha, and Swanabba, and Jyotisha,
and Sakuna, and Nairashya, and Vimala, and Yaugandhara,


10


74 RAMAYANA.


and Vindra, and the two Daityapramathanas, and Suchivahu,
and Mahav&hu, and Nishkali, and Virucha, and Archimak,
and Dhritim4li, and Vrittiman, and Ruchira, and Pitrya, and
Saumansa, and Vidhuta, and Makara,and Karavira, and Rati
and Dhana, aud Dhanya, O Raghava, and Kamarupa, and,
Kamaruchi,and Moha,and Avarana, and Jrimbhaka and Sarpa-
natha, and Panthdna, and Varuna,—these sons of Kricaswa,
O Rama, effulgent, and assuming shapes at will. And, good
betide thee, O descendant of Raghu, thou art worthy to
receive these weapons.” ‘Thereupon, Kakutstha with a heart
overflowing with delight, said—'So be it!” And those
weapons were furnished with celestial and shining persons,
and endowed with visible shapes, and capable of conferring
happiness. And some of them were like (live) coals ; and
some comparable unto smoke ; and some were like unto the
Sun or the Moon. Aad with folded hands, they spake unto
Rama iu bonied accents,—O chief of men, here we are!
Do thou command as to what we are to do on thy behall.”
Then the descendant of Raghu answered, saying,—‘“Repair
whithersoever ye will! Recurring to my memory, do ye
in time of need, render me assistance !’ Thereupon paying
homage unto Rama, and having gone round him, they replied
unto Kakutstha,—"Be it so!”, and returned whence they
had come. And having learnt all about those weapons,
\Raghava, while proceeding spake sweetly unto that mighty
ascetic, Vigwamitra,—“What is yonder wood hard by the hill,
appearing like clouds ?- Great is my curiosity. It is pleasing
urte the


ight, and abounds in beasts, and is oxceedingly
romantic, and is adorned with various birds singing sweetly.
Now; O foremost of ascetics, we have come out of a wilder-
ness capable of making one’s hair stand on end. And from
the pleasantness attaching to this place,I have come to a con-
clusion, Tell me, O reverend sir, whose hermitage is this ?
Where, O eminent ascetic, is that hermitage where dwell
those wicked-minded wretches of impious deeds, given to


BALARANDAMN. 75


slaughtering Brahmanas, who disturb thy sacrifice? Where,
© adorable one, is that spot, repairing unto which, oO
Brahmana, { am to protect thy sacrificial rites, and to slay
the Rakshasas ? All this, O foremost of ascetics, I desire to
hear, O lord.”


SECTION XXIX,


Hearne those words of Rama of measureless prowess,
who had asked the question, the highly energetic Vigw4mitra
answered, saying,—'Here, O mighty-armed Rama, Vishnu
of mighty asceticism worshipped of all the deities, for years
upon years, and hundreds of Vogas, dwelt for carrying on
his austerities and Yoga. This,O Rama, was formerly the
hermitage of the high-souled Vamana. And this is famed as
Siddhdgrama, in consequence of that one of potent asceticism
having attained fruition there. And it came to pass that at
this time Virochana’s son, king Vali, having vanquished
the celestials with Indra and the Maruts, established that
dominion of his, famous in the three worlds, And that
mighty chief of the Asuras celebrated a sacrifice. And as
Vali was performing that sacrifice, the deities with Agni at
their head, coming unto Vishnu himself at this asytum,«
addressed him, saying, —'Virochana's son, Vali, O Vishnu, is
celebrating a sacrifice. Do thou, before the ceremony is
finished, accomplish thy own end. He duly conferreth upon
such as repair unto him from various quarters all those things
that they ask for. And do thou thyself, O Vishnu, aided by
thy power of illusion, assuming a Dwarf-form, accomplish the
welfare (of the celostials.)” In the meantime, O Rama, the
wonderful Kagyapa resembling fire in splendour, and flaming
in energy, having in company with, and with the assistance
of, the divine Aditi, Q Rama, accomplished his vow, lasting


76 RAUMEPANA.


for hundred years, began to hymn the destroyer of Madhu
ready to confer boons. “By means of warm austerities, do F
‘behold thee composed of penances, a mass of mortifications,
and endowed with a form and a soul of austerities. And
in thy person, O lord, do I behold this entire universe.
And in Thee without beginning, and incapable of being
pointed out, do I take refuge !” Thereupon exceedingly
pleased, Hari spake unto Kagyapa, with his sins purged off
saying,-'‘Do thou mention the boon! Good betide thee.
Methinks thou deservest a boon.” Hearing these words of
his, Marichi’s son, Kasyapa, said,—Aditi, the gods and
I myself, crave of thee this,—and, O bestower of boons, it
behoveth thee well pleased to confer on us this boon, O thou
of excellent vows! Do thou, O sinless one, become born
as my son in Aditi, O adorable deity! Do thou become the
younger brother of Sakra, O destroyer of Asuras. It behoveth
thee to help the celestials afflicted with grief. And this
place through thy grace will attain the name of Siddhagrama,
The work, O lord of the celestials, hath been accomplished.
Do thou now, O thou of the six attributes, ascend from
hence!” And accordingly Vishnu of mighty energy took
his birth in Aditi. And assuming the form of a dwarf, he
presented himself before Virochana’s son. And then asking
for as much earth as could be covered by three footsteps,
«that one ever engaged in the welfare of all creatures, with
the object of compassing the good of all, stood occupying
the worlds. And having by his power restrained Vé4li,
that one of exceeding energy, again conferred the three
worlds upon the mighty Indra,—and made them subject to
his control. Formerly he used to dwell in this asylum capa-
ble of removing fatigue. And through reverence for the
Dwarf, | reside here. And this hermitage is infested by
Rakshasas disturbing rites. And, O most puissant of men,
here thou shouldst slay those ones of wicked .ways. To-day,
O R&ma, will I repair unto this supremely excellent


BALAKANDAM. 7


Siddagrama. And this asylum, child, is as much thine as
mine.” Saying this, taking Rama and Lakshmana, the mighty
ascetic, experiencing exceeding delight, entered that asylum
and appeared graceful, like the Moon emerged from mist in
conjunction with the Punarvasu stars. And bceholding
Vigwamitra, the ascetics inhabiting Siddh&grama, suddenly
rising in joy, worshipped that intelligent ono,—and extended
unto the princes the rites of hospitality. And then having
reposed for a while, those unreproved princes, the descend-
ants of Raghu, with clasped hands, addressed that foremost of
ascetics,—Be thou even to-day initiated unto the ceremony,
Good betide thee, O best of ascetics! Let this Siddhacrama
verily attain fruition—and Jet thy words be verified!”
Thus addressed, that mighty saint of exceeding energy,
with his mind subdued, and senses under restraint, caused
himself to be initiated into the ceremony. And like unto
the Kumaras,* Rama and Lakshmana, having passed the
night pleasantly, rose in the morning; and having finished
their morning worship, and with purity and self-restraint
recited the prime mantras, paid their obeisance unto
the sacrificial fire and the sacrificer, Vigwamitra, who was
seated,


SECTION xxx,


Tres those princes, repressors of foes, cognizant of place,
and time, and words, thus spake unto Kugika’s son agreéably
to time and place, saying,—"O adorable one do thou tell us
as to the time when we should oppose those rangers of the
night! Let not that hour pass away! ’Upon the two Kakutsthas’
saying this, and finding them prompt for the encounter, those


* Skanda and Visakha.—T.


78 ‘RAMAPANA.


ascelics tell-pleased, fell to extolling the sons of the king.
“For six nights from to-day, ye should protect us. This
ascetic hath been initiated into the sacrifice, and must there-
fore, observe taciturnity,” Hearing these words of theirs,
those illustrious princes, renouncing sleep, began to guard the
hermitage six days and nights; and those heroic and mighty
archers with their armours on protected that best of ascetics
and subduer of enemies. And when time had thus gone by
-and the sixth day had arrived, Rama said unto Sumitra's son,
—"Being well equipped, be thou vigilant!" When Rama,
manifesting emotion, and being eager for encounter, had said
this, the priests and spiritual guides lit up the alter. And
along with Vigwamitra and the family priests, they lit up the
alter furnished with Kuga, and Kaga, and ladles, and faggots,
and flowers. And as reciting mantras, they were about to
duly engage in that sacrifice, there arose a mighty and dread-
ful uproar in the sky. And as in the rains, masses of clouds
appear enveloping the firmament,* the Rakshasas, displaying
iNusions in that wise, began to rush onward. And M&richa
and Suvahu together with their followers coming in dreadful
forms, began to shower down blood upon the altar. And on
seeing the altar deluged with gore, Rama suddenly rushed
forward, and beheld them in the sky. And suddeuly seeing
them rushing in amain, the fotus-eyed Rama fixing his gaze
at Lakslimana, said,—“Behold, O Lakshmana, by means of
a Médnava weapon, I shall, without doubt, drive away the
wicked, flesh-eating Rakshasas, even as the wind driveth
away clouds before it. Surely I cannot bring myself to slay
such as these.” Saying this, that descendant of Raghu, Rama,
in vehemence fixing on his bow an exceedingly mighty and
gloriously-dazzling Manava weapon discharged it in great


* The text reads gamanam avaryya—obstructing passage. Evidently the
reading is vicious—it should run gaganam avaryya—enveloping the firma-
cent—T.


BALAKANDAM. 79


wrath at Maricha’s chest. And wounded by that foremost
of M&nava weapons, M&richa carried off a sheer hundred
Yojanas, dropped in the midst of the ocean. And finding
Maricha senseless, and whirling, and afflicted by the
might of the weapon, and overcome, Rama addressed
Lakshmana, saying,—Behold, O Lakshmana, this Manava
weapon first used by Manu, depriving him of his senses,
hath carried him off,—and yet hath not taken his life!
But these shameless, wicked, and blood-drinking Rakshasas,
addicted to wrong-doing, these disturbers of sacrifices,
will I slaughter.” Having said this, anon showing unto
Lakshmana his lightness of hand, Raghu’s descendant
touk out a mighty Agacya weapon, and discharged it at the
breast of Suvahu. Thereat being pierced with that shaft,
he fell down upon the ground. Then taking a Vayavya
weapon, the illustrious and exceedingly generous Raghavg,
bringing delight unto those ascetics, slew the rest. And
having destroyed all those Rakshasas disturbing sacrifices,
Raghu’s descendant was honored by the saints, even as Indra
in days of yoro,after having vanquished the Asuras. And when
the sacrifice had been completed, the mighty ascetic Vigway
mitra, beliolding all sides cleared of Rakshasas, spake unto
Kakutstha,saying,—“O mighty-armed one,I have obtained my
desire; and thou hast execuled thy preceptor’s mandate.
And, O illustrious hero, thou hast truly made this a Siddha-
gtama.” Having thus: extolled Rama, he took Rama and
Lakshmana, to perform his evening devotions.


SECTION xxx.


rose heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, their interest
secured, with glad hearts passed that night there, And when
the night had passed away and the morning como, they
together appeared before the saint, Vigwamitra, and the rest.


80 RAMAFANA,


And having saluted that foremost of ascetics resembling
flaming fire, they of honied speech spake unto him words
exceedingly lofty.—'These servants of thine, O best of asce-
tics, have come before thee. Do thou command, O chief of
auchorets, what command of thine are we to execute?” Thus
addressed by them, the Maharshis with Vigwamitra at their
head spake unto Rama, saying,—"A highly meritorious sacri-
fice, O foremost of men, is to be celebrated by Mithila’s lord,
Janaka. Thither shall we repair. And thou, O great among
men, must accompany us, and there behold a wonderful jewel
ofa bow, And formerly this bow of immeasurable energy,
and dreadful, and exceedingly effulgent at the sacrifice, had
been conferred in court by the celestials (on king Devarata).
And neither gods nor Gandharbas, neither Asuras nor
Rakshasas nor men, can fix the string upon it. And
@esirous of being acquainted with the prowess of this
bow, many kings and princes came; but they in spite of
‘their mighty strength, failed in stringing it. There, O
Kakutstha, thou wilt behold that bow belonging to the
high-souled king of Mithilé—as well as his exceedingly
‘vonderful sacrifice. That rare bow, O foremost of men,
furnished with an excellent device for griping it, had been
solicited by Mithila’s lord as the fruit of his sacrifice ; and the
celestials conferred it upon him. And now, O descendant
of Raghu, in the residence of king, the bow is worshipped
like a deity with aguru, dhupa, and various other incenses.”
This having been said, that foremost of ascetics, in company
with Kakutstha and the saints, departed. And on the
eve of setting out, he addressed the sylvan deities, saying,—
“Luck! 1 will, with my desire obtained, go from forth
this Siddhagrama unto the Himavat mountain on the north
of the Jabnavi." Having said this, that tiger-like ascetic,
Kugika’s son, along with other anchorets having asceticism
for their wealth, set out in a northerly direction. And
as that best of ascetics proceeded, he was followed by


BALAKANDAM. 8


Brahmanas upholding the Veda, carrying the sacrificial neces-
saries on an hundred cars. And birds and beasts dwelling
in Siddhagrama followed the high-souled Vi¢wamitra having
asceticism for wealth. And then followed by the body of
devotees he dismissed the birds. And having proceeded a
long way, when the sun was sloping down, the ascetics rested
on the banks of the Sona. And when the maker of day had
set, having bathed and offered oblations unto the fire, those
ascetics of immeasurable energy, placing Vigwamitra in their
front, sat them down. And Rama also together with Sumitra’s
son, hsving paid homage unto those ascetics, sat him dowa
before the intelligent Vigwamitra. Then Rama of exceeding
energy, influenced by curiousity, asked that foremost of
ascetics, Vigwmitra, having asceticism for his wealth, saying,
—'O worshipful one, what country is this, graced with luxuri-
ant woods? I am desirous of hearing this, Good betids
thee, it behoveth thee to tell me this truly.” Thus addressed
by Rama, that one of high austerities and excellent vows
began in the midst of the saints to describe the oppulence of
that region,


SECTION xxxil,


“— : ?

NCE upon a time there was a mighty son of Brahma,
of high austerities, named Kuca. And he was cognizant
vf duty, and ever engaged in observing vows and honoring
good men. And that high-souled one begat on Vaidarbhi,
iprung from a respectable line, and endowed with all noble
qualities, four sons like unto himself, and possessed of
‘Xtraordinary prowess—Kugamva, and Kuganabha, and
Asurtarajas, and Vasu, resplendent and breathing exhaust~
ess spirits. And with the desire of enhancing Kshetrya
aerit, Kuga said unto his truthful and virtuous sons,—‘Ye
ons! do ye engage in the task of governing,—and thereby
equire immense merit.’ Hearing Kuca's words, those four


Ir


82 RAMAYANA.


foremost of men and best of sons addressed themselves to
founding seats for their government. And the highly
energetic Kugamva founded the city of Kaugimvi; and the
righteous Kucanabha, the metropolis of Mahodaya; -and
the magnanimous Asurtarajas, Dharm@ranya; and king
Vasu, Girivraja, best of capitals. This city with these five
mighty mountains shining around (otherwise) called Vasumati
belongs to the high-souled Vasu. And the river known by
the name of Sumagadhi flows through the Magadhas. And
in the midst of the five foremost of hills, it looks like a
garland, And this Magadhi, O Rama, belongs unto the high-
souled Vasu, taking, O Rama, an easterly course, and flowing
through fertile fields furnished with corn. And, O descend-
ant of Raghu, the virtuous-souled Rajarshi Kuganabha begat
an hundred peerless daughters on Ghritachi. And it came to
yass that they endowed with youth, beautiful. and like unto
the lightning in the rainy-season, decked in excellent orna-
ments, coming to their garden, were merrily singing and
dancing and playing on musical instruments, O Raghava!
And as they perfect in every limb, and unparalleled on earth
4n beauty, and endowed with all qualities, and furnished with
youth and grace, were in the garden, like unto stars embasom-
ed among clouds, that life of all, the air, beheld them and
said,—'l seek for ye: do ye become my wives.Do ye renounce
this human guise, and attain long lives. Youth verily is uns-
table,specially with the human beings : do ye attaining unfad-
ing youth, become immortal :’ Hearing this speech of the Air
of ever fresh energy, the damsels ridiculing it, said,—'Thou
rangest the hearts of all creatures, O foremost of celestials,
and we also know thy influence. Wherefore, then, dost
thou dishonor us? O foremost of celestials, we are the
daughters of Kucanabha, O divine one. And god as thou
art, we can dislodge thee from thy place; but we refrain
from doing so, lest thereby we lose our ascetic merit) May,
O foolish one, that time never come, when disregarding


BALAKANDAM 83


our truthful sire, we following our inclination, shall resort to
self choice. Our father verily is our lord and prime god. Of
him even shall we become the wives unto whom our father
giveth us away.’ At these words of theirs,that lord and adora-
ble one, the Air, exceedingly enraged, then entered into their
bodies, and broke all their limbs. Their bodies being thus
broken by Air, those damsels, exceedingly agitated and over-
whelmed with shame, with tears in their eyes entered the
residence of the king. And finding his supremely beautiful
and favorite daughters with their limbs broken, and woe-
begone, the king bewildered, spake,—'Ye daughters, what is
this ? Who is it that thus disregards virtue ? By whom have
ye allcome by this crooked form? And why demonstrat-
ing your grief, do ye not answer me?’ Having said this,
the king heaved a deep sigh and became eager to hear all
about it.” .


SECTION xxxill.


"Hearing those words of the intelligent Kuganabha,
his hundred daughters touching his feet with their heads, said,
—‘O king, that life of all, the Air, was desirous of overcoming
us, having recourse to an improper way ; nor did he regard
morality.—We have a father, good betide thee ; and have no
will of our own. Do thou ask our father about it, if he con-
sent conferring us on thee.—But that wicked wight did not
listen to our words ; and as we were saying this, were we
roughly handled by him.’ Hearing those words of theirs,"the
highly pious and puissant king addressed his hundred beauti-
ful daughters, saying,—'Ye have displayed a signal example
of that forgiveness which is fit to be followed by-the forbear-
ing; and that ye have unanimously regarded the honor of
my house, alse conduces to your praise. Alike to men and


84 RAMAVANA,


women. forbearance is an ornament. And difficult it is for
one to exercise that forbearance, specially in respect of the
celestials. And may every descendant of mine possess for-
bearance like unto yours ! Forbearance is charity ; forbearance
ia truth ; forbearance, O daughters, is sacrifice ; forbearance
is fame ; forbearance is virtue,—yea,the universe is establish-
ed in forbearance.” Then dismissing his daughters, the king
endowed with the prowess of celestials,and versed in counsel,
began to consult with his counsellors about the bestowal
of his daughters in respect of time and place and person
and equality of lineage. And it came to pass that at this
time an ascetic named Chuli, highly effulgent, with his vital
fluid under control, and of pure practices, was performing
Brahmya austerities. And as the saint was engaged in
austerities, good betide thee, Urmila’s daughter named
Somada—a Gandharbi—ministered unto him. And in all
humility that virtuous onc for a definite period was engaged
in ministering unto him. And thereat, her spiritual guide
was gratified with ber. And, O descendant of Raghu, once
he said unto her,—'I am gratified, good betide thee! What
good shall I render thee ? Thereupon, concluding that the
ascetic was gratified, the Gandharbi, cognizant of words,
exceedingly delighted, sweetly addressed that one versed
in speech,—‘Thou art furnished with the Brahmya fire,art like
Bralima himself, and of mighty austerities, I desire of thee
a righteous son endowed with the Brahmya ascetic virtues.
Tam without a husband, good betide thee, and I am no one’s
wife. Upon me who am thy servant, thou shouldst confer
such a son by help of Brahmya means’ Thereupon, well
pleased with her, the Brahmarshi Chulina conferred upon her
an excellent Brabmya mind-begotten son, named Brahma-
datta, And that king, Brahmadatta, founded the flourishing
city of Kampily4,even as the sovereign of the celestials found-
ed the celestial regions. And, O Kakutstha, the righteous
king KuganSbha finally decided on conferring his hundred


BALAKANDAM. . 85


daughlers upon Brahmadatta. And inviting Brahmadatta
that highly energetic lord of earth,with a glad heart conferred
his hundred daughters upon him. And, O descendant of
Raghu, king Brahmadatta resembling the lord himself of the
celestials, by turns received their hands in marriage. And as
soon as he touched them, the hundred daughters were cured
of their crookedness,and became free from anguish, and were
endowed with pre-eminent beauty. And upon beholding them
delivered from (the tyranny of) the Air, the monarch Kuga-
nabha became exceedingly delighted, and rejoiced again
and again. And he dissmissed the newly married lord of
earth, king Brahmiadatta, in company with his consorts and
the priests. And the Gandharbi Somada rejoiced exceedingly
at the completion of the nuptials of her son ; and embracing
her daughters-in-law again and again , and extolling her son,


she expressed the fulness of her joy.” .


SECTION xxxIv,


B ry

* An, 0 Raghava, when Brahmadatta was married, that
sonless one, (Kuganabha), with the intention of obtaining
male offspring, took in hand a son-conferring sacrifice. And
when the sacrifice had commenced, that son of Brahmi, the
exceedingly noble Kuga, spake unto king Kuganabha, saying,
—"O son, there will be born unto thee a virtuous son like
unto thyself: thou wilt obtain even G&dhi,—and through
him enduring fame in this world’ Having said this unto
king Kugan&bha, Kuca, O Rama, entering the wWelkin,
went to the eternal regions of Brahma. Then after some-
time, an eminently ‘virtuous son, named Gadhi, was born
unto the intelligent Kuganabha. O Kakutstha, even that
highly pious Gadhi is my sire. And, O descendant of Raghu
1, called Kaugika, am sprung from Kuga's line. And, O


86 RAMAYANA.


Raghava, I had a sister of noble vows born before me, And
her name was Satyavati; and she was bestowed upon
Richika, And following her lord, she ascended heaven in
her own proper person. And my highly generous sister,
Kaugiki, hath finally assumed the form of a mighty river.
And in order to compass the welfare of all creatures, my
sister is now a noble and charming river of sacred waters,
issuing from the Himavat mountains. And thenceforth, out
of affection for my sister, Kaugiki, I ever dwell happily in the
vicinity of the Himavat, O Raghava. And that virtuous
Kaugiki, Satyavati, as well established in religion as
truth, and chaste, and eminently pious, is now the foremost
of streams. And, O Rama it is only for the purpose of com-
pleting my sacrifice that leaving her behind, I have come
to Siddhagrama, And now by virtue of thy energy, have
I attained fruition. Now, O Rama, I have narrated unto
thee the circumstances connected with the history of my
line and myself, as also of this place, O mighty armed
one,-which thou hadst asked me to relate. But, O K&kut-
stha, while I was speaking, half the night hath been spent.
Do thou now sleep, good betide thee,—so that thou mayst not
feel any difficulty while on the journey. The trees stand
motionless, and the beasts and birds are silent, and, O
descendant of Raghu,all sides have become enveloped in noc-
turnal gloom, The midnight is gradually passing away; and
the firmament thick-studded with stars resembling eyes, is
illumined up with their light. And that dispeller of darke
ness, the mild-beaming moon, is rising, gladdening the
hearts of all creatures with his splendour. And night-rang>
ing beings—terrible carnivorous Yakshas and Rakshasas—
walk hither and thither.’ Having said this, the mighty
ascetic of exceeding energy paused. And those ascetics
honoring him,  said,—“Excellent ! Excellent ! This
tine belonging to the Kugikas is ever exalted and devoted to
virtue. And those foremost of men sprung in the Kuga


BELAKANDAM. 87


race are high-souled and like unto Brahmarshis—and specially
thou, O illustrious Vigwamitra, art so. And that best of
streams, Kaugiki, hath added lustre unto thy line.” And the
auspicious son of Kugika having been extolled by those
delighted ascetics—the foremost of their order—slept,
like unto the sun, when setting. And Rimatoo along with
Sumitra’s son having in admiration praised that best of
ascetics, enjoyed the luxury of slumber.


SECTION xxxv.


Havine in company with the ascetics passed the re-
mainder of the night on the banks of the Sona, Vigwdmitra,
when the day broke, spake,—“O Rama, the night hath pass-
ed away, and the morn hath come. The hour for perforching
the prior devotions hath arrived. Arise! arise ! good betide
thee! Do thou prepare for going.” Hearing these words
of his, Rama, having finished his morning devotions and
rites,and ready for departure said,—"This is the Sona, of ex-
cellent waters, fathomless, and studded with islets. O Br&h-
mana, by which way shall we cross?” Thus addressed by
Rama, VigwAmitra replied,—“Even this path hath been fixed
upon by me—that, namely, which the Maharshis go.”
And having proceeded far, when the day had been half spent
they beheld that foremost of streams,the Jabnavi, worshipped
by ascetics. And having beheld that river furnished with
sacred waters, and frequented by swans and cranes, the
ascetics who accompanied Raghava were exceedingly de-
lighted, And they took up their quarters on the banks of
the river. And then having bathed and duly offered obla-
tions of water unto the gods and the names of their ances-
tors, and performed Agnibotra® sacrifices, and partaken of


* Sacrifice with burnt offering —T.


88 . _ RAMALANA.


clarified butter like unto nectar, those high-souled and aus-
picious ones, with glad hearts, sat down, surrounding
Vigw&mitra. And the descendants of Raghu also sat down,
occupying prominent places as befitted their rank. Then
Rama with a heart surcharged with cheerfulness spake unto
Vigwamitra, saying,—‘O adorable one, I desire to hear how
the Ganga flowing in three directions and embracing the
three worlds, falls into the lord of streams and rivers.”
Influenced by Rama’s speech, the mighty ascetic Vigwimitra
entered upon the history of the Ganga’s origin and progress,
“© Rama, that great mine of ore, Himavat is the foremost
of mountains. Unto him were born two daughters, unparal-
Jeled on earthin loveliness. And, O Rama, their mother
of dainty waist, the amiable daughter of Meru, named Men&
was the beloved wife of Himavat—she of whom was born
Ganga the elder daughter of Himavat ; and, O Raghava, a
second daughter was also born unto him, named Uma. And
it came to pass that once upon a time, the deities, with the
view of accomplishing some work appertaining to them as
divine beings, in a body besought that foremost of mountains
for that river flowing in three directions, Ganga. Thereupon,
desirous of the welfare of the three worlds, Himavat in
obedience to duty, conferred upon them his daughter
flowing everywhere at will, and sanctifying all creatures.
‘Thereat in the interests of the three worlds, accepting her,
those having the welfare of the three worlds at heart, went
away with Ganga, considering themselves as having attained
their desire. The other daughter of the mountain, O descend-
ant of Raghu, adopting a stern vow,began to carry on austeri-
ties, having asceticism for her wealth. And that best of
mountains bestowed upon Rudra of unequalled form his
daughter Uma, furnished with fiery asceticism, and worship-.
ped of the worlds. And these, O Raghava, are the datigh-
ters of that king of mountains, worshipped of all, vs., Ganga,
the foremost of streams, and the divine Uma. Now, O best


BALAKAND&M. 89


of those endowed with motion, have I related unto thee how
that sin-destroying one flowing with her waters in three
diverse directions, first, O child, went to the firmament and
then ascended the celestial regions.”


SECTION XXXVI.


HEN the ascetic had spoken thus, both the heroes,
Rama and Lukshmana, saluting that first of anchorets, said,
—O Brahmana, thou hast delivered this noble narration
fraught with morality. Now it behoves thee to speak about
the elder daughter of the mountain-king. Thou art exten-
sively conversant with everything relative to men or gods.
Why is it that that purifier of the worlds laveth three dirét-
tions? And why is that foremost of streams, Ganga, famous
as wending in three ways? And, O thou cognizant of
morality, what are her performances in the three worlds ?”
Thereat Vigwimitra having asceticism for his wealth, began
to relate unto Kakutstha that history in detail in the mid’t
of the ascetics. “In days of yore, O Rama, the blue-throated
one of mighty asceticism, having entered into matrimony,
commenced upon knowing the goddess, And as that in-
telligent blue-throated god, Mah&deva, was thus engaged in
sport, a divine hundred years passed away ; and yet, O Rama,
chastiser of foes, no son was born of her. Thereat all the
gods with the Grand-sire at their head became exceedingly
anxious. “Who will be able to bear the offspring of, this
union ?” And thereupon the celestials repairing unto
Mahadeva, thus addressed him, saluting low,—‘O god of
gods, O mighty deity, ever engaged in the welfare of all, it
behoveth thee to be propitious at the humble salutations of
the celestials. The worlds, O foremost of celestials, are


1Z


go RAMAFANA,


incapable of bearing thy energy. Therefore, for the welfare
of the three worlds, do thou, being furnished with Brahma
asceticism, in company with the goddess practise austerities,
and rein in thy energy by thy native indomitableness, Do
thou preserve these worlds ; for it becometh thee not to des-
troy all’ Hearing the words of the deities, the great god of
the worlds said unto them,—‘So be it! And addressing them
again he said,—'Ye gods, by my own energy I will assisted
by Um& bear my virile vigour,—therefore let the creation
find rest ! But tell me, ye foremost of celestials, who will
sustain my potent virility rushing out from its receptacle?
Being thus addressed, the gods answered him having the
bull for his mark,—‘The earth will to-day bear thy vital flow.’
Thus assured, the mighty lord of the celestials let go his vital
fluid ; and thereat the earth containing mountaius and forests
was overspread with the energy. Then the gods spake unto
the fire, saying,—‘Do thou in company with the Wind enter
into this fierce and mighty energy!’ And when the Wind
had entered into it, it was developed into a white hill, and a
forest of glossy reeds, resembling fire or the Sun. And here
sprang from Fire Kartikeya of mighty energy. And there-
upon the celestials and the saints, with gratified hearts, began
to pay enthusiastic adorations unto Um& and Siva’. Then
the Mountain's daughter, O Rama, addressed the celestials,
cursing them with eyes reddened in wrath,—‘While in asso-
ciation with Mahadeva for obtaining sons, I was broken in
upon by ye,—for this, ye shall not be able yourselves to be-
get offsping on your wives. And from this day forth, your
wives shall remain without issue.” Having thus spoken unto
the celestials, she cursed the Earth also, saying,—‘O Earth,
thou shalt have various forms, and many shall lord it over
thee! Nor, stained because of my ire, shalt thou experience
the pleasure that is felt on obtaining a son, O thou of wicked
understanding, O thou that dost not wish me ason! Wit-
nessing the gods thus distressed, the lord of the celestiats


BALAKANDAM. ot


set out in the direction presided over by Varuna.* And
having repaired to the north side of that mountaint, Mahe-
swara along with the goddess became engaged in austerities
on the peak Himavatprabhava. I have now related unto thee,
O Rama, the spread of the Mountain’s daughter, (Ganga).
Do thou now together with Lakshmana listen to the narration
of Bhigirathi’s potency.”


SECTION xxxvile


SA, on that celestial being engaged in austerities,
the deities with Indra and Agni at their head, desirous of
gaining over the generalissimo, appeared before the Grand-
sire. And, O Rima, the gods with Agni at their hedd,
bowing unto him, addressed that possessor of the six attri-
butes, the Grand-sire, saying,—'O God, that adorable one
who had formerly consigned unto us the generalissimo,
resorting to high asceticism, is practising austerities with
Uma. Do thou now, O thou conversant with resources, so
order as is advisable in the interests of the worlds! Verily
thou art our prime way.’ Hearing the words of the deities,
the Grand-sire of all creatures, consoling them with soft words,
spoke unto them, saying,—‘Even as the Mountain’s daughter ‘
hath said, sons will not be born unto ye of your own wives.
Her word is infalliable of a certainty: there is no doubt about
it. This is the celestial Ganga—she on whom Hutdsanat will
beget a son—the foe-subduing generalissimo of the celestijals.
And the elder daughter of the Mountain will consider that
son as brought forth by Uma; and Umi also will, without


* The West—T.
+ The Himalaya —T,
$ Fire—T.


92 RAMAPANA.


doubt, look upon him with regard.’ Hearing these words
of his, O descendant of Raghu, the gods bowing unto the
Grand-sire, paid him homage, Then, O Rama, repairing unto
the Kailiga mountain teeming with metals, the deities com-
missioned Agni with the view of having a son (born unto him).
‘Do thou, O god, accomplish this work of the deities ! O thou
of mighty energy, do thou discharge thy energy into that
daughter of the mountain, Ganga.’ Thereupon giving his
promise unto the gods, Pavaka* approached Gang4,saying,—
‘Do thou, O Goddess, bear an embryo; for even this is the
desire of the deities.’ Hearing this speech, she assumed a
divine appearance. And beholding her mightiness, Agni
was shrunk up on all sides. And then Pavaka from all sides
discharged his energy into her,—and thereat all her streams
became surcharged with it, O descendant of Raghu. And
unto him staying at the head of all the deities, Ganga spoke,
saying,—'O god, I am incapable of sustaining this new-
sprung energy of thine: I am burning with that fire, and
my consciousness fails me.’ Thereupon that partaker of
the oblations offered unto the gods, said unto Ganga,—'Do
thou bring forth thy embryo on the side of this Himavat !’
Krearing Agni’s words, Ganga of mighty energy cast her
exceedingly effulgent embryo on her streams, O sinless one.
And as it came out of her, it wore the splendour of molten
gold; and in consequence of its fiery virlue, objects near and
objects far were converted into gold and silver of unsurpassed
sheen,—while those that were more distant were turned
into copper and iron. And her excreta were turned into
lead. In this wise, various metals began to increase on
earth. And as soon as the embryo was brought forth, the
woods adjoining the mountain being overspread with that
energy, were turned into gold. And from that day,O descend-
ant of Raghu, gold of effulgence like unto that of fire, became


* Fire—T.


BALAKANDAM. 93


known as Jatarupa, O foremost of men! And when the son
was born, the deities with Indra and the Maruts enjoined
upon the Kritika stars to suckle him, ‘Surely he shall be son,
unto us all’—concluding thus, they as soon as he was bors,
by turns began to dispenso mitk unto him, Then the coles-
tials called him Kartikeya, saying —‘Without doubt, this son
shall become famed ever the three worlds.’ And hearing
those words of theirs, the Kritikas bathed the offspring that
had issued from her womb, flaming like fire, and with auspi-
cious marks. And, O Kakutstha, since Kartikeya had issued
from (Gangs) womb, the celestials called that effulgent and
mighty-armed one, Skanda.* And then the teats of the
Kritikas were filled with milk; and thereupon assuming
six mouths, he began to suck milk from the teats of those
six. And having drunk the milk, that lord although then
possessed of a tender frame, by virtue of his inborn prowess
in one day vanquished the Danava forces. And jim
possessed of mighly effulgence, the celestials assembled
with Agni as their leader sprinkled with water, by way of
installing him as their generalissimo. He who,O Kakutstha,
on the earth revereth Kartikeya, is blessed, and attaineth
righteousness, and being long-lived and obtaining sons and
grand-sons, repaireth to the regions of Skanda.”


SECTION xxxvill.


Hawise said those words unto Rama, composed of
melodious letters, Kaucika again spoke unto Kakutstha, say~
ing,—"Formerly there was a king—lord of Ayodhya named
Sagara. And it came to pass that righteous one,though eagerly
wishing for children, was without issue. And Vidharbha’s


* Shanna means issuing from—T.


94 RAMAYANA.


daughter, O Rima, named Kegini, was the elder wife of
Sagara. And she was virtuous and truthful. And the second
wife of Sagara was called Sumati, who was the daughter of
Arishtanemi and the sister of Suparna.* And with those
wives of his, that mighty king, coming to the Himavat, began
to practise austerities on the mountain Bhriguprasravana.
And whena full hundred years had been numbered, the ascetic
that had been adored by means of those austerities, Brighu,
best of those endowed with truth, conferred a boon upon
Sagara, saying,—‘O sinless one, thou shalt obtain glorious
offspring; and, O foremost of men, thou shalt attain un-
paralleled renown among men. And, O child, one of thy
consorts shall bring forth a son who will perpetuate thy race ;
and the other give birth to sixty thousand sons.’ As that best
of men was saying this, those daughters of kings, exceedingly
delighted, propitiating him, addressed him with clasped
hayds,-—'Who of us, O Br&hmana, shall produce a single son,
and who many? This, O Brahmana, we wish to hear. May
thy word prove true!’ Hearing this, the highly pious
Bhrigu said these pregnant words—‘Do ye unfold your
minds. Who wishes for what boon,—between a single
pa:petuator of the line, and innumerable sons, possessed
of mighty strength, and furnished with fame, and endowed
with high spirits ? Hearing the ascetic’s words,O descendant
of Raghu, Kegini in the presence of the monarch chose,
«O Rama, a single son to perpetuate the line ; and Suparna’s
sister, Sumati, sixty thousand sons, high-spirited and
furnished with fame. And then, O son of Raghu, having
gone round the saint and bowed down the head, the king
went to his own capital, accompanied by his consorts.
And ‘after a Jength of time, the elder, Kegini, bore a son
unto Sagara, known by the name of Asamanja. And Sumati,
© foremost of men, brought forth a gourd. And‘ when it


* Garura.—T.


BALAKANDAM: 95


burst open, out came from it sixty thousand sons. And the
nurses fostered them by keeping them in jars filled with
clarified butter. And after a great length of time, they~
attained to youth. And after a long lapse of time, Sagara’s
sixty thousand sons attained to youth and beauty. And O
foremost of men,* the eldest son of Sagara, taking those
children, would, O descendant of Raghu, often cast them
into the Sarayu, and in mirth behold them sinking in the
waters, Being thus evil-disposed, and injuring honest
folks, and engaged in doing wrong unto the citizens, he was .
banished by his father from the city. And Asamanja had a
son possessed of prowess, named Ancuman. And he was
beloved of all men and fair-spoken towards every one.

And, O foremost of men, it came to pass that after a
long time had gone by, that lord of earth Sagara made up
his mind, saying,—‘I will sacrifice.’ And having determined
upon it, that one versed in the Vedas set about it,in company
with his priests.”


SECTION xXxxIx,


Wen Vigwamitra had ended, hearing his words, Rama
exceedingly pleased, spoke unto that ascelic resembling
flaming fire, saying, —“I am anxious to hear in detail, good,
betide thee, how, O Brahmana, my ancestor arranged for the
sacrifice.” Hearing those words of his, Vigwamitra, smiling,
eagerly spoke unto KAkutstha, saying,—“Do thou, O Rama,
hearken unto the story of the high-souled Sagara’s sacrifice.
Sankara’s father-in-law is the far-famed Himavat. »And
approaching each other the Himavat and the Vindhya beheld
each other, And on the region lying between them took


* The text has Norasresthas, put for Asamanja. Evidently this is an error.
1 make it a vocative,—T,


96 RAMAVANA.


place, O foremost of men, that sacrifice of Sagara’s. And
that country, O best of men, is excellent as a sacrificial
ground. And, O Kakutstha, equipped with a powerful bow,
that mighty car-warrior,living under Sagara's sway, Angumat,
O child, followed the horse, for the parpose of protecting it.
And it came to pass tbat with the intention of dirturbing the
sacrifice of that monarch, on a certain day Vasava, assuming
the form of a Rakshasi, stole away the sacrificial horse.*
And, O Kakutstha, on the hurse of that high-souled one
being stclen, the priests said unto the king engaged in the
ceremony,—‘On this auspicious day, hath the sacrificial
horse been stolen by violence. Do thou, O Kakutstha, slay
him that steals the horse,—and bring it back. Otherwise
the sacrifice will be defective, bringing us misfortune. There-
fore, do thou, O king, act so, that the sacrifice may not be
marred with defects.’ Hearing the words of the priests, the
king addressed his sixty thousand sons in the midst of his
court, saying,—'Being, as this great sacrifice is, presided
over by eminently pious Bralimanas sanctified by mantras,
I do not, ye foremost of men, ye sons, sce how Rakshasas
may find entrance into it. Therefore, repair ye, and seek
fo& the horse, ye sons, Good betide you! Do ye search the
eulire earth engarlanded with oceans; and do ye search
Yoyana after Yoyana, ye sons. And do ye delve the earth
till ye light upon the horse, by my command following the
track of that stealer of the horse. 1 have been initiated into
this sacrifice with my grand-sons and priests.’ And thereat
the mighty princes, enjoined by their father, breathing
high spirits, began to range the earth, OQ Rama, Then they
each fell to delving the bowels of the earth for the space of
a Yoyana in length and breadth, with their hands resembling
thunder-bolts in feel, and with darts like unto thunder-bolts,
and with gigantic ploughshares. And being thus riven, the
earth, O descendant of Raghu, began to send forth loud cries


* The Bengali edition reads this s/oka differently —T.


BALAKANDAM. 97


O Raghava, O thou hard to repress, there arose an uproar
from serpents, and Asuras, and R&kshasas, and other crea-
tures, that were being slaughtered. And O descendant of,
Raghu, they excavated the earth, O Rama, for sixty thousand
Yoyanas,—yea, as if they had intended to reach the lowest
depths underground. Thus, O foremost of kings, those sons
of the monarch dug all around Jamvudwipa, filled with
mountains. Thereat, the gods together with the Gandharbas,
and Asuras, and Panuagas, in trepidation appeared before the
Grand-sire. And propitiating that high-souled one, they
with melancholy countenances and in exceeding agitation,
spoke these words unto the Grand-sire,—'O adorable one, the
entire earth is being excavated by the sons of Sagara; and
many are the high-souled ones as well as the aquatic animals
that are being slain in consequence.—This one is the disturber
of our sacrifice, and by him hath the sacrificial horse been
stolen,—saying this, Sagara’s sons are committing hayoc
upon all creatures.”


SECTION XL.


-EARING the speech of the celestials, that possessor
of the six attributes, the Grand-sire, spoke unto them exceed-
ingly frightened and deprived of their senses on beholdinge
the prowess of Sagara’s sons like unto the Destroyer
himself,—'This entire Earth belongeth unto the intelligent
Vasudeva, she being his consort. And that adorable one is
indeed her lord. And assuming the form of Kapila he
unceasingly sustaineth the Earth. Andthe sons of king Sagara
will be consumed by the fire of his wrath. The pre-ordained
excavation of the Earth, as well as the destruction of
Sagara’s sons, had been foreseen by the far-sighted,’
Hearing the words of the Graud-sire, those repressors of


9 RAMAYANA,


theic foes, the three and thirty* celestials, being exceedingly
rejuiced, went back to their respective quarters. And as the
sons of Sagara were riving the Earth, there arose a mighty
“noise, like unto the bursting of thunder. Then, having riven
the entire Earth and ranged it all around, the sons of Sagara
together (returned to their father) and spake unto him,saying,
—‘By us hath the Earth been extensively surveyed, and have
powerful deities and Danavas, Rakshasas, Pig&chas, .Uragas
and Pannagas been slain; and yet do we find neither the
horse nor the stealer thereof. What are we to do now? Good
betide thee, do thou consider it well.’ Hearing those words
of his sons, that foremost of kings, gelting into a wrath, said,
O descendant of Raghu, ‘Do ye yet again, good betide ye,
delve the earth, and having got at the stealer of the horse,
cease.’ Receiving this mandate of their sire, the sixty-
thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara rushed towards the
depths of the earth, And as they were engaged in excavating,
they beheld the elephant of the quarter resembling a hill,
named Virupaksha, holding the earth. And, O son of
Raghu, that mighty elephant, Virupiksha, held on his
head the entire earth with its mountains and forests,
Aad, O Kakutstha, when on sacred days the mighty elephant,
from fatigue, shaketh his head, then takes place the earth.
quake. Thereupon, O Rama, going round that mighty
elephant, and honoring him duly, they went on piercing the
aunderearth, And having pierced the East, they pierced
the South,—and in the Southern quarter also they beheld a
mighty elephant—the high-souled Mahapadma, resembling
a huge bill, holding the earth on his head. And thereat they
marvelled greatly. And having gone round him, sixty-
thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara began to peuetrate
into the Western region. And in the Western quarter also
those highly powerful ones beheld the elephant of that
quarter named Saumanasa, resembling a mighty mountain.


© The eight Vasus eleven Rudvas, twelve Adityasand two Acwins—T.


BILARANDAM. 99


And having gone round him and asked him as to his welfare
they delving on, arrived at the Northern region. Andon
the North likewise, O foremost of the Raghus, they beheld
Bhadra, white as snow, holding this earth on his goodly
person. And having felt as well as gone round him, those
sixty thousand sons of Sagar went on penetrating the depths
of the earth, Then repairing to the famous North-eastern
region, Sagara’s sons becoming enraged, began to dig the
earth. And there those high-souled, exceedingly powerful
and vehement ones beheld the eternal Vasudeva in the guise
of Kapila. And there also, experiening exceeding delight,
O descendant of Raghu, they found his horse, browsing hard
by. And knowing him to be the destroyer of the sacrifice,
they bearing spades, and ploughs, and innumerable trees and
crags, with eyes reddened with ire, furiously rushed against
him, exclaiming —‘Stay ! Stay! And thou it is that hast
stolen our sacrificial horse, © thou of wicked understandirfg,
know that thou hast fallon into the hands of the sons of
Sagara” Hearing this speech of theirs, Kapila, O descendant
of Raghu, overwhelmed with rage uttered a tremendous roar.
And then, O Kakutstha, the sons of Sagara were reduced te
ashes by the high-souled and incomparable Kapila.”


SECTION xu.


‘Senne the delay on the part of his sons, King Sagara,
O son of Raghu, addressed his grandson, flaming in, his
native energy, saying,—'Thou art heroic and accomplished
and like unto thy uncles. Do thou enquire into the circum-
stances that have befallen thy uncles, as also about the way
by which the horse hath escaped. And as there are strong
and mighty creatures inhabiting the Earth’s interior, with


100 RAMAYANA,


the view of resisting them, do thou take thy bow along with
thy scimitar. And honoring those that deserve to be honored
‘and slaying such as disturb thee, do thou, having attained
thy end, come back, becoming the instrument for the com-
pletion of my sacrifice.’ Thus duly enjoined by the high-
souled Sagara, Angumat endowed with fleet vigor, taking
his bow as well as his scimitar, set out. And commanded by
the monarch, O best of men, he found the underground way
that had been carved out by those high-souled ones. And
he found an exceedingly powerful elephant belonging to the
cardinal point, worshipped by deities, and Danavas, and
Rakshasas, and goblins, and birds, and Uragas. And having
gone round him, and asked him as to his welfare, he enquired
after his uncles and the stealer of the horse. Hearing this,
the mighty-minded elephant of that quarter answered,—'O
son of Asamanja, having attained thy object, thou wilt
sptedily return with the horse.’ And hearing those words of
his, Angumat by turns duly asked the same question of all
the elephants belonging to the cardinal points. And being
honored by those guardians of the cardinal points, knowing
words as well as their application in regard to time, place,
and person, he was asked by them, saying—‘Do thou come
with the horse!’ Hearing those words of theirs, that one
of fleet vigor repaired unto the spot where the sons of
Sagara, his uncles, had been reduced to a heap of ashes,
“And (arriving there), Asamanja’s son, smitten with grief,
and being exceedingly afflicted at their destruction, bewailed
in heaviness of heart. And exercised by grief and sorrow,
that foremost of men espied there the sacrificial horse straying
near, ~ And desirous of offering oblations of water unto those
princes, that highly powerful one in need of water, did not
find any watery expanse in the neighbourhood.” And it came
to pass, O Rama, that surveying wide, he descried the
maternal uncle unto the princes, Suparna, the lord of birds,
resembling the Wind. And thereupon Vinata’s son possessed


BALAKANDAM. 101


of mighty strength spoke unto him, saying,—‘Do not lament,
O foremost of men. The destruction of these was for the
welfare of all. These highly powerful ones had been con
sumed by the peerless Kapila,—therefore, thou ought not to
offer water unto them in consonance with social usage.
Gang’, O foremost of men, is the elder daughter of
Himavat. In her (streams) do thou perform the watery rites
of thy uncles, O mighty-armed one : let that purifier of the
worlds lave these, reduced to a heap of ashes. And on these
ashes being watered by Ganga, dear unto all, the sixty
thousand sons of Sagara will repair unto the celestial regions.
Do thou, O highly pious one, go back, taking this horse, O
foremost of men ; and do thou complete the sacrifice of thy
grand-father, O hero.’ Hearing Suparna’s speech, the ex-
ceedingly powerful Angumat of mighty asceticism speedily
taking the horse, retraced his steps. Thon coming to the
king who had been initiated into the ceremony, he,?O
descendant of Raghu, faithfully communicated unto him
the words of Suparna. Hearing this sorrowful intelligence,
the king duly finished the sacrifice agreeably to the scrip-
tures. And having seen the completion of the sacrifice, that
lord of earth entered his capital ; but the king could not see
how to bring Ganga on earth. And without being able to
ascertain it, the mighty monarch after a long course of
time, and having reigned for thirty thousand years, ascended
heaven.” 2


SECTION XLII.


“W.

HEN Sagara had bowed unto the influence of Time,
the subjects selected the righteous Angumat for their king
And, O descendant of Raghu, An¢umat proved a great ruler.
And his son,the celebrated Dilipa,was also a great king. And,
O Raghu’s son, consigning unto Dilipa his kingdom,Angumat


10a RAMAFANA.


entered upon rigid austerities on the romantic summit of the
Himavat. Aud having for the space of thirty-two hundreds of
thousands years carried on austeries in the woods, that highly
famous one, crowned with the wealth of aceticism, attained
the celestial regions. And the exceedingly powerful Dilipa.
hearing of the destruction of his grand-fathers, was stricken
with grief; yet he could not ascertain his course about it.
And he constantly thought as to how Ganga could be
brought down, how to perform their watery rites, and how to
deliver them. Angas that pious one furnished with self-
knowledge was always meditating upon this, an eminently
virtuous son was born unto him named Bhagiratha. And per-
forming numerous sacrifices, the mighty king Dilipa reigned
for thirty thousand years. And without having arrived at any
definite decision in regard to their deliverance, the king, O
puissant one, being attacked with an ailment, breathed his
last’ And having sprinkled his son Bhagiratha in the way
of installing him in the kingdom, that prime of men, the
king, by virtue of his own acts, repaired to the region of
Iadra. And, O descendant of Raghu, that royal saint Bhagi-
ratha was possessed of righteousness. And being without
issue, and desiring to obtain it, the mighty monarch consigned
his kingdum and his subjects to the care of his counsellors,
and engaged in bringing down Ganga. And, O Raghu’s
descendant, restraining his senses, and eating once a month,
And surrounding himself with, five fires, and with arms
upraised, he for a long lapse of time performed austerities at
Gokarna. And as he was performing his terrible austerities,
a thousand years rolled away. And thereat that possessor of
the six attributes and lord of all creatures, Brahm&, was wel-
pleased with that high-souled monarch. And presenting
himself together with the celestials, the Grand- -sire thus spoke
unto the high-souled Bhagiratha engaged in austerities,—'O
Bhagiratha, QO mighty monarch, pleased am I with thee, O
lord of men, on account of thy ardent austerities; do thou,


BALAKANDAM. 103


© thou of excellent vows, ask for the boon thou wouldst
have,’ Thereupon that great car-warrior, the highly power-
ful and mighty-armed Bhagiratha, with clasped hands, said
unto the Grand-sire of all creatures,—‘If, adorable one,
thou art pleased with me, if thou wouldst grant me the fruit
of my asceticism, may Sagara’s sons receive water at my
hands; and on the ashes of those high-souled ones being
laved by the waters of Gang’, may my great-grand-fathers
without fail repair unto heaven! And, O divine one, I
beseech thee, may our line never languish for want of off- .
spring. May, O God, this prime boon light upon Ikshw&ku’s
race? When the king had said this, the Grand-sire
addressed him these sweet and auspicious words composed
of melting letters—‘O mighty car-warrior Bhagirath, high is
this thy aim. Be it so, good betide thee, thou enhancer of
the Ikshw4ku line. This Haimavati Ganga, Himavat's elder
daughter, even her to hold, O king, do thou employ Hara ; tor
Ganga’s fall, O king, Earth wilt not be able to sustain, And
to hold her, O king, find I none save the wielder of the
Trident.” Having thus addressed the monarch, and greeted
Gang§, the creator of the worlds repaired to heaven with the
celestials.


SECTION xuiti.


OW un that god of gods had gone away, Bhagiratha,
O Rama, pressing the earth with his thumb, spent a year in
adoring Siva. And when the year was complete, Um&'s lord,
Pagupati, worshipped of all the worlds, spake unto the king,
saying,—‘O foremost of men, I am -pleased with thee:
1 will do what will be for thy-welfare. I will hold the
Mountain’s daughter on my head.’ Then, O Rama, that one
bowed unto by all creatures, the elder daughter of Himavat,
assuming an exceedingly mighty shape, with irresistible


10g RAMAYANA,


impetus precipitated herself from the welkin upon Siva’s

gracious head. And that divine one, Gang&, exceedingly
sodifficult to sustain, thought,—‘I will enter the nether regions,

carrying off Sankara by my streams. Knowing her proud

intention, the adorable Hara waxed wroth; and the

three-eyed deity set his heart upon enveloping her, And,

O Rama, as that sacred one plunged upon Rudra’s holy
head of tangled locks, resembling Himavat, she could by no

means reach the earth, despite all her endeavours ; nor did
. she obtain egress from under the matted locks. And she
wandered there for many a year. And finding Ganga in
this plight, Bhagiratha became again enguged in high
austerities. And thereupon Siva, O descendant of Raghu,
was exceedingly gratified ; and cast Ganga off in the direction
of the Vindu lake. And as she was let off, seven streams
branched out from her, And the three streams of the excel-
leat Ganga of auspicious waters went in an easterly direct-
tion; while the Suchakshu, the Sita, and that mighty river
the Sindhu flowed on the auspicious west. And the seventh
followed Bhagiratha’s car. And that royal saint, the
exceedingly puissant Bhagiratha, mounted on a superb car,
went before; and Ganga followed him. And she des-
cended from the we'kin upon Sankara’s head, thence
alighting upon the earth; and there her waters flowed
with thundering sounds. And earth looked beautiful with
swarms of fallen and falling fishes, and tortoises, and por-
poises. And then celestials and saints and Gandharbas, and
Yakshas and Siddhas meunted on excellent elephants and
horses and cars resembling cities, looked on Ganga des-
cenging upon the earth. And the celestials stationed on cars
were struck with surprise; and all creatures marvelled at
the excellent descent of Gang’. And ekger to witness
the spectacle, celestial hosts of immeasurable energy came
there. And in consequence of the celestials coming thither,
and the effulgence of their ornaments, the firmament free


‘


BALAKANDAM. 105


from clouds, shone as if with an hundred suns. And the
sky was graced with fast-fleeting porpoises and serpents
and fishes resembling playing lightning; and the welkin
scattered with pale foam-flakes by thousands, appeared as if
it was scattered with autumnal clouds swarming with cranes.
And the river proceeded sometimes rapidly, and sometimes
awry, and sometimes in volumes, and sometimes sloping,
and sometimes ascending, and sometimes languidly; and
sometimes water clashed with water; and sometimes as-
cending an upland, it descended into a dell. And the pellu-
cid and pure water first descending upon Sankara’s head,
and thence on to the earth, appeared exceedingly beautiful
And there the saints andthe Gandharbas, as well as the
inhabitants of the earth touched the sacred water
flowing from Bhaba’s body. And those that had fallen
from the sky unto the earth in consequence of some curse or
other, having bathed there, and thereby having their sins
washed and removed by that sanctifying water, again as-
cended the sky and entered their respective regions. And
through the agency of that shining water, all beings, feeling
delight, rejoiced, and having bathed in Gang’, became
cleansed from sin. And stationed on an excellent car that
mighty king, the royal saint Bhagiratha, went first, and
Gang& went at his back. And the gods, and the saints, and
the Daityas, and the Danavas, and the Rakshasas, and the
foremost of Gandharbas and Yakshas, and the Kinnaras, and
the mighty Uragas, and the Serpents, and the Apsarais, O
Rama and the aquatic animals in a body following Bhagi-
ratha’s car, with glad hearts went in the wake of Ganga. And
withersoever king Bhagiratha went, the famous Gang§,: fore-
most of streams, capable of destroying all sins, went. And
Gangi flooded the sacrificial ground of the high-souled Jabnu, of
wonderlul deeds, as he was performing a sacrifice. Thereat,
O R&ghava, reading her insolence, Jahnu, waxing wroth,
drank up all her wonderful waters. Thereupon, the deities,


14


106 RAMAPANA,


and the Gandharbas, and the saints, struck with amazement,
fell to worshipping that/foremost of men, the high-sovled Jahnu

“and brought Gang’ into the daughtersbip of that high-souled
one, And that highly energetic lord, being propitiated, let
Gang’ off through his ears. Therefore it is that Gang’ goes
by the name of Jahnu’s daughter Jahnavi. Then Gang’ again
began to follow Bhagiratha’s car. And having reached the
ocean, that foremost of streams, with the object of accompli-
shing his work, entered into the subterranean regions. And
having carefully brought Gang§, that royal saint, Bhagiratha,
having his sense bewildered beheld his grand-fathers
reduced to ashes. And the excellent water of Gang’ over-
flowed that heap of ashes; and thereupon, O best of the
Raghus, they, their sins purged, attained heaven.”


BECTION XLIV.


Tyan having arrived at the Ocean, the king wending
in Gang’’s wake, entered underneath the Earth, at that spot
where those (sons of Sagara) had been reduced to ashes.
And O R&ma, on the ashes being washed by the waters of
Gang’, Brahm, the lord of all creatures thus spoke unto the
monarch,—‘O most puissant of men, the sixty-three thousand
sons of the high-souled Sagara have been delivered—and they
have ascended heaven like unto celestials themselves. And,O
lord of earth, as long as the waters of the ocean shall en-
dure in the world, Sagara’s sons shall reside in heaven
like unto celestials. And this Ganga shall become thy eld-
est daughter ; and she shall attain celebrity among all, being
called after thy name. And Ganga is called both Tripathag4
and Bhagirathi, And she is known as Tripathag’, in conse-
quence of her proceeding in three directions. Do thou now,
O lord of men, here offer oblations of water unto thy grand-
sires,—and thereby, O king’ make good thy promise. And,


BALAKENDAM. 107


O king, that foremost of righteous ones, thy ancestor of ex-
ceeding renown, had failed to attain his desire. And, O
child, Angumat likewise unparalleled in the worlds in energy
had failed in realising his cherished promise of bringing
down Gang&. And then again thet royal saint, crowned
with qualities, of austerities like unto mine, ever abiding
by his Kshatrya duties, even Dilipa’s self—thy exceedingly
puissant sire—O eminently righteous one—had failed in
bringing down Gang& according to his cherished resolve, O
sinless one. And now, O foremost of men, that promise hav- ~
ing been fulfilled by thee, thou shalt attain signal glory in the
world by the common consent of all. And, O vanquisher of
thy foes, having brought about Gang’’s descension, thou
shalt from this act of thine also attain the regions of Brahma.
Do thou, O best of men, lave thyself in these waters incapable
of being rendered worthless, O prime of men,—and theye-
by become purified, and attain sanctity. And do thou
perform the watery rites of thy grand-sires, May luck be
thine, I shall now repair to my own regions ; do thou depart,
Oking.’ Having said this, the illustrious lord of the celestials—
the Grand-sire of all creatures—went unto the celestial regiohs.
And the royal saint king Bhagiratha also of high fame having
performed his ablutions and purified himself, and duly and in
proper order offered oblations of water unto the sons of Sagara,
entered his capital. And attaining exceeding prosperity, that
foremost of men ruled his kingdom ; and, O descendant of
Raghu, having him as their sovereign, the people rejoiced
greatly ; and with their griefs removed, and prosperity secur-
ed, they lived in peace of mind. Thus, O Rama, have I
detailed unto thee the history of Gangi. Auspiciousness
mayst thou obtain! Good betide thee, the evening draweth
nigh. He that reciteth this story conferring prosperity, fame,
long life,and heaven unto Vipras, Kshatriyas, andothers, attain-
eth the good graces of his ancestors and the celestials ; and,
O Kakutstha, he that listeneth to the sacred history of Gang§’s


108 RAMAYANA.


descent, conferring length of days, attaineth all his desires,
and all his sins are destroyed, and his life and fame increase.”


SECTION xuv.


Flearina the words of VicwSmitra, Raghava, together
with Lakshmana, was struck with amazement,-—and spoke
unto Vigwamitra, saying,—“O Brabmana, wonderful is the
story that thou hast recited unto us, vys., that of Gangh’s
sacred descension and the replenishing of the Ocean. And,
O afflicter of foes, as we had been reflecting upou all this at
length, the night hath passed away as if it were a moment.
And the live-long night hath passed away asIin company
with Sumitr&’s son, was pondering over VicwAmitra’s aus-
Picious speech.” Then in the morning which happened to
be bright, that subduer of his foes, Raghu’s descendant,
addressed the ascetic Vigwamitra, who had finished his
devotion,=—The auspicious night is past,—and we shall (again)
listen to thy wonderful narrations. Let us now cross over
this sacred stream—foremost of rivers~-wending in three
ways. And learning that thou hast arrived at this place,
the pious ascetics have speedily come hither, and have
also brought this barque with a spacious carpet.” Hearing
those words of the high-souled Raghava, Kaucika crossed
over the crowds of ascetics; and on reaching the north bank,
he paid homage unto the saints. And when they had land-
ed onthe banks of the Ganga, they beheld a city named
Vicafé. And thereupon speedily that, foremost of ascetics
in company with Raghava, went towards Vic&lé,—beautiful
and elegant like unto the celestial regions. Then the highly
wise Rama, with folded hands, asked that mighty ascetic
Vigwamitra concerning the excellent city of Vigala,-“O mighty
ascetic, what royal line resideth in yonder large city?


BALAKANDAM. tog


I desire to hear this, good betide thee, and great is my curios-
ity.” Hearing those words of Rama, that foremost of
ascetics began to relate the history of Vig4l4, saying,—“Do
thou listen, O Rama, to what I had heard from Sakra rela-
ting this history ; and, O descendant of Raghu, do thou
listen to all that befell in this city. Formerly in the Krita
age, O Rama, Diti’s highly powerful sons, as well as those
of Aditi, possessed of prowess, and virtuous and pious—
high-souled ones both—O foremost of men, fell to reflect-
ing,—‘How can we become exempt from decrepitude and
disease, and immortal.’ And as they reflected, it struck
them,—'By churning the ocean of milk, we must obtain am-
brosia” Then deciding upon churning (the ocean), those
ones of immeasurable energy making Vasuki the cord, and
the Mandara (hill), the stick, began to churn the deep. And
after a thousand years had gone by, the hvods (of the ser-
pent) serving as the churning cord, began to vomit virulent
venom and to bite at the crags, with their fangs. And
thereat there came out powerful poison like unto fire ; and
in consequence the entire universe with celestials,and Asuras,
and men, began to burn. And thereupon, intending to seék
refuge, they appeared before that mighty god, Sankara, or
Pagupati, or Rudra,—hymning him,—‘Save us,’ ‘Save us.’
When that master, the lord of the celestials, was being thus
addressed by the deities, there appeared before them Hari,
bearing the conch and the discus. And smiling Hari said
unto the trident-bearing Rudra-—‘O chief of the celestials,
since thou art the foremost of the gods, this that hath come
out of the ocean churned by the celestials,is thine. Remaining
here, O lord, do thou receive the first offering in the form of
this poison” Having said this, that best of ceiestials vanished
there. Witnessing the dismay of the celestials, and hearing
also the words of Sarngin, Siva took in that dreadful poison
as if it were nectar ; and theo leaving the deities, the wor-
shipful Hara went away. And then, O descendant of Raghu,


110 RAMAYANA,


as the celestials resumed the churning, that foremost of hills
serving as the cord, entered the subterranean regions.
‘Thereupon the gods and the Gandharbas fell to extolling the
slayer of Madhu, saying,—‘Thou art the way of all beings,
of the celestials in especial. Do thou, O mighty-armed one,
protect us, and recover the mountain.” Having beard this,
Hrishikesha, or Hari, assuming the form of a tortoise,stood in
the sea, supporting the hill on his back ; and that Soul of all,
Kegava, best of male beings, taking hold of the top of the
hill by his hand, began to churn the deep, stationed in the
midst of the celestials. And after a thousand years had roll-
ed on, arose a male being impregnated with the Ayurveda,*
of exceedingly righteous soul, called Dhanwantari, bearing
in his hands a stick, and a Kamandalu. And there arose
also, from the cream of the churning waters,those magnificent
dames the shining Apsaras. And, O foremost of men, as they
had emerged from water, they are called Apsards.t And
there sprang sixty Kotzs of shining Apsar’s. And, O Kakuts-
tha,the female attendants of those are numberless, And neither
the deities nor the D&navas would accept them,—and in con-
sequence of this non-acceptance, they are known as women
belonging to all. And then, O Raghu’s descendant, arose the
eminently pious daughter of Varuna, Varuni, who fell to look-
ing for acceptance. And Diti’s sons, O Rama, did not accept
gthe daughter of Varuna,—and Aditi’s sons, O hero, accepted
that one of blameless limbs. And hence Diti’s sons go by
the name of Asuras ; and Aditi’s by that of Suras. And the
celestials became exceeding glad, on having accepted Varuni.
And, O foremost of men, next arose Uchhaicravi—best of
horses, and also Kaustubha; and nexf,the excellent ambrosia,
And, O Rama,tremendous was the carnage for the possession
thereof ( ambrosia); and Aditi’s and Diti’s sons fought
together. And the Asuras assembled together with the


* Science of Medicine —T.
: + Ap, means water.—T.


BALAKANDAM. mr


Rakshasas ; and, O hero, mighty was the battle that was
fought, striking terror into the three worlds. And when a
great havoc had been committed, the highly powerful Vishnu,
assuming a captivating from speedily stole away the ambrosia.
And those that came forward before that best of male beings,
Vishnu, knowing no deterioration, were crushed in conflict
by Vishnu in a different form. And in that exceedingly
dreadful battle between the sons of Diti and Aditi, those
heroic ones, viz., Aditi’s heroic sons slaughtered those of Diti.
And having slaughtered the sons of Diti and regained his
kingdom, Purandara, happily began to rule the worlds,
containing saints and Ch&ranas.”


SECTION xivi,


saa 2


*§ An on those sons of her being slain,Diti afflicted with
great griefthus addressed her husband, Maricha’s son,
Kagyapa,—'O adorable one, thy high-souled sons have slain
mine, I now wish for a son, who, obtained through lorg
austerities, will be able to slay Sakra. And I will engage in
austerities : it behoves thee to grant me such an embryo,—
such a slayer of Sakra it behoves thee to promise me.’ Hearing
those words of hers, Maricha’s son, Kagyapa of exceeding
energy answered the deeply aggrieved Diti, saying,—'Be
it so. Good betide thee, do thou become pure, O ascetic. If
thou remain pure, when a full thousand years shall be com-
plete, thou wilt give birth unto a son who will slay Sakra -
in battle. And through me, thou wilt give birth to a -son
that will destroy the three worlds.’ Having said this, that
highly energetic one rubbed her person with his palm. And
having rubbed her, he said,—‘Luck ! and then went away
to carry on austerities. And when he had gone, Diti,
O foremost of men, becoming exceedingly delighted, went


ara REMIPANA.


unto Kugaplava* and began to practise rigid mortifications.
,And, O foremost of men, as she was practising austerities,
the thousand-eyed deity most dutifully ministered unto her.
And the thousand-eyed one provided for her fire, and Kusa
and faggots, and water, and fruits, and roots, and other
things that she wanted. And at all times, Sakra served Diti
by rubbing her person, and removing her fatigue. And when
ten years only were wanting to complete the thousand years,
Diti, O descendant of Raghu, being exceedingly delighted,
thus spoke unto the thousand-eyed one,—'O best of those
endowed with prowess, of me engaged in austerities, ten
years only remain (to complete the period). And after that
time, good betide thee, thou wilt behold thy brother. I will,
O son, bind him unto thee in affection, whom I had besought
for to compass thy destruction—so that, the fever of thy
heart removed, thou wilt with him enjoy the victory of the
three worlds. On thy high-souled sire having been besought
by me, he, O foremost of celestials, granted me the boon that
after a thousand years, I shall obtain a son.’ And it came
to pass that having said this, the sun being in his meridian,
the worshipful Diti with her feet placed at that part of the bed
which should contain her head, was overpowered by sleep.
And thereupon seeing her resting her feet at the place where
she should place her head,—-and consequently unclean, Sakra
was exceedingly delighted, and smiled. And, O R&ma,
Purandara entered into her womb, and that highly self-con-
trolled one severed the embryo in seven parts. And the
embryo being pierced by the thunder-bolt of an hundred
knots, cried at the top of its voice,and thereat Diti awoke.
‘Do not cry, do not cry,’—exclaimed Sakra : and even while
it was crying, the mighty-minded Vasava continued piercing
it. ‘Do not slay it ; do not slay it,’ said Diti. Thereupon, in
consideration of the honor of his mother, Sakra went out.


* An asylum on the east, otherwise called Beshnlaksha.—T.


BALARANDAM. 113


Then he with clasped patms accosted Diti, saying,—‘O
worshipful one, thou didst sleep with thy feet placed where
thy head should have lain, and hast therefore become impure.
And finding this opportunity, 1 severed in seven pieces that
would be slayer of mine in battle. Do thou,O worshipful one


SECTION xvii.


HEN the embryo had been sundered in seven,
Diti exceedingly aggrieved humbly spoke unto the irrepressi-
ble thousand-eyed deity, saying,—‘By my fault it is that the
embryo hath been sundered in seven. O chief of the celes-
tials, herein thou art guilty of no transgression, O destroyer
of Vala. And since calamity hath befallen the embryy, I
wish to do thee a good turn. Let the seven parts become
the guardians of the seven Maruts. And, O son, let my sons
having noble forms, becoming famous as Marutas range the
V&taskandha regions in heaven. And let one range Brahmi’s
regions, and another Indra’s, and the highly illustrious third
also range around, being known as Divya Vayu.* And,O best
of celestials, by thy command, let the four remaining sons of
mine known by the name which thou hast mentioned, range
about in appointed periods.’Hearing her words,that destroyer
of Vala, thousand-eyed Purandara, with clasped palms
said,—‘All this that thou hast said must come to pass ; there
is no doubt about it. Good betide thee, thy sons endowed
with celestial forms, shall range about. And it hath been
heard by us that having thus ascertained in that hermitage,
the mother and the son, O Rama, went to heaven, their
desire obtained. Even this, O Kakutstha, is the place where


* Etherial air—T.
a5


m4 RAMAPANA.


formerly the mighty Indra sojourned, and where he attended
upon Diti of accomplished ascetic success. And, O most
powerful of men, tkshw&ku had an exceedingly righteous
json born unto him of Alamvush3, known by the name of
Vig&la. And here stood a palace, built by him, called Vig&l4.
And Vigala’s son, O Rama, was the mighty Hemachandra.
And after Hemachandra comes the celebrated Suchandra.
And, O Rama, the son of Suchandra was Dhumraswa. And
then was born Srinjaya, son unto Dhumraswa. And Srin-
+ jaya’s son was the powerful Sahadeva. And Sahadeva’s son
was the pre-eminently pious Kugagwa. And Kucagwa's
son was the puissant Somadatta. And now, O Kakutstha,
Somadatta’s son the effulgent and invincible and renowned
Sumati resideth in this city. And by the grace of Ikshwaku,
all the sovereigns of Vigala are long-lived, and high-souled,
and puissant, and pious. And here will we happily spend
a hight ; and on the morning of the morrow thou wilt, O
foremost of men, behold Janaka.’ And having heard that
the illustrious Vi¢wamitra had come, that best of kings, the
effulgent Sumati, appeared before him. And having paid
Vigwamitra high homage together with his priests and friends,
and with clasped hands enquired after the former's welfare,
he addressed Vigw&mitra, saying,—“Blessed are we, and
obliged are we, whose domains, O ascetic, have been graced
_with thy presence. Surely none is more blessed than I am.”


SECTION XLVviil,


ene


Havine met together, they enquired after each other's
welfare. And then Sumati spoke unto the mighty ascetic,
saying,—"Good betide thee, boasting of the prowess of celes-
tials of elephantine or leonine gait, heroic resembling tigers or
bulls, possessed of expansive eyes like lotus-petals, bearing


BALAKANDAM. 115


scimitars and bows and quivers, like unto the Agwinis in
grace, endowed with youth, like unto celestials fancy-led
descended from etherial regions to the earth beneath, whose
sons, O ascetic, are these boys, and what for have they come
hither, and why also is it that they journey on foot? And
adoring all directions, like unto the Sua or the Moon
adorning the firmament, and resembling each other in per-
sonal proportions, and expressions, and gestures, and equip-
ped with excellent weapons, and war-like, how have these
paragons of men come into this impracticable way? I wish,
to hear all this related truly.” Having heard his words,
Vigwamitra faithfully related all about it. Hearing Vicwa-
mitra’s words, the king was extremely surprised; and
having those sons of Dacaratha as his all-worthy guests,
received with becoming respect those highly powerful ones
deserving of hospitality. And mecting with such splendid
reception from Sumati, those descendants of Raghu spent
there a night, and the next day set out for Mithili. And
beholding Janaka’s beauteous city, the ascetics exclaiming,
—Excellent, excellent’ fell to admiring Mithila. And jn
a grove at Mithila, Raghava saw an ancient, lonely, and
romantic asylum, and asked that foremost of ascetics, say-
ing--“What is this that looketh like an asylum, though
without any ascetics? I wish to hear, O worshipful one, to
whom this asylum belonged in time past.” Hearing this
speech addressed by Raghu’s descendant, that one verse!

in speech, the highly energetic and mighty saint, Vigwamitra,
answered,—"‘Ah ! Do thou listen. I will tell thee through
the wrath of what high-souled one this hermitage came to
be cursed. O foremost of men, this excellent asylum hopored
by the celestials themselves, formerly belonged to the high-
souled Gautama. And here, O illustrious prince, in days
of yore Gautama in company with Ahalya carried on aus-
terities for a long series of years. And perceiving occasion,
Sachi’s lord, the thousand-eved deity, assuming the form


116° KAMAYANA.


of that as. nus addressed Ahalya—O exceedingly
beautiful one, those bent upon sport, do not stay for the
Menstrual season. And, O graceful one, I desire to enjoy
thy company (on the instant). Thereupon, out of curiosity,
that one of perverse understanding consented to the propo-
sals of the chief of the celestials. Then, having attained her
object, she spoke unto that foremost of the celestials, say-
ing-—‘O best of the immortals, I have obtained my desire,
~—do thou speedily go from his place, O lord. Do thou,
© lord of the celestials, from a sense of repectibility
preserve thyself and me also.’ Indra too smiling, said unto
Ahalya,—'O thou of shapely hips, pleased am I. Now!
repair unto my own place.’ Having known her thus, Indra, O
Rama, exceedingly apprehensive of Gautama, then hurriedly
sallied out of the thatched cottage. Just at this time, Indra
saw that mighty ascetic Gautama entering—that foremost
of anohorets, incapable of being repressed by the deities
and the D&navas, and equipped with ascetic energy, having
bathed in the waters of holy spots, and flaming like fire,
carrying faggots and Ausa grass. And seeing him, the coun-
tewance of the lord of the celestials turned pale. And
seeing the wicked thousand-eyed deity in the guise of an
ascetic, the well-behaved anchoret fired with rage said,—
‘And since, O thou of wicked understanding assuming my
form, thou hast done this foul deed, thou shalt lose thy
Scrotum. And soon as the bigh-souled Gautama had said
this in ire, the scrotum of the thousand-eyed one dropped
tothe earth. And having seen Sakra in this plight, he
cursed his wife also—'For a thousand years thou shalt
live bere feeding upon air. without food, tormented with
repentance and thou shalt remain in this hermitage
unseen of any. And when the irrpressible son of Dagaratha
R&ma, shall come to this deep wood, thou shalt be cleansed
of thy sin. And, O wicked one, ministering unto him the
rites of hospitality, with a mind free from ignorance and


BILARINDAM. uy


covetousness, thou shalt in thy own form with joy regain
my side.’ Having said this to that wicked woman the highly
energetic Gautama of rigid austerities, forsaking this her
mitage, began to carry on penances on the romantic summit
of the Himavat, inhabited by Siddhas and Ch&ranas.”


SECTION xuix.


66 :
‘Axo having been deprived of his scrotum, Sakra with
eyes tremulous with fear, addressed the celestials with Agni
at their head, as well as the Siddhas and the Gandharbas
and the Charanas, saying,—I have accomplished the work of
the celestials by stirring the ire of the high-souled Gautama,
and thereby disturbing his austerities. And in doing so, I
have been deprived of my scrotum; and Ahaly& also Ith
been put down. And I have deprived him of his ascetic
energy by causing him to utter a mighty curse,—and, there-
fore, ye celestials, and saints, and Charanas, ye should restore
my scrotum unto me who have served the gods.’ Hearigg
Satakratu’s* words, the deities along with the Maruts led by
Agni, presented themselves before the divine Pitris.t And
then Agni addressed the latter, saying—‘This ram is
possessed of a scrotum; while Sakra hath been deprived of
his. Do ye taking the scrotum of the ram furnish Sakra witk
it. And although deprived of the scrotum, the ram will be
able to grant consummate satisfaction unto ye. And on those
that will offer such a ram for your entertainment, ye will
bestow undying and profuse merit. Hearing Agni’s speech,
the assembled Pitris, rooting up the scrotum of the ram, joined
it unto the person of the thousand-eyed deity. Thenceforth,
* Lit. the performer of an hundred sacrifices, one of the appellations of


Indra,
+ The ancestors,


118 RAMAYANA.


O K&kutstha, the divine Pitris together feast upon scrotum-
less rams, for their scrotum had been joined unto the person
gf Indra. And thenceforth, O Raghava, Indra also through
the high-souled Gautama’s ascetic energy, hath been bearing
the scrotum of aram. Therefore, O highly powerful one, do
thou enter the hermitage of that pious one, and deliver the
dignified and divinely fair Ahalya.’ On hearing Vigwamitra,s
words, R&ghava in company with Lakshmana, placing
Vigwamitra in their front, entered the asylum; and they
beheld that magnificent dame flaming in ascetic energy ; and
incapable of being gazed at too near even by the celestials
and the Asuras; as if created by the Deity to be the divinely
charming Woman; like a flame hid in smoke; or the bright-
ness of the full-moon clouded and dimmed in mist; or the
solar splendour incapable of being beheld on account of clouds.
And by virtue of Gautama’s word, she had been incapable of
befng seen by any in the three worlds, till the sight of Rama.
And now the curse having coming to an end, she could be
perceived hy them. And the two descendants of Raghu then
took hold of her feet; but remembering Gautama’s words, she
ok Her part took hold of theirs. .And with a collected mind
she gave them water for their feet as well as arghya, and
extended unto them the rites of hospitality. And the
Kakutsthas accepted the homage thus rendered according to
the ordinance. And blossoms began to shower copiously to
“the sounds of kettledrums; and the Gandharbas and the
Apsaras began to rejoice greatly. And exclaiming, ‘Excellent,
excellent,’ the celestials honored Ahaly’, as with a person
purified by penance, she again came under Gautama’s govern-
ance, Aad the highly energetic Gautama also happy on his
union with Ahaly&, honored Rama highly, and that one of
mighty mortifications then became engaged in austerities.
And having duly received signal honors from the great ascetic
Gautama, Rama set out for Mithila.


BALARANDAM 119


SECTION L.


Then proceeding north-east Rima in company with
Sumitra’s son, placing Vigwamitra at their head, appeared
before the sacrificial ground. And Rama and Lakshmana
said unto that puissant ascetic,—Great is the pomp and
splendour of the high-souled Janaka’s sacrifice. And, O pious
one, many thousand of Brahmanas inhabiting various regions,
and well-read in the Vedas (have coime to this sacrifice) ; |
and the abodes of ascetics are thronged with hundreds of
cars. Do thou, O Brahmana, arrange for some place where
we may put up.” Hearing Rama’s words, the mighty ascetic
Vigwamitra selected for their abode a well-watered spot free
from bustle andtumult. And hearing of Vigwamitra’s arrival,
the best of monarchs without blame, placing the priest
Sat&inanda before him, as well as the high-souled family
priests, speedily taking the arghya, at once went out in
humble guise, and offered it unto Vigwamitra according to the
ordinance. Having accepted that homage of the high-souled
Janaka, the ascetic enquired after the king's welfare, and tffe
uninterrupted performance of his sacrifice. And the king
together with his priests, having enquired of the ascetics as
to their welfare, cheerfully embraced them all in a proper
way. Then he with clasped hands, spoke unto that foremost
of anchorets, saying—“O worshipful one, do thou along
with these eminent ascetics, take thy seat.’ Hearing Jana-
ka’s words, the mighty ascetic sat him down. And the king
also, in company with his priests and counsellors sat down
around in order of rank. And then the monarch looking
into Vigwamitra’s face, said—‘'To-day by the grace of the
gods, hath my sacrifice been crowned with success—to-day
have 1 reaped the fruit of my sacrifice by beholding thy
worshipful self. Btessed and obliged am I whose sacrificial
ground, O Br&hmana, hath been graced by thee along with


120 RAMAYANA,


these ascetics. Twelve days, O Brahmarshi, have been fixed
for the period of initiation by the sages. On the expiry of
that term, thou wilt, O Kaugika, behold the celestials come
unto the sacrifice for claiming their respective shares.”
Having said this, the king with a cheerful countenance, with
folded hands, again intently asked that foremost of ascetics,
~—"These youths, good betide thee, like unto celestials in
prowess, of the gait of lions or elephants, heroic, and resem-
bling tigers or bulls, of expansive eyes like unto lotus-petals,

, bearing scimitars, quivers and bows, graceful like unto the
Agwinis, endowed with youth, resembling immortals fancy-led
from heaven unto the carth—-whose sons, O ascetic, are they
and what for have they came, and why again have they come
afoot? And bearing excellent arms, whose sons, O mighty
anchoret, are these heroic ones, who grace this place even as
the sun and the moon do the welkio, and resemble each other
incbodily proportions, expression, and gestures; wearing
side-locks and of warlike mind? This I would hear truly
related.” Hearing this speech of the high-souled Janaka, that
ascetic of immeasurable soul related all about Dagaratha’s
st ns, —their sojourn in Siddh&grama, and the slaughter there
of the R&kshasas, their undaunted journey, the sight of
Vigala, the encounter with Ahaly€ and Gautama, Rama's
curiosity about the mighty bow, and visit there for beholding
the same. Having related all this unto the high-souled
Janaka that one endowed with exceeding energy, the mighty
ascetic Vicwamitra, paused.


SECTION Lt.


Hearine the narration of the intellegent VigwAmitra,
Gautama’s eldest son, the exceedingly energetic Satananda
of rigid austerities, highly effulgent by virtue of his ascetic-
ism, with his down standing on end wondered greatly at


 BALAKANDAM. 121


the sight of Rama. And seeing the king’s sons seated at
their ease, he said unto that foremost of ascetics, Vigwamitra,
—"O most powerful of anchorets, by thee was my iJlustri-
ous mother, grown old in asceticism, shown unto the
king’s son. Did my famous and exalted mother entertain
with the produce of the woods Rama worthy of every
one’s homage? And, O highly energetic one, hath that old
story relative to my mother having been wronged by that
celestial, been communicated unto Rama? And, O Kaucika,
good betide thee, hath my mother, in consequence of be-»
holding Rama, been united with my revered sire? And,
Oson of Kugika, hath the highly energetic Rama come
hither, after having been rendered homage by my high-souled
revered sire? And, O Kucika’s son, was my revered sire
of quiescent soul, saluted by Rama when he arrived there?”
Hearing those words of his, the mighty ascetic VigwAmitra,
skilled in speech, replied unto Satdnanda, cogniZant
of words, saying—"O best of ascetics, nothing necessary
was omitted by me,—but everything hath been done.
And the ascetic’s wife hath been united with him, even
as Renuka with Bhrigu’s son.’"* Hearing the mcr
of the intelligent Vigwamitra, the exceedingly energetic
Satananda said unto Rama,—“Art thou well come, O chief
of men? it is by our luck that, O descendant of Raghu
thou hast come unto us, headed by the respected Maharshi
VigwAmitra. This highly energetic VigwSmitra,this Bralmarsitt
is of prowess measureless and deeds _ inconceivable,
by virlue of his asceticism. Him thou knowest as the
prime way. © Rama, there existeth on this earth not
one that is more fortunate than thyself. Thy protector is
even Kusika’s descendant, by whom mighty austerities have
been performed. Do thou listen as [ faithfully describe
unto thee the ascetic power of the high-souled -Kaugika. Do


* Jamadagni, Sather of ParaswAma—T,
16


323 RAMAYANA.


thou listen unto me relating this, This righteous one was
for a long time a king, subduing his enemies, cognizant of
morality, accomplished, and intent upon the welfare of his
subjects. And there was a king named Kuga, the son of
Prajipati. And Kug&’s son was the powerful and pious
Kuganibha. And Kugan&bha’s son was Gadhi. And
Gadhi’s son is the highly energetic and mighty ascetic
Vigwamitra who ruled the earth. And that king reigned
for thousands of years. And it came to pass that once
With his four-fold forces marshalled, he set out for ranging
the earth, And the king went on by turns ranging cities
and kingdoms, rivers and mountains and asylums, And at
length that foremost of conquerers, the mighty Vigwamitra,
came upon Vasishtha’s asylum furnished with various blossom-
ing plants and trees; abounding in animals; inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas; graced by celestials and Danavas and
Gandharbas and Kinnaras; and filled with mild deer; fre-
quented by the feathered tribes ; crowded with Brahmarshis ;
with Devarshis inhabiting it; aye teeming with high-souled
ones of accomplished ascetic success and resembling fire;
the another region of Brahm& ; graceful; and adorned on all
sides with high-souled saints and V&lakhilyas and Vaikha-
nasas resembling Brahma, feeding on water or air, or living
on withered leaves, or subsisting on fruits and roots,and self-
controlled, and free from faults, and of vanquished senses,
aod engaged in reciting mantras and performing homas.


SECTION Lit.


Uron seeing that foremost of those reciting mantras
the highly powerful and heroic Vigwamitra, exceedingly
delighted, bowed unto him in humility. And having enquired
as to the pleasantness of Vigwamitra’s journey,the high-souled
and adorable Vasishtha ordered a seat for the former.


BALARANDAM., 133


And on the intetligent Vigw&mitra having been seated, that
best of ascetics properly entertained him with fruits and
roots. And having accepted Vasishtha’s hospitality, that
foremost of mouarchs, the exceedingly energetic Vigwamitra,
then enquired of Vasishtha as to the welfare of his asceticism,
his Agnihkotras, and his disciples, and his trees. Thereupon
Vasishtha communicated the welfare of all unto that best of
kings. Then Brahma’s son, Vasishtha, of fierce austerities,
the best of those reciting mantras, asked Vigwamitra, seated
at his ease, saying—‘O king, is it well with thee? And,
O king, dost thou rule thy subjects,pleasing them consistently”
with royal duties? And, O virtuous one, are thy retainers
maintained on salaries from the kingdom? Do they abide
by thy mandates? And, O destroyer of foes, hast thou
vanquished thy enemies? And, O repressor of foes, is
it well with thee as to, O most powerful of men, thy forces,
exchequer, and friends, and, G sinless one, sons and grgnd-
sons?’ Thereupon, the highly powerful king, Vi¢wamitra,
with humility communicated unto Vasishtha his complete
welfare. And having conversed for a long time, those virtu-
ous ones, experiencing exceeding joy, ministered unto ofh
other's delight. Then, O descendant of Raghu, after fhe
conversation had ended, the adorable Vasishtha, smiling
addressed Vigwamitra, saying,—‘O highly powerful one, %
desire to properly entertain thee of immeasurable power, as
well as thy forces,—do thou, therefore, accept my hospitality.
Do thou receive the hospitality which I extend unto thee. O
king, thou art the foremost of guests, and art worthy of assi-
duous homage. Being thus addressed by Vasishtha, that
mighty ascetic, king Vigwmitra, said,—‘Even by this word
of thine relative to receiving me, hast thou in fact dofle so,
And, O worshipful one, even with the fruits and roots that
are in thy asylum, with the water for washing my feet, and
for sipping,—yea, with the sight of thy revered self, have
I been, O profoundly wise one, excellently entertained


124 RAMAPANA.


by thee, who art thyself worthy of homage. I bow unto
thee. I will go now. Do thou regard me with a friendly
eye.’ As the king was speaking thus, the righteous-souled
and generous Vasishtha again and again pressed him to
accept his hospitality. Then GAdhi’s son answered Vasishtha,
‘Very well, O potent ascetic,—let that be which findeth
favor in thy sight.’ This having been said by him, Vasishtha,
the best of those reciting mantras, joyfully called his sacri-
ficial dappled cow whose sins had been washed away,—'O
Savala! do thou come soon; and hear my words. I intend
to entertain this royal saint together with his forces. Do
thou enable me to entertain him, by yielding excellent viands,
And, O divine one, O thou that conferrest everything that
is desired, do thou grant everyone whatever he asketh
anong edibles impregnated with the six tastes. And do
thou, O Saval&, speedily create sapid viands to be chewed,
sucked, licked or drunk’.”


SECTION Lilt.


VT nus addressed by Vasishtha, that bestower of all that
was desired, Saval&, O destroyer of thy foes, brought forth
everything that was desired by everyone. And she produced
sugarcanes, and honey, and fried rice, and excellent Marrey-
ag,* and costly drinks,and various viands, and heaps of warm
rice resembling hills, and other kinds of edibles, and soups,
and Dadhikulyds,t together with silver plates by thousands
filled with meats of diverse tastes. And, O Raima, that army
of Vicwdmitra consisting of cheerful and stout men being
superbly entertained by Vasishtha, became exceedingly
gratified. And the royal saint, Vigwamitra himself, together
with the priests and Brabmanas and the inmates of the inner


* A kind of wine prepared from molasses. —T.
+ A preparation of milk and rice.—T.


BILAKANDAM. 135


apartment, was also heartily filled. And being hospitably
entertained with his courtiers and counsellors and retainers,
he, exceedingly delighted, spoke unto. Vasishtha, saying,--
‘Received and excellently entertained have I been by thee, O
Br&hmana, who thyself art worthy of being honored. Do
thou, O thou conversant with speech, listen tome. | will tell
thee a word. Do thou bestow on me Saval& for an hundred
thousand kine. O worshipful one, verily this one is a jewel ;
and as it is the function ot kings to acquire jewels, uo thou
confer on me Savala ; for, O twice-born one, this one by right
belongs unto me,’ Thus addressed by Vigwamitra the right-
¢ous and adorable Vasishtha—best of ascetics—replied unto
that lord of earth,—‘O king, neither for an hundred thousand
nor for an hundred otf of kine, nor yet for heaps
ot silver, will I part with Savala. O subduer of enemies,
Ubis one deserves not to be separated from my side.
Even like unto the fame of the mighty, this Savala is ewer
joined with me. My oblations to the gods and the Pitris as
well as my subsistence itself are established even in her,
And my Agnihotras,* Vali,y and Homat depend upon her;
and, O royal saint, my Sudhdkdras and Vashatkérs§ as wefi
as my various lore depend upon her. All this is so; there is
no doubt about it. Verily she is my all; and in ber do I find
my delight. And many are the reasons, O king, why I can-
not give unto the Salava.’ Thus addressed by Vasishtha,
that one versed in speech, Vi¢wamitra, eagerly rejoined,—‘I~
shall confer upon thee fourteen thousand elephants decked
in gold chains and gold neck-ornaments and hooks; and [
will confer upon thee eight hundred golden cars furnished
with bells and each yoked with four white horses ;


* Maintainance of the perpetual fire—T.

+ Offerings to the spirits of air—T.

+ Burnt offerings.—T.

$ Sacrifices performed with the exclamation of Sw¢hd and Vashaf respect-
ively.—T.


126 REMAY ANA,


and, O thou of auspicious vows, I will confer upon thee one
thousand and ten high mettled horses of noble breeds ; and
I will confer upon thee a Zof# of youthful and variegated
kine,—do thou grant unto me Savala. And as much of gems
and gold, O best of regenerate ones, as thou wilt ask for,
shall I bestow upon thee: do thou grant me Savala.’ Thus
besought by the intelligent Vigwimitra, that adorable one
replied, saying,—‘O king, Savalé 1 will not by any means
give. This is verily my jewel: this is verily my riches: this
is verily my all: this is verily my subsistence. And this is
my Darsa,* and this my Paurnamasa,t and this my various
sacrifices with dakshinas ;} and, O king, this my various rites.
This, O king, is without doubt, the root of all my rites. And
what need of dilating? This one bestowing everything that
is desired will I not part with.”


SECTION Liv


Yew

HEN the ascetic Vasishtha would not part with
the cow of plenty, then Vigwamitra, O R&ma, forced
SavalA away. And, O Rama, carried away by that high-
souled king, Saval& stricken with grief and afflicted with
“sorrow, bethought herself, weeping,—‘Have I been forsaken
by the high-souled Vasishtha that the royal retainers carry
me off thus aggrieved? What wrong have I done unto
that mighty ascetic of concentrated spirit, that, knowing me
to be faultless, that righteous one leaveth her that was devoted


* Bi-monthly sacrifice, petformed at change of the moon by persons main-
taining a perpetual fire—T.

+ A ceremony performed at the full of the moon by persons maintaining a
perpetual fire. —T. °

} Gilts to Brahmanas on occasions of sacrifice.~T.


BALARANDAM. 127


unto his service? Revolving this in her mind and sighing
again and again, she darted unto where the pre-eminently
energetic Vasishtha was ; and defeating those servants (of
the king), she with the speed of the wind, appeared at the
feet of that high-souled one. And weeping Saval& having
the voice of clouds, standing before Vasishtha, spoke in
distressful accents,—‘O Brahma’s son, wherefore have I been
forsaken by thee,—that the servants of the king were carrying
me from off thy presence?” Thus addressed the Brahmarshi
said these words unto that one aggrieved, and of heart afflict «
ed with sorrow, and like unto a sister,—‘O Savala, not that
I forsake thee; nor hast thou done me any wrong. But this
mighty king proud of his prowess hath been carrying thee
away. Surely, my strength is not equal to his. More speci-
ally, he is a king, a powerful king,—more particularly, this
day he should not be slain by me (inasmuch as he is my
guest): he is a Kshatriya and lord of earth. And he is fofe-
most in might by virtue of possessing this entire Akshauhint
abounding in elephants and horses and cars and standards,
and pennons on elephants.’ Thus addressed by Vasishtha,
that one cognizant of words humbly said in reply unto that
Brahmarshi of incomparable power,—'The might of the
Kshatriyas is not great—the Brahmanas are more mighty
than they. O Brahmana, superhuman is the power of the
Brihmanas, excelling that of the Kshatriyas, Thy power is
immeasurable; and the exceedingly energetic Vigwamitra®
is not as powerful as thyself. Thy energy is unequalled.
O highly energetic one, do thou command me bursting with
-Brihma forces: the pride, power and endeavours of that
wicked one will f bring down.’ Thus accosted by her, the
highly famous Vasishtha, O Rama, said,—‘Create thou forces
capable of crushing the forces of the enemy.’ Hearing
those words of his, Suravi created (an army). And, O king,
Pahlavas by hundreds brought into being by her lowing,
begin even in Vigwamitra’s sight to commit havoc upon his


m8. RAMAYANA.


forces. Thereat, exceedingly angered, with eyes expanded in
ire, that king commenced to slay the Pahlavas with various
weapons. And beholding the Pahlavas by hundreds afflicted
hy Vi¢w4mitra, she again created grim-visaged Sakas mixed
Yavanas. And the field became thronged with the Sakas
mixed with Yavanas, of dazzling splendour, exceedingly fierce
resembling golden filaments, bearing sharp scimitars and
adzes, and clad in yellow apparel. And that entire host (of
Vigwamitra) was being consumed by them like unto flaming
fires. Then the exceedingly powerful Vig¢wdmitra hurled
weapons at them; and with these the Yavanas, Kimvoyas
and Varvaras* became sore afflicted.”


SECTION tv.


‘4 Ann beholding them sore harassed, and overwhelmed
by VigwAmitra’s weapons, Vasishtha directed (Saval&) saying,
—'O cow of plenty, do thou create (fresh troops), through
thy Yoga power.’ And from her roar, there came into being
Eamvojas, resembling the Sun. And from her udders sprang
Varvaras, arms in hand; and from her mysterious parts,
Yavanas ; fram her anus, Sakas; and from the pores of her
skin, those barbarians,—Haritas and Kiratas. And, O des-
cendant of Raghu, anon Vigw&mitra’s entire host consisting

“of foot, and elephant, and horse, and cars, was exterminated
by them. And seeing the army annihilated by the high-
souled Vasishtha, the hundred sons of Vigwamitra, equipped
with various weapons, rushed in high ire against that best of
mantra-reciting ones. Thereupon, uttering a roar, that mighty
ascetic consumed them quite. And in a moment, Vigwamitra’s
sons together with horse and car and foot were reduced to
ashes by the high-souled Vasishtha. And witnessing them all
destroyed, together with the army, the illustrious Vi¢wAmitra,


* Barbarians. —T.


BALAKANDAM. 129


mitra, covered with shame, became plunged in thought ; and
like unto a tideless ocean or a fangless snake, he instantly be-
came shorn ofhis effulgence, like unto the sun overwhelmed hy
Rabu.* And deprived of his forces and sons, he appeared like
a bird bereft of its wings ; and Josing his entire army and with
it the high spirits that it had inspired him with, his heart died
within him. Then entrusting one of his (remaining) sons
with the sovereignty, saying,—‘Do thou rule the earth agree-
ably to the duties of the Kshatriya,’ he went into the forest,
And repairing to the side of the Himavat inhabited by
Kinnaras and Serpents, that one of mighty asceticism began
to perform austerities with the view of propitiating Mahade-
va. And on a certain occasion that lord of the celestials,
Vrishadwaja,t intending to confer a boon, appeared be-
fore the mighty ascetic Vigwamitra,—'What for, O king,
art thou performing penance ? Do thou unfold what thou
hast to say. Lam for conferring a boon: do thou express
what boon thou wouldst obtain.” Thus addressed by that
god, that performer of mighty austerities, VigwAmitra, bow-
ing down unto him, addressed him, saying,—'If, O might:
god, thou art pleased (with me), do thou confer upon me the
science of archery with all its mysteries and mantras, as
well as its virtues of helping from far and near. And, Q
sinless one, may all those weapons that are with the celestials
and the Dénaves and the Afaharsh’s and the Gandharbas ands
the Yakshas, and the Rakshas, shine on me! May this my de-
sire be granted me through thy grace, O god of gods! There-
upon, saying, ~‘Be it so’—the lord of the celestials vanished.
And obtaining the arms from the lord of the celestials, the
mighty Vigwamitra, naturally haughty became swelled with


* A Daitya with the tail of a dragon, whose head was severed from his
body by Vishnu ; but being immortal the head and tail retained their separate
existence, and being transfered to the stellar sphere, became the author of
eclipses.—T.

$ An appellation of Siva ; meaning, who hath the bull for his vehicle.—T.


17


130 RAMAYANA.


insolence. And surcharged with energy, like unto the sca
during the equinox, he considered, O Rama, as if that fore-
most -of saints, Vasishtha, was already slain. And repairing
to Vasishtha's asylum, the king began to discharge weapons,
capable of burning down the hermitage. And beholding
those weapons discharged by the intelligent Vigw&mitra,
the ascetics, overtaken by fear, by hundreds began to fly.
And Vasishtha’s disciples as well as the animals and birds
inhabiting there, fled in all directions by thousands, And for
a time the hermitage of the high-souled Vasishtha was bare
of living beings, and still like unto a wilderness, though
Vasishtha cried again and again,—'Do not fear. To-day
wilt I slay Gadhi’s son, even as the sun (destroys) mist.’
Having said this,that best of mantra-reciting ones, Vasishtha,
in high wrath, addressed Vigwamitra, saying,—‘Since, O fool,
thou hast destroyed this hermitage that had been prospering
for a long time, thou of execrable ways shalt not live long,’
Saying this, he, transported with wrath, and like unto the
smoking flame at universal dissolution, speedily upraised a
staff resembling another mace of Yama itsell.”


SECTION LVI.


ST \ius addressed by Vasishtha, the mighty Vigwamitra,
aiming a fiery weapon, said,—'Stay! Stay! The worshipful
Vasishtha also on his part, raising a Brahma staff resembling
another staff of Kala, exclaimed in wrath,—‘Wretch ofa
Kshatriya! here am I,—do thou display the might thou art
master of. To-day, O Gadhi’s son, willl humble thy pride
of arms. Thou disgrace of thy race, where is thy Kshatriya
might, and where my high Brahma energy? Do thou behold
my superhuman Brahma energy.’ And even as water allaycth
the fierceness of a flame, the Brahma staff quenched the


BALAKANDAM. 137


energy of the powerful fiery weapon discharged by Gadhi's
son, Then G&dhi’s son, waxing wroth, discharged Varuna
and Raudra and Aindra and P&asupata and Aishika weap-
ons. And, Manava, and Mohana, and Gandharba, and
Swapana, and Jrimbhana, and Mohana, and Santapana, and
Vildpana, and Soshana, and Daruna, and Vajra hard to baffle,
and Brahmap4ga, and Kalapaga and Varunapaga, and
Pinika (favorite of Siva), and the two Asanis, wet and dry,
and the Danda weapon, and Paig&cha, and the Krauncha,
weapon, and Dharmachakra, and Kalachakra, and Vishu-
chakra and Vayavya, and Mathana, and the Haragiras
weapon, and the twin Saktis, hurled he, and Kank@la, and
Mushala, and the mighty weapon Vidyadhara, and the
terrible Kala weapon, and the dreadful Trisula weapon, and
Kapala, and Kankana,—all these weapons hurled he (Vig-
wimitra), at that best of mantra-reciting ones, O descendant
of Raghu, And it was wonderful to behold. But Brahma's
son baffled all those by means of his staff. And on those
(weapons) being resisted, the son of Gadhi hurled a Brahma
weapon. And on that weapon being discharged, the deities
with Agni at their head, and the Devarshis, and the Gan-
dharbas, and the mighty Serpents, became afflicted with fear.
And on that Brahma weapon being discharged, all the three
worlds became exceedingly alarmed. And, O Raghu’s des-
cendant, Vasishtha by virtue of his Brahma energy completee
ly baffled that terrible Brahma weapon. And when the
high-souled Vasishtha had baffled the Brahma weapon, his
form became fierce and terrible, capable of striking terror
into the three worlds. And’ from the pores of his body,
resembling a smoking flame, dartéd out scintillations of fire.
And resembling another staff of Yama, the Brahma/staff rais-
ed by Vasishtha’s arm flamed like unto the smokeless fire at
the universal dissolution. ‘Then the ascetics ina body fell
to eulogizing that best of mantra-reciting ones, Vasishtha,
saying,—‘Thy might, O Brahmana, is infallible. Do thou rein


132 RAMAYANA,


in (the Brahma) energy, by thy own. O Brahmana, Vigwamitra
of mighty strergth hath been subdued by thee. Infallible is
thy extraordinary might. Let the creatures now be relieved
from their distress.’ Thus addressed, that highly energetic
one of rigid austerities, became pacified. And Vigwamitra,
_being put down, heaving a sigh, said,—-‘Fie upon the Ksha-
triya might : the strength begot of Brahma energy, is might
indeed. By one Brahma staff hath all my weapons been put
to the rout, Beholding this, I with a placid mind and senses


‘will engage in mighty austerities——which shall earn for me
Brahmanahood.”


SECTION LVI.


eT EN with his heart burning, in consequence of the
remembrance of his humiliation, and having made enemies
with that high-souled one, Vigwamitra of mighty asceticism
sighing, and sighing, went towards the south, in company
with his queen, and became engaged in dreadful austerities,
O Raghava. And subsisting on fruits and roots, and res-
training his senses, he performed the most rigid austerities,
And four sons engaged in observing truth and duty—
lavishpanda, Madhushpanda, Drihanetra, and Mah&ratha,*
were born unto him. And when a thousand years had been
completed, the Grand-sire of al], Brahma, addressed the
ascetic, Vigwimitra in sweet words , saying,~'O son of
Kugika, the regions of the Rajarshis have been won by
thee'through thy austerities. And on account of this thy
asceticism, we recognize thee asa Rajarshi’ Having said
this, the highly energetic prime Lord of all creature went
to the celestial regions in company with the celestials.


* Some texts have Mahodara.—T.


BALAKANDAM. 133


Hearing this, VigwAmitra hanging down his head from shame
and possessed by a mighty sorrow, said, in piteous accents,
—I have performed rigid austerities,—yet the deities and
the saints recognise me only as a Rajarshi. I do not con-
sider the fruit of my asceticism as gained.’ Ascertaining
this in his mind, that righteous and highly composed one
of high austerities, O Kakuststha, again engaged in penances.
And, O Raghava, it came to pass that at this time, that
enhancer of Ikshwaku’s line, the celebrated and truthful
Trisanku of subdued sense made up his mind, saying,—‘ r
will perform a sacrifice, and in body win the prime way of the
celestials.’ And summoning Vasishtha, he unfolded his mind
unto him. And on the high-souled Vasishtha saying,—'l
am incapable of doing this, and disregarded by the latter,
the King went towards the southern quarter. And with the
view of securing success to his endeavours, the king repajed
to where Vasishtha’s sons had for a long time been per-
forming austerities. And the highly energetic Trisanku
saw the hundred exceedingly effulgent sons of Vasishtha
engaged in austerities with fixed faculties. And approaching
all those high-souted sons of his spiritual guide, aud paying
them reverence he, hanging down his head from shame,
with clasped hands, addressed those mighty spirits, saying
—'I seek protection of ye ; and I take refuge in ye capable
of conferring it. Disregarded have I been, good betide ya
by the high-souled Vasishtha. I have set my heart upon
celebrating a mighty sacrifice


it behoveth ye to command me.
And, with the view of propitiating ye, I, lowly bowing down
my head, beseech the sons of my spiritual guide,—Brahmanas
ever staying by asceticism,—do fe with coliected mindé offi-
ciate in this sacrifice, so that success may be secured unto
me ; and that in body I may attain the regions of the celes-
tials. Disregarded by the ascetic Vasishtha, other way find
I none, ye anchorets, except the sons of my spiritual guide.
To the Ikshwakus, their preceptor is their prime way.


134 RAMAYANA.


Therefore alter him (Vasishtha), even ye are the objects
of my adoration.’”


SECTION uviil.


TT e :

EARING Trisanku’s speech, the hundred sons of the
saint, Q Rama, excited by wrath, said these words unto the
‘king, —'Disregarded hast thou been, O thou of perverse
understanding, by our truth-telling sire,—why, then, having
passed him hy, do thou seek for others’ help? To the
Ikshwakus, their spiritual guide is their prime way ; nor art
thou capable of setting at naught the words of that truth-
telling one, That worshipful saint said, that he was incapa-
ble (of accomplishing this),—how can we then undertake that
sacrifice ? Thou art ignorant, O foremost ofmen. Do thou
speedily retrace thy steps. And, O king, that adorable
one is competent to officiate at the sacrifice itself of the three
worlds, how can we then contribute to his dishonor ?”
Iearing those words of theirs, that king, wilh accents tre-
mulous with passion, again addressed them, saying,—‘Dis-
regarded by that worshipful one as well as by the sons of
my spiritual guide, I will go after another way,—so peace be
unto ye, ascetics’ The saint's sons, on their part, hearing
that speech couching a fierce intent, cursed him in exceeding
wrath, saying,—'Thou shalt come by Chandala-hood,' Having
said this, those high-souled ones entered cach into his dwell-
ing. And when the night had gone by, the king came by Chan-
dalaood. Andclad in a blue gath, blue and rough of person,
having a short head of hair, wearing a garland composed of
materials culled from a cemetery,his body bedaubed with ashes
from the same quarter, he was decked out with iron ornaments.
And, O Rama, beholding him in the guise of a Chandala,
his counseHors as well as followers, renouncing him, fled


BALARANDAM. 135


in abody. And, O Kakutstha, maintaining himself in pati-
ence, the monarch burning day and night, all alone went
unto the ascetic Vigwamitra. And beholding the disappointéd
king in the guise of a Chandala, the ascetic O Rima, was
touched with pity. And from commiseration,that pre-eminently
pious and excecdingly energetic one said unto that king
frightful to behold, saying,—‘Good betide thee, O heroic
Jord of Ayodhya, thou hast fallen into Chandala-hood through
a curse, what is the purpose of thy coming, O highly
powerful prince?) Hearing him, the king conversant with
words, fallen into Chandila-hood, with folded hands, said
unto that one versed in speech—Disregarded had 1 been
by my spiritual guide as well as his sons. And far from
attaining my desire,! came by this calamity. O thou of placid
presence, I had desired to repair unto heaven in body, Ly
me have an hundred sacrifices been performed,—but yet,do
I not obtain the fruit thereof. I have never before told an
untruth ; and I swear by my Kshatriya morality, that albeit
fallen on evil days, I will never do so in future, O gentle one.
And sacrifices I have celebrated many,—and J have ruled my
people in righteousness ; and I have pleased my preceptots
by my character and conduct. But, O best of ascetics, now
endeavouring to do my duty and intending to perform a
sacrifice, I have failed in enlisting the good graces of my
spiritual guides. Therefore do I consider Destiny as supremeg
and action as nothing, Destiny overiaketh all: Destiny is
the prime way. Therefore it behovcth thee to grant thy
favor unto me extremely distressed, who crave thy favor,
and, good betide thee, whose endeavours have been baiiled
by Destiny. Other way will E w@nd none; nor is theré any
other refuge forme. It behoveth thee to meet Destiny with


exertion’.”


136 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LIX.


(14

"W ue the king had spoken thus, Kucika’s son, moved
with pity, said these sweet words unto the king who had
undergone Chand4la-hood,—‘O descendant of Ikshwaku, hast
thou had a pleasant journey? I know thee well, O highly
virtuous one. Refuge will I grant thee,—so fear not, O best
‘of monarchs. I shall summon ail ihe pious Maharshis, who
shall assist at the sacrifice, O king,—and then thou wilt be
able to accomplish thy purpose easily. And should the
guise thou hast come by in virtue of thy preceptor’s curse,
cling to thee yet, thou wilt bodily repair unto heaven in this
form. And since appearing before Kugika’s son, thou hast
taken his refuge, I consider heaven, O lord of men, as if
within thy grasp. Having said this, that exceedingly
energetic one ordered his highly virtuous and profoundly
wise sons to provide the sacrificial necessaries. And sum-
moning his disciples, he said,—‘Do ye by my command
bring hither all the saints together with Vasishtha’s sons ;
and our friends and their disciples and the family priests
variously versed in lore. Aud should any summoned by my
mandate, say aught, do ye fully represent unto me the ex-
pression of slight.’ Hearing his speech, they set out in
different directions ; and Brahmavadis* began to pour in
from various countries. And the disciples (of Vigwa&mitra)
returning, fully communicated unto that ascetic of flaming
energy the words of the Brahmavadis, saying,—‘Hearing
thy message, the regenerate ones resident in every part will
come hither,~and some have already arrived—all save
Mahodaya and the hundred sons of Vasishtha. Do thou, O
foremost of ascetics, listen to the words that they said with
accents tremulous with emotion-~How can celestials


* A Brakmavadi is one who maintains that all things are Spirit.—T.


BALAKANDAM. 137


and saints partake of offerings in the court of him that in
addition to being a Chandala, hath for his priest a Kshatriya?
And how can high-souled Brahmanas, patronized by Vicw4-
mitra, attain to heaven, having partaken of a Chandala’s
fare ?—These cruel words, O powerful ascetic, did Vasish-
tha’s sons together with Mahodaya, utter with reddened
eyes. Hearing those words of theirs, that foremost of asce-
tics, with eyes reddened in anger, wrathfully cried,—‘Since
blameless as | am, those wicked-minded ones censure me
practising fierce austerities, they shall, without doubt, be”
reduced to ashes. And this very day bound by the noose of
K4la, meeting with destruction at the hands of Viviswata’s
son,* they shall for seven hundred births range these worlds,
procuring dead men’s clothes, always feeding on dogs’flesh,
going by the name of Mushtikas, void of abhorrence, and
of frightful, distorted forms and foul practices. And wicked
Mahodaya also hath blamed me although undeserving of
blame ; therefore, reproved of all, he shall undergo Nishada-
hood. And becoming cruel and engaged in taking life, he
shall through my ire fare wretchedly for a long lapse of time.’
Having uttered this in the assembly of saints, that mighty
ascetic, the highly powerful Vigwamitra of fierce asceticism
paused,”


SECTION LX,


Ano knowing (by virtue of his Yoga power) Vasishtha’s
sons together with Mahodaya as edestroyed in consequence
of his ascetic energy, the highly powerful Vigwamitra
said in the midst of the saints,—‘This descendant of
Ikshwaku, the famous Trisanku, is virtuous and munificent
and hath taken refuge in me, with the view of attaining the


* Yama.—t.


18


138 RAMAYANA.


celestial regions in his own person. Therefore do thou
engage with me in the sacrifice, so that he may bodily repair
unto heaven.’ Hearing Vigwamitra’s words, the pious
Maharshis readily spoke in harmony with duty, saying,—‘This
descendant of Kugika is a highly irascible ascetic,—therefore
what he saith should, without doubt, be performed. The
worshipful one is like unto fire, and, if angered, may curse us.
Therefore, let us engage in this sacrifice, so that Ikshw4ku’s
descendant through the potency of Vigwamitra may repair
“unto heaven in person. Then let us engage in this sacrifice.’
Saying this, the sages entered upon the ceremony sand in
that sacrifice the highly energetic Vigwamitra acted as the
priest, And Ritwijas versed in mantras performed every
thing in order with manfras, in accordance with scripture and
prescription. Then after along time, Vigw&mitra of mighty
augterities invoked thither all the celestials for receiving
their respective shares ; but the deities did not come to receive
them. Thereupon, getting into a wrath, the mighty ascetic
Vigwamitra, lifting up a ladle, wrathfully spoke unto Trisanku,
—'O lord of men, do thou witness the prowess of my self-
earned asceticism. I shall by dint of my asceticism take
thee bodily unto heaven. And, O king, do thou in person
repair unto heaven hard to attain. Something yet remains
in me of the self-earned fruit of my asceticism; and, O king,
through the energy of that asceticism, do thou repair unto
heaven in person.” And on the ascetic saying this, O
K&kutstha, that lord of men bodily ascended heaven in the
very sight of the anchorets. And beholding Trisanku risen
toheaven, the subduer of Paka* together with all the celes-
tials‘said,—‘O Trisanku, turn thee back. Thou hast not
earned abode in heaven. O fool, thou hast been blighted by
the curse of thy spiritual guide. Do thou therefore drop
down headlong. The great Indra having spoken thus,
Trisanku fell down, crying unto the ascetic Vi¢wamitra,—


* Indra —T.


BALAKANDAM. 139


‘Save me, save me.’ Thercupon, hearing his distressful
cries, Kaugika waxed mightily wroth, and exclaimed,—‘Stay,
stay.” And in the midst of the ascetics, like unto another
Prajipati, he created other seven Rishis* on the Southern
way; and also, overwhelmed with wrath created another
set of stars. And colliedt with passion, that illustrious
one in the midst of the ascetics created another system
of stars in the southern direction. And, saying,—‘t will
create another Indra, or the world (that I create) shall
be without an Indra’ And in anger, he went the lengtle
of creating celestials. Thereupon, in trepidation, the saints
and the celestials and the Aswras humbly addressed the high-
souled Vicwamitra thus,—'This king, O highly exalted one,
hath been visited with the curse of his preceptor,—therefore,
© ascetic, he deserves not to ascend heaven in person,’ Hear-
ing those words of theirs, that best of anchorcts, Kaugika,
in company with the celestials, said these pregnant word’,—
'Good betide ye, I have vowed unto this king, Trisanku’s
bodily ascension unto heaven,—therefore, I dare not falsify
my vow. Let Trisanku evermore dwell ia heaven in person,
and let these stars created by me verily endure as longas
the worlds. This it behoveth ye, ye gods, to ordain.
Thus addressed, the deities answered that best of ascetics,
saying,—‘So be it, good betide thee! All these innumerable
stars, O foremost of anchorets, shall remain in the firmament
outside the path of Vai¢w4nara ;t and shining in their splen-
dour, Trisanku shall dwell with bended head, like unto an
immortal. And all these luminous bodies shall follow that
best of kings, illustrious and successful, as if he had attained
heaven itself.’ And the virtuous and exceedingly energetic
Vigwamitra, thus assured by the celestials, said in the midst


* Ursa major—T.

+ “And passion having my best judgment collied.”—T-
Othello.

} The Zodiac —T.


148 RAMAYANA,


of the saints,—Ye gods, excellent weil.’ Then, after the
sacrifice had concluded, the high-souled celestials and the
saints of ascetic wealth went to their respective regions, O
foremost of men.”


SECTION LX}.


oe
is ‘Ano, © puissant one, seeing those saints gone, the
highly energetic Vigwamitra addressed those inhabitants of
the forest, saying,—‘A mighty disturbance hath happened
in regard to the southern quarter: let us therefore repairing
to another region, carry on austerities. Ye high-souled
ones, in the west there are extensive tracts; and there
in Pushkara will we peaceably carry on our austerities.
THat asylum is really pleasant.’ Having said this, that
exceedingly energetic and mighty Muni* began to perform
terrible austerities subsisting on fruits and roots. And it
came to pass that at this time that mighty lord of Ayodhya,
Amvarisha, prepared for celebrating a sacrifice. And as he
was sacrificing, Indra stole away his sacrificial beast. And on
the beast being stolen, the priest said unto the king,—'O
king, the beast hath been stolen (away); and it hath been
dost through thy dereliction. And, O lord of men, his own
fault destroyeth the king that faileth to protect (the subjects).
And, O best of men, even this is the expiation : do thou,
while the ceremony lasts, speedily bring back the beast, or
bring a man (in its stead).’ Hearing the priest’s words, that
highly intelligent king began to range various countries
and provinces, cities, forests, and holy asylums, searching
for the beast, with a thousand kine (as the price thereof).
And, O child, it came to pass that arriving at Bhrigutunga,t
* Ascetic—T.
+ A mountain peak.—T.


BALAKANDAM. 141


he beheld Richika seated there in company with his wife
and sons, O descendant of Raghu. And bowing unto that
Brahmarshi flaming in asceticism, and propitiating him, the
exceedingly energetic royal saint of unparalleled cffulgence
having enquired as to his complete welfare, addressed
Richika,saying,—‘O highly pious one, O Bhrigu’s son,if,in
order that I may have a substitute for my sacrificial beast,
thou sell thy son, my desire I shall attain. I have ranged
every country ; but the beast I do not find. Therefore, it
behoveth thee to part with one of thy sons for price’ Thus
addressed the exceedingly energetic Richika replied,—'O
best of men, my first-born I willin no wise dispose of.’
Hearing the words of the high-souled Richika, their mother
spoke unto that foremost of men, Amvarisha, saying,—‘The
worshipful son of Bhrigu hath said that his first-born cannot
be disposed of,—do thou, O ford, also know that the yoyng-
est, Sunaka, is my favorite. Therefore my youngest son
will I not give untothee. O foremost of men, the eldest sons
are generally the best beloved of their fathers ; and the
youngest, of their mothers,—-therefore the youngest I would
retain.’ And when the ascetic as well as his wife had spoken
thus, the second son, Sunasepha, O Rama, himself said,—
‘My father would not sell the eldest ; nor my mother the
youngest,—therefore I consider even the second as dispos-
able. Do thou then, O prince, take me.’ When that ore
versed in the Veda had ended, that lord of men, O mighty-
armed descendant of Raghu, taking possession of Sunasepha,
by paying kotis of kine, and heaps of jewels, and gold and
silver by hundreds and thousands, went away exceedingly
delighted. And that royal saint,’ the exceedingly enetgetic
and highly famous Amvarisha, placing Sunasepha on his car,
speedily set out.”


142 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LXil.


“ A .

ND, O foremost of men, taking Sunasepha, that
illustrious king at noon rested in Pushkara, O descendant
of Raghu. And having arrived at the excellent Pushkara,
as the king was resting, the famous Sunasepha with an
aggrieved heartsawhis maternal uncle Vigwamitra in company
with some saints engaged inasceticism. Thereupon,witha woe-
‘begone countenance, and sore afflicted with fatigue and
thirst, he, O Rama, flung himself into (Vigwamitra’s) lap, and
said—'I have neither father, nor mother, nor relatives, nor
friends anywhere. It therefore behoves thee, O gentle one,
to save me in the interests of virtue, O foremost of ascetics.
And, O best of men, thou art the protector of all, and their
refyge. May the king have his desire and may I at the same
time, attaining long life, and undcteriorating, gain heaven,
having performed meritorious austerities! Do thou with a
delighted heart become arlord unto me that am without one.
And, O righteous one, even as a father rescueth a son, do
thou deliver me from this peril.” Hearing his words, VigwA-
mitra of mighty austerities, pacifying him by every means,
spoke unto his sons, saying,—'That in view of which fa-
thers beget well-wishing sons—the compassing of welfare in
the next world—is at hand, This youthful son of the ascetic
craveth my protection. Do ye, ye sons, accomplish my
desire by saving his life. Ye are all of virtuous deeds, ye
are all engaged in the observance of righteousness,—do
ye confer satisfaction upon Agni by one of ye becoming the
(sacrificial) beast of the lor& of men. Thus Sunasepha will
obtain protection, the sacrifice will be freed from hin-
derance, the deities will be pr«pitiated, and finally my
word will be made good.’ Hearing the ascetic’s words, his
sons, Madhuchchhanda andothers, © foremost of men, haugh-
tily and tauntingly answered,—‘O lord, how, neglecting


BELARANDAM. 343


thy own sons, thou desirest to deliver that of another ?
This we consider as heinous, even like unto eating one’s
own flesh.’ Hearing this speech of his sons, that best Of
anchorets, with eyes reddened with anger, said,—Disregard-
ing my words, ye have uttered this audacious and shocking
speech, disclaimed by morality, and capable of causing one’s
hair to stand on end. Therefore, becoming Mushtikas, and
living on dogs’ flesh, do ye all, even like Vasishtha’s sons,
inhabit the earth fora thousand years.’ Having cursed his
sons, that best of ascetics then, by all means cheering up the”
distressed Sunasepha as to his protection, addressed him,
saying,—‘Do thou donning on a zone made of Kuga, and
wearing a garland of red flowers, and bedaubing thy person
with red sandal paste, hymn Agni with manéras, approaching
the Vaishnava sacrificial stake; and, O ascetic’s son, (at
the same time) chaunt these two verses in that sacrifice of
Amvarisha. Then thou wilt attain success.’ Thereupon, with
a concentrated mind securing those two verses, Sunasepha
speedily presented himself before that Ieonine monarch,
saying,—'O lion of a king, O thou endued with high
intelligence, let us without delay repair hence. And, ’O
foremost of monarchs, do thou engage in the sacrifice and
commence upon the initiation.’ Hearing those words of
the ascetic’s son, the king, filled with delight, readily at once
repaired to the sacrificial ground. And with the consent @f
his court, the king fastened Sunasepha with a Kuga cord,
and investing him with a crimson apparel, tethered him to
the stake as the (sacrificial) beast. And, being bound (to
the stake), the ascetic’s son first of all duly hymned Agni,
and next those deities, Indra®and his younger brother.
Thereupon, gratified with the excellent eulogy, the thousand.
eyed Vasava conferred upon Sunasepha long life. And, O
foremost of men, that king also, having completed the
sacrifice, obtained the manifold fruit thereof through the
grace of the thousand-eyed deity, O Rama. And, O best of


144 RIMAPANA.


men, the righteous Vigw&mitra of mighty asceticism again
carried on austerities at Pushkara for ten hundred years.”


SECTION -Lxiil.


&e

And when the thousand years had been completed and
the mighty ascetic had accomplished his vow, the celestials
in a body desirous of conferring upon him the fruit thereof,
‘appeared before him. And the exceedingly effulgent
Brahma addressed him in soothing words, saying,—'Thou
art henceforth a saint, good unto thee,—and (this eminence)
thou hast attained through thy own laudable exertions.’
Having spoken thus unto him, the Jord of celestials returned
to heaven. And Vigwdmitra of mighty energy became again
engaged in rigid austerities. And, O foremost of men, it
came to pass that after a long lapse of time that prime of
Apsaras, Menak&, was at that time performing her ablutions
in Pushkara, and she was observed by Kugika’s son, like unto
lightning among clouds. And coming under the control of
Kandarpa,* the anchoret spoke unto her, saying,—‘O Apsari,
hath thy journey been a pleasant one? Do thou abide in my
asylum. Do thou favor me; for, good betide thee, I have
been rendered senseless by Madana,’* Thus addressed, that
cne of shapely hips began to dwell there. And mighty was
the hinderance that befell Vigwimitra as regarded his asce-
ticism, as she, O Righava, staying in that asylum of his,
pleasantly spent five and five years, O gentle one. And after
this period had gone by, overwhelmed with shame and afflict-
ed with anxiety and grief{ the mighty ascetic Vicwamitra
impatiently thought, O son of Raghu, that all this mighty loss
of austerities was the work of the celestials. And deprived of
his senses by lust, the decade had passed away imperceptibly
as if it were one day and night ; and this impediment stood in


* Cupid.—T.


BALAKANDAM. 45


the way of his austerities. And heaving’a sigh, that best of
ascetics burned in repentance. And with sweet words,
renouncing the terrified and trembling Menak4 standing with
clasped hands, Kugika’s son, Vigwamiira, O Rama, went to
the northern mountains. And practising the Brakmacharyya
mode of life with the intention of subduing lust, that highly
famous one engaged in arduous austerilies on the banks of
the Kaugiki. And as he was thus engaged ‘in profound eus-
terities on the northern mountain, a thousand years, O Rama
passed away, Then taking counsel together, the celestials”
and the saints appeared before (Brahma), saying,—'Let
Kugika’s son obtain the title of Maharshi.’ Hearing the
words of the celestials, the Grand-sire of all addressed the
ascetic Vigwamitra, in these sweet words,—O mighty saint,
hast thou had a pleasant journey? Satisfied with thy fierce
austerities, O Kaugika, I confer upon thee the eminence, of
the foremost saintship.’ Hearing Brahm&’s speech, the
anchoret Vigwimitra bowing down thus answered the Grande
sire with clasped hands,—'The incomparable title of Brah-
marshi is to be won by one by performing sterling works.
And since thou hast not addressed me (by that title, f
appears that I have not yet succeeded in subduing my senses.’*
Thereupon Brahma said unto him,—'Do thou exert thyself
until thou conquer thy senses? Saying this, Brahma went to
heaven. And when the celestials hid gone, the mighty
ascetic, Vigwamitra, with upraised arms, and without any
support, and subsisting on air, began to perform penances,
And in summer, the ascetic surrounded himself with five fires,
and in rains remained in an uncovered place, and in winter
day and night stood submerged if water. Thus passed*by a
thousand ycars of terrible penances. And on the mighty


* The rext is very faulty. The literal meaning would be, “since thou hast
Note. 1 have subdued my senses,’ which would be absurd. 1 have therefore
rendered the passage freely.—T.


146 RAMAYANA,


ascetic Vigwamitra’ being engaged in austerities, great was
the agitation that exercised the celestials and VAsav, in
particular. And Sakra together with the Maruts spoke unto
Rambhi these words, fraught with weal uato himself, and


woe unto Kangika’.”


SECTION LXIV.


en ee ae


66 6 ;

O Ramana, this mighty service thou wilt have to per-
form in the interest of the celestiats;—even to take Kaugika
with the witchery of love.’ Thus addressed by the intelligent
thousand-eyed deity, the Apsari, O R&ma, with clasped
palms, thus bashfully answered the chief of the celestials,—
‘O lord of the celestials, this mighty ascetic, VigwAmitra, is a
teyrible person ; and, without doubt, he will, O divine one,
waxing wroth, curse me, And O god, even this is my
fear, and therefore it behoveth thee to favor me.’ Thus ap-
prehensively addressed by her in fear, the thousand-eyed one
answered that damsel trembling and staying with clasped
hands,—'Never fear, O Rambha, good unto thee! Do thou
perform my bidding. Assuming the form of a coel, captivating
the heart, I will in this spring crowned with graceful trees,
stay by thy side in company with Kandarpa. And do thou
adding unto thy beauty, diverse blandishments bewitch this
ascetic, Kugika’s son, O gentle one ? Hearing Indra’s words,
that comely damsel of luminous smiles, heightening her
charms exceedingly, inspired Vigwamitra with desire. And
he listened to the mellifluous strains of the coel; and with a
delighted heart, he behel the fair one. Anon, listening to
the warbling of the coel and her own incomparable singing,
as well as beholding Rambhi, the ascetic began to entertain
doubts. And knowing for certain that it was the thousand-
eyed deity who had devised all that, that foremost of anchor-
ets, Kucika’s son, overwhelmed with anger, cursed Rambhé,


BALAKANDAMN. va7


saying,—‘Since, O Rambha, thou endeavourest to seduce me
who is bent upon subduing his anger and lust, thou shalt, O
luckless one, remain as a stone for ten thousand years. Ana
ahighly energetic Brahmana equipped with ascetic energy,
will, O Rambha, deliver thee, stained because of my ire.’
Thus said that exceedingly energetic and mighty ascetic
Vigwimitra, and was filled with remorse unable to contain his
anger of heart. Andin consequence of his mighty curse,
Rambha was turned into a stone, Hearing the curse of the
mighty saint, both Kandarpa and Indra left the place. And,”
O Rama, on account of his anger, and his sense remaining
still unsubdued he found no rest from deterioration of ascetic
merit, And coming by decrease of ascetic merit, he thought
within himself,—'No more shail I suffer anger to exercise me,
—nor will I ever say anything to any. And I shall not
breathe for an hundred years; and controlling my sensg I
shall dry up my body. And so long as J do not attain
Brahmanahood as earned by my austerities, I shall suspending
my breath and abstaining from food, stay for a long lapse of
time. And engaged in austeritics, my form will not undergo
any deterioration.’ That foremost of ascetics bound himseff
by this unparalleled vow to lead a life of such self-denial.”


SECTION LXV. *


-—_—-—


 Anp forsaking the northern direction, the mighty AZunt,
O Rama, betaking himself to the Eastern quarter, became
engaged in dreadful austerities. And adopting the high"vow
of taciturnity for a thousand years, he, O Rama began to
perform the most signal and arduous austerities. And when
the thousaud years had been complete, many an impediment
tried the mighty Afuaz staying like the trunk of a tree, yet
could not anger enter his heart; and firmly determined


148 - RAMAYANA.


to shut out anger, he, O Rama, kept his asceticism from
deterioration, And, O foremost of the Raghus, when his vow
of a thousand years had been observed, that one of mighty
vows became desirous of feeding on boiled rice. And it came
to pass O best of the Raghus that at this time Indra assuming
the guise of a regenerate one, arked forthe rice. Thereupon
he gave it away unto the Vipra; and when the rice hud been
thus exhausted, that worshipful one of mighty austerities
, went without food, Nor, abiding by the vow of reticence,
did he say aught unto the Vipra. And he then again resumed
his dumb guise, restraining his breath at the same time. And
that puissant ascetic did dot breathe fora thousand years. And
as he restrained his breath, vapours began to issue out of his
head. And, at this, the three worlds being on fire became
as if afflicted with fear, And bewildered on account of the
entrgy of his asceticism, and shorn of their brightness, and
affiicted with anguish, he Devarshis and the Gandbarbas and
the Pannagas and the Uragas and the Rakshasas in a body
addressed the Pitamaha* saying,—'O divine one, various
were the means by which we endeavoured to affect the mighty
Muni Vigwimitra with covetuousness and lust; but for all
that he increaseth in asceticism. Nor do we perceive in him
ever so little of anger or fust. And if thou do not confer
upon him what his mind desireth to have, he will annihilate
Yhe three worlds with all that is mobile and immobile in them.
And the ten cardinal points are disconsolate : and nothing
can be discovered therein. And the seas are vexed, and the
mountains riven. And the earth shaketh, and the winds
keep steadily blowing. And, O Brahmana, we do not know
how to remedy, this. ‘And ev ery one is inactive like an infidel.
And the three worlds look as if stupified, with their minds
exceedingly exercised. And by virtue of that mighty saint's
energy, the sun itself hath been deprived of his splendour.


* Zit. grand-iather. Here, a name of BrahmA meaning, the great father
of all.—T.


BALAKANDAMN. lag


Therefore, O god, against the mighty Muni bending his mind
upon destruction, and consuming the three entire worlds like
unto the fire raging at the universal dissolution, that exalted
one of exceeding eflulgence resembling a flame, should be
pacified. Even.should he desire the dominion of the celestial
regions, do thou grant him his wish.* Then the celestials
with Pitamaha at their head, addressed the high-souled Vicwa-
mitra in sweet-words, saying.—‘welcome, O Brahmarshi !
well pleased have we been with thy penances. And, O sgn
of Kugika, in consideration of thy fiery asceticism, thou hast
obtained Brahmana-hood. And, O Brahmana, I will in com-
pany with the Maruts confer on thee long life. Hail unto
thee! Do thou accept this, good betide thee. Go thou, O
gentle one, as thou likest ? Hearing Pitamaha’s speech, the
miglity ascetic, bowing down unto the celestials, said in
delight,—'If Brahmaua-hood hath really been obtained by me
together with length of days, let Omédra and Vashathéra
and the Vedas crown me; and let, ye gods, that foremost of
those versed in Kshatra Veda as well as of those cognizant
of the Brabmaveda, even Brahmi's son, Vasishtha, recognize
me. Having granted this prime desire of mine, do ye go
away, ye gods.’ Then pacified by the celestials, that best
of reciters, the Brahmarshi Vasishtha, made friends (with
Vigwamitra), saying,—‘So be it.’ ‘Thou art a Brahmarshi.
There is no doubt about this. And every thing hath been com-
passed in thy behalf,’—having said this, the deities went to
their respective regions. And that Brahmarshi, the righteous
Vigwamitra also, having attained excellent Brahmana-hood,
paid his homage unto that best of reciters, Vasishtha ; and
having secured his end, began “to range the entire “world,
staying inasceticism. In this wise, O Rama, was Brahmanya
_ actually obtained by the high-souled one. This, O Rama, is
the foremost of ascetics,--this one is Asceticism incarnate.


* Some texts read matem, for manas—meaning the same—T.


150 RAMAYANA,


This one ever abideth by duty ; and he is the stay of ascetic
energy.”

Having said this, that best of regenerate persons paused.
Hearing Satananda’s narration delivered in the presence of
Rama and Lakshmana, Janaka with clasped hands addressed
the son of Kucika, saying,—Blessed and favored am I,
that thou, O Kaugika, accompanied with Kakutstha, hast
arrived at my sacrifice, O puissant anchoret. Purified am I,
Q Brahmana, by thy very sight, O mighty Mfunz. And from
thy sight have I received various qualities. O Brahmana, thy
mighty austerities have been related in detail ; and myself as
well as the high-souled Rama have listened to the narration
relative to thy formidable ascetic energy ; and the assembled
courtiers have heard of thy various perfections. Immeasur-
able is thy asceticism ; and immeasurable thy power ; and ever
immeasurable thy qualities, O Kucika’s son. I never, O lord,
am tired of listening to that wonderful narration. Now, O fore-
most of ascetics, the hour for performing the daily devotions
hath arrived, and the solar disc hangeth aslope. To-morrow
morning, O highly energetic one, thou wilt sce me again.
Welcome, best of reciters. Itbehoveth thee to favor me.”
Thus addressed, that best of ascetics, extolling that powerful
one, well pleased, dismissed the delighted Janaka. Thus
accosted, MithilA’s lord, Vaideha, in company with his priests
aral friends, went round that foremost of ascetics. And the
righteous VigwAmitra also together with Rama and Lakshma-
na, having been honored by the high-souled ones, took up
their quarters there.


SECTION LXVi.


——:00:—-


Tue next morning, which happened to be bright, the
Jord of men, having performed his daily devotions, welcomed


BALAKANDA. 152


Vigwamitra and Raghava. And having in accordance with
they scriptures, paid homage unto the former as well as the
two high-souled Raghavas, that virtuous one said,—‘Hail, O
worshipful sir! What shall I do unto thee, O sinless one ?”
Do thou command, Surely, I deserve to be commanded by thee.
Thus addressed by the high-souled Janaka, that first of ascetics
endowed with a righteous soul, wel! versed in speech, answer-
ed,—"These sons of Dagaratha—Kshatriyas—famed among
men, are eager to behold that best of bows, that lies with thee.
Do thou show it unto them, may it be well with thee ! Hav-
ing obtained a sight of that bow, the king’s sons, their desires
crowned with success, will return as they list.” Thus accost-
ed, Janaka replied unto the mighty A/unz, saying —Listen
to why the bow lieth here. There was a king known by the
name of Devarita. He was the elder brother of Nimi, And,
O worshipful one, this bow was consigned unto the handg of
that high-souled one as a trust. Formerly with the view of
destroying Daksha’s sacrifice, the puissant ( Siva ), drawing
this bow, sportively spoke unto the celestials in ire, saying, —
‘Since, ye gods, ye deny me the shares (of this sacrifice),
which I lay claim to, I will with my bow even sever those
heads of yours.’ Thereat, O powerful ascetic, with agitated
hearts, the deities fell to propitiating that lord of the celes-
tials,—and Bhava was pleased with them. And well-pleased
with them, he conferred this upon those high-souled ones.
And even this is that jewel of a bow belonging to the
high-souted god of gods, and which was ultimately, O lord,
consigned as a trust unto our ancestor. And as J was plough-
ing (he mead, arose a damsel,—and as I obtained her while
hatlowing the field (for sacrifice), he hath come to be Known
by the name of Sita. And arising from the earth, she grew
as my daughter. And unsprung from the usual source, she
was then established here as my daughter, whose hand must
be obtained by bending the bow. And O foremost of ascetics,
many a king, coming here, had saught to obtain my growing


152 RAMAYANA.


daughter arisen from the earth. But, O worshipful one,
in consideration of her being one whose dower must be
prowess in bending the bow. I would not bestow my daughter
upon those lords of earth seeking for the damsel. Thereupon
O puissant anchoret, all the kings in a body began to
flock to Mithila,desirous of being acquainted with the strength
of the bow. And on their being curious (as to the bow ), I
showed it unto them ; but they could neither hold nor wield
it. And, O mighty Muni, finding those powerful kings to be
but endowed with small prowess, I passed them by. Hear
what then befell, O thou of ascetic wealth. Then, O power-
ful anchoret, in high ire, the kings, doubtful as to their
strength in stringing the bow, laid siege to Mithila. And those
potent princes, conceiving themselves as frustrated by me,
began to harass the city of Mithila, waxing wondrous wroth.
Andewhen a year had been completed, my defensive resourc-
es were entirely exhausted,—and at this, I was exceedingly
aggrieved. Then I sought to propitiate the deities ; and well-
pleased, the celestials granted me a Chaturanga army.
At length those wicked kings, meeting with slaughter, broke
and fled in all directions, together with their adherents, be-
reft of vigor, and confidence in their strength. And, O
puissant ascetic, this highly effulgent bow will I show unto
Rama and Lakshmana, O thou of excellent vows. And, if,
CPascetic, Rama succeeds in fixing string to it, I will confer
upon Dagaratha’s son my daughter Sita, unsprung from the
usual source.”


BALAKANDA. 153
>
SECTION LXViI.


Hearne Janaka’s words, the mighty Muniz Vi¢wi-
mitra said unto the king,—"Do thou show the bow unto
Rama.” Thereupon the king Janaka commanded his minis~
ters, saying,—“‘Do ye bring the wonderful bow furnished
with unguents and garlands.” Commanded by Janaka, the
ministers entered the city ; and placing the bow in their
front, those, endowed with immeasurable energy, came out.
And deposited in a case on acart borne upon eight wheels,
it was with difficulty drawn along by five thousand stalwart
persons of well-developed frames. And having brought that
case of iron, wherein lay that bow, the royal counsellors
spoke unto Janaka resembling an immortal, saying,—"Here
is the best of bows, O king, worshipped of all sovereigns.
O foremost of kings, O Jord of Mithila, if you think it worth
showing (shew it).” Hearing theirspeech, the king with clasped
palms said unto the high-souled Vigwamitra as well as Rama
and Lakshmana,—"This best of bows, O Brahmana, hath
Always been worshipped by the Janakas ; as also by mighty
kings incapable (of wielding and stringing it.) And neither the
celestials, nor the Asuras, northe Rakshasas, nor the Gan-
dharbas nor the Yakshas, nor the Kinnaras, nor the mighty
Uragis,—how shal! men fare }—have succeeded in stringing
or stretching it, or fixing the arrow to it, or pulling its string’
or wielding it. This foremost of bows hath been brought
here, O chief of ascetics. Do thou, O exalted one, show it
unto these sons of the king.” Hearing Janaka,s words, the
righteous VigwAmitra said unto Raghava,—"O Rama, do thou,
my child, behold the bow.” At the words of the Maharshi,
Rama, opening the case, wherein lieth the bow took a sight of
it and said,—‘This divine bow will I touch with my hand,—
and shall I also strive to wield and draw it ?’ Thereat both the

20


154 RAMAYANA.


e
king and the ascetic said,—“Excellent well.” At the words of
the anchoret, in the sight of countless thousands of specta-
tors,the righteous son of Raghu with exceeding ease took hold
of the bow by the middle, and fixed the string upon it,—and
having fixed the string, drew it. And that foremost of men
enjoying high fame, snapped the bow in the middle. And
mighty was the sound that was heard on the occasion, like
unto the bursting of a thunder-clap : and the earth trembled
terribly, as it doth in the vicinity of a mountain splitting ; and
overwhelmed by the noise, all rolled head over heels,with the
exception of that best of ascetics, the king, and the two
Raghavas. And on the people being reassured, the king con-
versant with:speech, his apprehension removed, with folded
hands addressed that puissant ascetic, saying,—"O worship-
ful one, I have beheld the prowess of Dagaratha’s son. This
is Gerily wonderful and inconceivable ; and I did not think
this was possible. And my daughter, Sita, being united with
her lord, Dacaratha’s son, Rama, will shed lustre on Janaka’s
line. And my promise v/s.,that I will confer Sit4 upon him that
will bend the bow, hath been fulfilled, O son of Kugika. And
this Sit&, this my daughter, dearer unto me than life will
T confer upon Rama. And, O Brahmana, by thy permission
let my counsellors speedily post hence, O Kaugika, good
hetide thee unto Ayodhya, in cars ; and with humble speech
bring the king unto my capital. And let them communicate
unto him all about the bestowal of Sita upon Rama, in
‘consequence of his having bent the bow. And let them
acquaint the monarch with the welfare of the Kakutsthas
protected by the asceticy and let them, speedily posting
hence, bring the delighted king.” And thereupon Kugika’s son
said,—'So be it.” And the righteous king, summoning his
counsellors, despatched them to Ayodhy& with his letter, to
communicate all duly unto the king, and bring him thither.


BALASKANDAM. 155


ISECTION LXVI11.


Tavs commissioned by Janaka, the envoys, having
spent three nights on the way, entered the city of Ayodhya,
with their conveyance afflicted with fatigue. And in ac-
cordance with the royal commission, entering the king's resi-
dence, they siw the aged king, Dagaratha, resembling a
celestial. And freed from apprehension, the envoys with
clasped hands addressed the monarch in sweetly humble
accents, saying,—“O mighty monarch, Mithila’s lord king
Janaka, in company with his priests, in sweet and affec-
tionate words, repeatedly enquires after the complete
welfare of thyself along with thy priests and servants. And
alter having enquired after thy complete welfare, Mithi-
1a’s lord, Vaideha, by permission of Kaugika. addresses’thee
thus,—‘Thou knowest the vowI had made formerly—viz,
to confer my daughter upon him that would bend the bow,—
and the kings, in consequence of their having been deprived
of prowess, aud being baffled, have come to entertain sffite
against mc, And that daughter of mine, O king, hath been
won by thy son arrived here at will, headed by Vi¢wamitra.
And, © mighty-armed one, that divine, jewelled bow hath
been snapped in the middle by the high-souled Rama in the
midst of a large assembly. And upon that high-souled one
should I confer Sit, having prowess assigned for her dower.
And in this wise will I free myself from my vow; and this thou
shouldst permit. And, O mighty king, do thou, good betide
thee, come specdily, headed bY thy priests. It behoveth
thee to see the Raghavas ; and, O foremost of kings, to see
me delivered from this vo-v. And do thou attain the joy
incident to the nuptials of both thy sons,’—thus spoke sweet.
dy the lord of Videha, permitted by Vigwamitra and staying
by the opinions of Satananda.” Hearing the words of the


156 RAMAYANA.


envoys, the king, exceedingly rejoiced, addressed Vasishtha
and Vamadeva, as well as his counsellors, saying,—Pro-
tected by Kugika’s son, that enhancer of Kaugaly&’s joy
stayeth in Videha in company with his brother Lakshmana.
And the high-souled Janaka hath witnessed the prowess of
Kakutstha ; and he wisheth to bestow his daughter upon
Raghava. If this alliance with the high-souled Janaka is
relished by ye, we shall speedily repair to his capital. Let
there he no waste of time.” Thereupon, the counsellors along
with the Maharshis said,—Excellent !? And the king
highly delighted, said unto the counsellors,—“Our journey
commenceth on the morrow.” And excellently ministered
unto, the counsellors of that foremost of monarchs (Janaka),
endowed with every excellent quality, spent that night in
joy.


SECTION LXIxX.


“Then when the night had been spent, king Dacaratha
accompanied with his priests ind adherents, well pleased
spoke unto Sumantra, saying,—‘To-day let the officers in
charge of the treasury, taking plenty of excellent wealth, and
farnished with various gems, go in advance under proper
escort, And let the fore-fold forces sally out with speed.
And at my command let horses and conveyances and elegant
vehicles march out. And let Vasishtha and Vamadeva and
Javali and Kacyapa and Markandeya endowed with long life
and the saint Katy3yana—let these regenerate ones go for.
ward. And do thou also yoke my car. Let not the proper
time pass away ; for the envoys urge speed upon me.” At
these words of the king, the four-fold forces together’ with
the saints went in the wake of the monarch. And after hav-
ing passed four days on the way, they arrived at Videha.


BALAKANDAM. 187


And hearing of Dagaratha’s arrival, ‘the auspicious king
Janaka experienced great delight, and having obtained the
aged king Dagaratha, he honored him duly.* And that Best
one ‘Janakz) spoke words unto that delighted chief of men.
“Hath thy journey been a pleasant one, O best of men? By
luck have J obtained thee, O descendant of Raghu. Do thou
y carned by the prowess of thy sons. And by
ive obtained the highly energetic and wor-
shipful saint Vashistha accompanied by the foremost regener-
ate ones, like him of an hundred sacrifices, by the celestials,
By lack if is that ] have overcome the obstacle; by luckit
is that my race hath attained renown,in consequence of alliance
with those endowed with prowess, the exceedingly potent
R&ghavas. O lord of men, to-morrow morning, after the com-
pletion of the sacrifice,do thou perform the nuptials,in company
with the foremost of the saints.” Hearing his speech in, the
midst of the saints, that best of those conversant with words,
the lord of men, replied unto the monarch, saying,—"A gift
should be accepted,—this I heard formerly. And what thou
sayest, O thou cognizant of duty, will we accomplish.” Hear-
ing these words of the truthful (king),chiming in with morality
and conducive to fame, the lord of Videha was filled with
admiration. Then the ascetics experiencing great delight,
passed the night happily in each other's company. And the
king, overjoyed on beholding his sons, the Raghavas—passed
{the night) in exceeding delight, splendidly entertained of
Janaka, And the exceedingly energetic Janaka also, versed in
men and things, having in accordance with the ordinance com-
pleted the sacrifice and performed all the preliminary rites
relative to the nuptials of his daughters,reposed for the’ night,


* The text: And hearing of Dasaratha’s arrival, the auspicious king Fanake
honored him duly ; and having obtained the aged monarch Dasaratha, he being:
delighted experienced the excess of joy.—T.


158 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LXX.


acy next morning Janaka skilled in speech, having
in company with the Maharshis performed his daily duties,
addressed the priest Satananda, saying,—"My highly ener-
getic, puissant and eminently righteous brother known by the
name of Kugadhwaja dwelleth in the auspicious city, Sanka-
¢y3, whose ramparts are ranged round with pointed weapons,
and which is laved by the river Ikshumati, and which re-
sembles the celestial regions or the aeriat car, Pushpaka. I
wish to see him, and he is in charge of my sacrifice. And
that highly energetic one will partake with me the joy of
this occasion.” This having bcen said unto Saténanda,
some competent persons presented themselves ; and Janaka
commanded them (to set out) for Sanka¢yd, And commanded
by the monarch, off they went, mounting on fleet coursers,
with the view of bringing over that best among men, like
Vishnu at the mandate of Indra. And arriving at SAnkacy4,
they presented themselves before Kugadhwaja, and faithfully
delivered unto him the intention of Janaka. And hearing the
tidings conveyed by those foremost of envoys endowed with
great fleetness, Kugadhwaja set out at the mandate of the
monarch. And oncoming to Videha, he appeared before
the high-souled Janaka addicted to righteousness. And
saluting Satananda as well as the eminently virtuous Janaka,
he sat down on an excellent and superb seat worthy of
aking. And having been seated, both the heroic brothers
of immeasurable splendour addressed that foremost of
counsellors, Sud&mana, Saying,—“Go, foremost of coun-
sellors, and speedily bring over the irrepressible Ikshwaku
of immeasurable splendour along with his sons and ministers.”
Thereupon, repairing to the camp he saw that enhancer
of the race of the Raghus, an: saluting him with bended
head, addressed him,—"O heroic lord of Ayodhy&, Vaideha,


BALARANDAM. 159


>
the master of Mithila, hath wished to sce thee along
with thy priests.” Hearing the words of that best of coyn-
sellors, the king accompanied by the saints and his adherents
came to Janaka. And in company with his counsellors,
and preists artd adherents, the king--foremost of those skilled
in speech—spoke unto Vaideha, saying,—“O mighty king,
thow knowest that the worshipful saint Vasishtha is the
spiritual guide of our race ; and in every ceremony that we
undertake, he it is who serves the function of a spokes»
man. And permitted by Vigwamitra along with all the Ma-
harshis, even this one of a righteous soul will relate my
genealogy.” And on Dagaratha resuming silence, the wor.
shipful saint Vasishtha, versed in speech, spoke unto Vai-
deha in company with his priests, saying—‘“The perpetual,
everlasting, and undeteriorating Brahma sprang from the
Unmanifest (Brahma). From him sprang Maricha ;sand
Kagyapa is son unto Maricha. And from Kagyapa
sprung Vivaswat ; and Manu is son unto Vivaswat.* This
Manu is otherwise called Prajapati ; and Ikshwaku is Manu’s
son. And this Ikshwaku, thou must understand, was the
first king of Ayodhya. And Ikshwaku's son, it is well
known, was the graceful Kukshi. And Kukshi’s son was the
graceful Vikukshi + And Vikukshi’s son was the exceedingly
energetic and powerful Vana. .And Vana’s son was the
highly energetic and powerful Anaranya. From Anaranya
sprang Prithu; and from Prithu, Trisanku. And Tri-
sanku’s son was the highly famous Dhundumara. And from
Dhundumara sprung the Mahdratha, Yuvanagya. And
from Yuvandcya sprung Manghata, lord of earth. And
M&ndhata’s son was the graceful Susandhi. And Susan-
dhi’s two sons were Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. And


* The Bengal Text reads: From Maricha sprang Angiras ; and his
son was Pracketas ; and Manu is Pracketas’ son —~T.


+ The Bengal Text: From lkshwaku sprung Vikukshi—T


160 RAMAYANA,


from Dhruvasandhi sprung the famous Bharata. And
fram Bharata sprung Asita ; to fight whom were born as
hostile kings, those heroes, the Haihayas, the Tala-
janghas, and the Sasavindas. And engaged in conflict
with them, that king fled (from his kingdom); and repairing
to the Himavat in company with his two consorts, the feeble
Asita there paid his debt to Nature. The story runs that
his two wives were in the family-way ; and that with the in-
tention of destroying the embryo of the other, one of them
administered pnison unto the former mixed in her food. And *
it came to pass that at this time, Bhrigu’s son, the ascetic
Chyavana, had become addicted to the romantic Himavat—
foremost of mountains. And here one of these exalted
dames with eyes resembling lotus-petals, saluting Bhtigu’s
son shining like a celestial, desired of him an excellent sou,
And, drawing near unto that sage, KAlindi saluted him,
And that Vipra said unto her, who was desiring of having
ason born of her,—“In thy womb, O exalted one, will be
speedily born an excellent son mixed up with poison, high-
ly,powerful, and exceedingly energetic, and possessed of
mighty strength, and graceful. Therefore, do thou not
gticve, O thou of lotus-eyes.” And having paid reverence
unto Chyavana, that chaste and worshipful princess, although
bereft of her husband, gave birth to a son. And since
ifftending to destroy her foetus she thut was co-wife with her
had administered poison unto her, Sagara* was born to-
gether with the poison.

And Sagara’s son was Asamanja,and As:amanja’s Angumat.
And Dilipa was son unto Angumat, and  Bhagiratha
unto Dilipa. And from Bhagiratha sprang Kakutstha, and
from Kakutstha, Raghu. And Raghu’s son was the puissant
Pravridha, feeding on human flesh; and he came finally


* Gara, poison. Sagara means, with poison, i. ©, here, one bors with
poison.—T,


BALSKANDAM. 161


to be known by the name of Kalmashapada.* And from him
sprung Sankhana. And Sudargana was Sankhana’s, and
Agnivarna was Sudargana’sson. And Sighraga was Agni-
varna’s, and Maru was Sighraga’s sou. And Maru’s son
was Pragucruka, and from Pragucruka sprung Amvarisha.
And Amvarisha’s son was Nahusha, lord of earth. And
Nahusha’s son was Yayati, and Yay&ti’s was Nabhaga. And
Nabhaga’s son was Aja, and from Aja sprung Dagaratha.
And from this Dagaratha have come the brothers Rama and
Lakshmana. And it is in the interests of Rama and Laksh-
mana belonging to the heroic and truthful and pious sovereigns
sprung in the Ikshwaku line, and possessing purity of race
even from the time of their founder, that, O king, we solicit
the hands of thy daughters. And, O foremost of men, it be-
hoveth thee to confer like brides upon like bridegrooms.”


ISECTION LXXI,


Wen Vasishtha had spoken thus, Janaka with clasped
hands answered unto him, saying,—It behoveth thee
to listen unto our genealogy as related by myself. In the
matter of disposal of daughters, O foremost of anchoretg,
one’s own line should be described by one boasting of a
noble ancestry. Do thou then, O mighty-minded one, listen
tothe same. There was a king famed over the three worlds
by his own acts—Nimi—eminently pious and ihe foremost
of those endowed with strength. And his som was
named Mithi, and Mithi’s son was Janaka. And from this


* He incurred Vasishtha’s curse, and was turned into Rakshasa. He took
up water, intending to clear scores with Vasishtha; but at the request of his
wife, desisted, pouring down the water at his own feet. Hence the name of
Kalmashapada.—T.


at


162 RAMAPANA.


king Janaka have we derived that word as applied to every
one of us. And from Janaka sprang Udavasu ; and Udavasu's
son was the pious-souled Nandivardhana. And Nandivardhan’s
son was the heroic Suketu. And Suketu’s son was the
mighty and righteous Devarata. And the Rajarshi Devarata’s
son was Vrihadratha. And Vrihadratha’s son was the heroic
and puissant Mahavira. And Mahfvira’s son was Sudhriti,
endowed with fortitude and having truth for prowess. And
Sudhriti’s son was the pious-spirited and eminently righteous
Dhritaketu. And the Rajarshi Dhritaketu’s son was
Haryyasya. And Haryyacya’s son was Maru; and Maru’s
son was Pratindhaka. And Pratindhaka’s son was the righte-
ous king Kirtiratha. And Kirtiratha’s son was Devaiirha,
and Devamirha’s, Vibudha, and Vibudha’s Mahidhraka. And
Mahidhraka’s son was king Kirtiratha endowed with great
strength. And the Rajarshi Kirtiratha had Moharoma born
unto kim; and Moharoma, the virtuous Sarnaroma. And
the Rajarshi Sarnarom& had Hraswaroma born unto him.
And this high-souled king conversant with morality had
two sons : the elder, myself, the younger, even my brother,
the heroic Kugadhwaja. And installing in the kingdom
myself, who was the elder son, and consigning unto my care
Kugadhwaja, our father sought the forest. And on my aged
sire ascending heaven, I righteously ruled the kingdom and
cherished my brother Kucadhwaja resembling a celestial, with
the eye of affection. And it came to pass that on one
occasion a certain powerful king named Sudhanw4 came from
the city of Sankagya before Mithila intending to lay seige
to it. And he sent word unto me, saying,—‘Do thou give
me the all-excellent bow of Siva, as well as thy daughter, the
lotus-eyed Sita.’ And in consequence of my not granting
him either, king Sudhanwa, O Brahmarshi, entered into
hostilities with me; but he was both defeated and slain by
me in the encounter. And, O foremost of ascetics, slaying
king Sudhanw4, I installed in Sankacya my heroic brother


BALARANDAM. 363


Kugadhwaja. This one, O mighty anchoret, is my younger
brother, and I am his elder. O powerful ascetic, well pleased
will I confer on thee these as thy daughters-in-law,—Sita’on
Rama, good betide thee, and Urmila on Lakshmana. And,
Itake oath tbrice that, without doubt, I will with a glad
heart confer upon thee, O potent ascetic, as thy daughters-
in-law my second daughter Urmila and also Sita resembling
the daughter of a celestial, having prowess assigned for her
dower. Do thou now, O king, perform the ceremony Godana
ofthe nuptials of Rama and Lakshmana ;andalso perform
their ancestral rites, good unto thee; and then complete the
marriage ceremony. To-day the star Magha is on the aecendant.
On the third day, my master, when the Phalguna will be on
north, do thou, O monarch, perform the marriage ceremony,
Do thou now, however, dispense gifts for invoking blessings
upon Rama and Lakshmana.”


SECTION LXXIt.


Wren Vaideha had spoke thus, the mighty ascetic
Vigwamitra in company with Vasishtha addressed that heroic
king, saying,—'‘O puissant one, the lines of the Ikshw&kus and
the Vaidehas are exceedingly noble and incomparable. No
other race can by any means compare with them. And, O
monarch, this youthful union of Rama and Lakshmana with ©
Sita and Urmila is fit by all means ; and it is worthy of their
wealth of grace. Now do thou, O foremost of men, listen to
my words. This youthful brothér of thine, king Kugadhwaja,
O thou versed in morality, this pious-souled one, O king, hath,
O prime of men, a couple of daughters, unparalleled on
earth in beauty, whom we would ask for, to become wives
unto the prince Bharata and the intelligent Satrughna ; as we,
O king, ask for thine own daughters in the interests of those


i64 RAMAYANA.


high-souled ones (Rima and Lakshmana). And these sons
of Dagaratha are endeued with youth and beauty, resembling
the Lokapflas, and possessed of the prowess of celestials.
Therefore do thou, O foremost of sovereigns, by this alliance
with both the brothers, bind the Ikshw&ku race. And in this
may thy mind never waver!” Hearing Vigw&mitra’s words
embodying the sentiments of Vasishtha, Janaka with clasped
hands addressed both the potent ascetics, saying,‘ con-
sider my line as blessed ; since such puissant ascetics wish
for such a desirable alliance. Whatever ye wish, even that
shall be done, good betide ye. Let these daughters of Kuga~
dhwaja together become the wives of Satrughna and Bharata.
On the same day, O mighty Muni, let the four highly power-
ful princes espouse the hands of the four princesses, The
learned consider bridal celebrated on the day succeeding
thosg on which the Phalgunis are on the ascendant,—and hav-
ing for its presiding deity Bhaga—as the most auspicious.”
Having said these amiable words, king Janaka arose, and
with clasped hands addressed both the foremost of ascetics,
saying,—“I have reaped high religious merit (by these nup-
tials), and I also am your disciple. And do ye, ye anchorets,
occupy these best of thrones, (belonging tous). And even
as this kingdom is unto Dagaratha, is Ayoidhya unto my-
self. Do ye not therefore entertain any doubts as to your
lofdship. Do ye therefore do as it behoveth ye.” And as
Vaideha Janaka was speaking thus, Raghu’s son, king
Dagaratha, well pleased answered that monarch, saying,
—"Countless are the excellences that pertain to ye bro.
thers, lords of Mithila ; and saints and sovereigns are
ever honored by ye,* auspiciousness be yours. Good be-
tide ye, I will repair unto my own quarters, there to duly per-


* The commentator here seems to be in fault. He explains,—“By you
have your royal ancestors been honored.” Evidently an error, I differ from
him. The particle cha (and) makes the point clear.—T,


BRLARANDAM. 165


form the Sraddha ceremonies.” Then “having greeted that
king of men, the illustrious Dagaratha, placing those forempst
of ascetics in his front, went away. And reaching his quarters,
the king performed the Sraddha according to the ordinance,
arose the next morning. and completed Godana ceremony
in consonance with the time. And to Brahmanas the monarch
severally gave away kine by hundreds and by thousands, for
the welfare of his sons. And that puissant one gave away
unto the regenerate ones four hundred thousands of kine
furnished with horns plated with gold, and each having her
calf,—together with bell-metal vessels for milking them. And
that descendant of Raghu addicted to his sons made presents
of various other valuables unto the Brahmanas, on behalf of
his sons. And having given away kine, the king surrounded
by his sons looked like unto the amiable Prajapati* surround-
ed by the Lokapalas.


SECTION LXX:11.


at .


Ano it came to pass that the day on which the king
made excellent presents of kine, the heroic Yudhajit, son
unto the lord of the Kekayas and maternal uncle unto Bha-
rata, presented himself before Dagaratha, And havidg
seen the king and enquired after his welfare, he said unto
him,—“The lord of the Kekayas hath from affection enquired
after thy welfare, saying,—‘They of whose peace thou
art anxious, are at present well.’ And, O foremost of
kings, desirous of secing my nephew (Bharata) that lérd of
earth repaired to Ayodhya, O descendant of Raghu. And
learning at Ayodhya that thy sons for the purpose of marriage
had, O monarch, come to Mithila with thyself, I have speedily
hied hither, with the intention of seeing my sister's son.”


* The Bengal text—Like Prajdpati himself —T.


166 RAMAYANA,


Then king Dagaratha, on having that dear guest with him,
regdered unto him all the respect that he deserved. Then
having passed the night in company with his high-souled
sons, that one versed in men and things arose in the
morning, and having disposed of his daily duties, approached
the entrance of the sacrificial ground, headed by the saints.
Then at an auspicious moment called Vijaya, Rama with
Vasishtha as well as other Maharshis at his head, and
agcompanied by his brothers adorned with various ornaments,
who had all performed the rites relative to their nuptials,
(approached the entrance of the sacrificial ground). Then
the worshipful Vasishtha, coming unto Vaideha, spake as
follows,—“King Dagaratha, O foremost of sovereigns—that
chief among the best of men—accompanied with his sons,
who have performed all the rites relative to their nuptials,
stayeth the orders of the bestower (of the bride); for the
meeting of the giver and the receiver is indispensable to
every transaction (of this nature). Dothou therefore main-
tain thy merit by accomplishing this excellent nuptial
ceremony.” Thus addressed by the high-souled Vasishtha,
that exceedingly generous and energetic one versed in
morality answered, saying,—“Who acts as my warder there ?
And whose commands doth he stay? And what need of
exercising judgment in entering one’s own house? As
tBis kingdom is mine, so it is verily thine. O foremost of
anchorets, my daughters resembling flames of fire, having
performed all the rites relative to the incoming nuptials, are
at the foot of the dais; and, sitting beside the dais, | myself
had been expecting thee every moment. Do thou perform
everyihing without let. What need of delaying further?”
Hearing those words uttered by Janaka, Dagaratha entered
in together with his sons and the body of saints. Then unto
the king of the Videhas, Vasishtha spake as follows,—''O
saint, do thou, O pious one, in company with the saints,
perform, O master, the nuptial ceremonies of Rima charming


BALAKANDAM. 167


unto all.” Thereupon, saying,—“So be it’ unto Janaka, the
worshipful saint Vasishtha of mighty austerities with Vigw4-
mitra and the pious Sat&nanda in his front,constructed a dais
agreeably to the scriptures, decking it out with fragrant
flowers all around, and golden ladles, and variegated water-
pots, and platters with ears of barley, and censers filled
with Déupa, and conchs, and sacrificial spoons, and vessels
furnished with Arghyas, and those containing fried paddy,
and sanctified Akshatas. And over the dais, Vasishtha with
due mantras and rites spread an awning consisting of Dar-
vas of equal proportions. And with prescribed rites and
mantras placing fire upon the dais, the highly energetic one
commenced upon offering oblations. Then bringing Sita
adorned with various ornaments near the fire, and placing
her before Raghava, king Janaka addressed the enhancer of
Kaugalya’s joy, saying,—"This Sita, my daughter, do thou
accept, good betide thee, as thy partner in the observarite of
every duty: do thou take her hand by thine. May she be of
exalted piety, and devoted to her hushand ; ever follow-
ing thee like thy shadow!” saying this, the king sprinkled
Rama's palm with water sanctified with menéras ; with the
celestials and saints exclaiming,—“Excellent ! Excellent !”
And the celestial kettle-drums sounded, and blossoms began
to shower down copiously. Having thus given away his
daughter Sita, with water and mantras, king Janaka overflow
ing with delight, said,—“Come forward, O Lakshmana, good
unto thee. Receive thou Urmila ready to be bestowed by
me upon thee. Do thou accept her haud; let there be no delay
about it.” Having addressed Lakshmana thus, Janaka spake
unto Bharata, saying—“Do thbu, O descendant of Raghu,
take Mandavy8’s hand by thine own.” And the righteous
lord of Mithila spake also unto Satrughna, saying,—“Do
thou, O thou of mighty arms, take Srutakirti’s hand by thine
own, May ye all be good, and vowed unto excellent life !
and be, ye Kakutsthas, ye united with your wives. Let there


168 RAMAYANA.


be no delay about it.’ Hearing Janaka’s speech, those four
perpetuators of Raghu’s line, staying by Vasishtha’s opinions,
tafing the hands of the four brides with their own, went
round the sacrificial fire, and the dais, and the king, and the
high-souled saints ; and in company with their wives, agree-
ably to direction entered into matrimony in accordance with
the ordinance. And there was a mighty shower of shining
blossoms from the firmament accompanied with the sounds
of celestial kettle-drums, and choiring and instrumental
music. And the Apsar&s danced and the Gandharbas sang
melodiously, at the bridal of the foremost of the Raghus.
And this seemed wonderful to witness. And to the blowing
of trumpets, those exceedingly puissant ones, thrice going
round the fire, in company with their wives went to the
encampment. And the king,having seen that all the auspicious
ceremonies were performed, went in their wake, accompanied
by thie sages and his adherents.


SECTION LXXIV.
‘


Trex when the night had passed away, the mighty
Munt Vigwamitra, having greeted the monarch, set out for
the Northern mountains. And when Vigwamitra had gone
away, king Dagaratha, greeting Mithila’s lord, Vaideha, ac-

‘tively prepared for setting out for his own capital. And
then the king of the Videhas gave a dower consisting of
various things. And Mithila’s lord gave many hundred
thousands of kine, and excéilent woolen stuffs, and Kotis of
common cloths; and elephants, and horses, and cars, and
foot men, as well as an hundred damsels adorned, endow-
ed with elegance, to form goodly waiting-maids. And well-
pleased the king gave as a noble dower gold and silver
and pearls and coral. And having given divers kinds of


BALARANDAM. 189


atticles, that king, the lord of Mithild, bidding adieu to the
monarch (Dagaratha), re-entered his own capital. And ghe
master of AyodhyS accompanied with his high-souled sons,
and headed by the saints in a body, started on the journey,
followed by his army and attendants. And as that tiger-like
one was on his way, in company with Raghava and the saints,
the fowls began to utter frightful cries all around, and the
beasts on earth to stream in a Southern direction. And behold-
ing them, that tiger-like monarch asked Vasishtha, saying —
“Those birds of fierce aspects emit frightful cries and beasts
stream in a Southerly direction. What is this? My heart
trembleth and my mind is not at ease.” Hearing the speech
of king Dagaratha, that mighty saint spake sweetly, say-
ing, “Hear what would be the result of it. These fowls of
the air by their cries presage some dreadful impending evil ;
but these beasts betoken peace restored. Therefore dogthou
renounce anxiety.” And as they were thus conversing, there
blew a strong wind, shaking all the earth, and breaking down
the trees. And a deep gloom enveloped the sun; and no
quarter could be discovered. And enveloped in ashes, that
host became stupified. And at that dreadful hour, Vasishtha
and the other saints and the king with his sons alone retained
their senses, all else were deprived of their senses,and the
army was enveloped with ashes. And the king saw that
repressor of kings, the decendant of Bhrigu, Jamadagni’s sch,
dreadful to behold, wearinga head of matted locks, irre-
presible like unto Kailiga, and unbearable like unto the
fire at the universal dissolution, flaming in energy,
incapable of being looked at by the unrighteous, with his
axe on his shoulder, equipped with a bow like unto the. light-
ning, and fierce arrows, looking like Siva the slayer of
Tripura. And beholding him of dreadful appearance like
unto flaming fire, the Vipras headed by Vig-vamitra, engaged
in reciting .mantras and offering oblations unto the fire—
those saints assembled together—began to converse with
22


170 RAMAFPANA.


-each other., saying,— —"Is this one, enraged because of the
slaughter of his sire, intent upon exterminating the Ksha-
triyas? Formerly, having slaughtered the Kshatriyas, he
pacified his tre and mental ferment,—therefore, to annihi-
late the Kshatriyas once again can uever be his endeavour.”
Having said this, the saints offered Avghya unto Bhrigu’s
son of dreadful appearance ; and addressed him in soothing
words, saying,—“O Rama ! O Rama.” Accepting that
homage rendered unto him by the saints, that puissant one,
Jamadagni’s son, Rama, addressed Rama, the son of


SECTION LXXv.


6) RamA, son of Dacaratha, I have, 0 hero, heard of
thy wonderful prowess ; and I have also heard all about thy
breaking of the bow. And having heard of that wonderful
and inconceivable breaking of the bow, I have bent my steps
hither, taking another auspicious bow. Do thou
stretch it, fix the arrow upon this mighty and dreadful bow,
belonging to Jamadagni ; and thus display thy prowess.
Then, having witnessed thy might in stretching the bow, I
shall offer thee combat, laying under contribution our utmost
strength.’ Hearing his words, king Dagaratha with a blank
countenance, and clasped hands, said,—'Thou hast quenched
thy ire against the Kshatriyas; and,moreover, thou art a Br&h-
mana boasting of high austerities. It therefore behoveth thee
to dispel the fears of my sons who are boys. Thou bringest
thy life from the race of the Bhargavas engaged in observing
vows, and studying the Veda ; and thou hast renounced arms
vowing in the presence of the thousand-eyed one. And
embracing a life of righteousness, thou didst confer the
-earth upon K&gyapa ; and repaired to the forest, making the


BELAKANDAM. ize


Mahendra hill thy home. O mighty*Mua#, thou hast come
here to compass the destruction of my all ; but if Rama be
slain, we shall never live.” Thus addressed by DagarStha,

the powerful son of Jamadagni, disregarding his words, thus
addressed Rima,—“These two foremost of bows, extraordi-
nary, and worshipped of all the worlds, and stout, and power-
ful, surpassingly excellent, were constructed with care by
Vigwakarma. And, one of these, O foremost of men, for
the destruction of Tripura, the celestials gave unto Tramvaka,
desirous of encounter,—even that which, O K&kutstha,
thou hast snapped. And this second, which is irrepressible,
was given to Vishnu, by the chiefs of the celestials. And,
O Rama, this bow belonging unto Vishnu, capable of conquer-
ing hostile cities, is, O Kakutstha, equal in energy unto the
bow belonging unto Rudra, Once on a time the deities, with
the object of ascertaining the respective prowess of Vishnu
and the blue-throated one, asked the great father, about it.
Thereupon the great father,foremdst of those abiding by truth
—reading the intention of the deities, fomented a quarrel be-
tween them. And upon that quarrel breaking out among the
deities, there took place a mighty contest capable of making
one’s hair stand on end, between Vishnu and the blue-throated
one, each burning to beat the other down. Then on Vishnu ut-
tering a roar, Siva’s bow of dreadful prowess becaine flaccid.
And thereupon the three-eyed Mahadeva became movelgss.

And upon the assembled gods with the saints and the Charanas.
beseeching those two foremost of celestials, they became"
pacified. And upon beholding that bow of Siva rendered
flaccid by Vishnu’s prowess, the deities with the saints ac-
knowledged Vishnu as the more” powerful. And the enraged
Rudra of high fame made over the bow along with its
shafts unto the hands of the Rajarshi, Devarata of Videha.
And, O Rama, this bow belonging to Vishnu, capable of con-
quering hostile cities, Vishnu consigned to Bhrigu’s son,
Richika, as a worthy trust. And the exceedingly energetic


17a RAMAYANA,


Richika made over the divine bow unto his son of immeasur-
able prowess, my sire the high-souled son of Jamadagni.
And once on a time, on my sire surcharged with ascetic
energy, renouncing the bow, Arjuna, under the influence of
unrighteous sentiment, compassed the death of my father.
Thereupon, learning of the lamentable and untoward slaugh-
ter of my sire, I from ire, annihilated the Kshatriyas, spring-
ing up afresh by numbers, then bringing under sway the
whole earth, I, O Rama, on the sacrifice being over, confer-
red it upon the righteous Kacgyapa as Dafshina. Having
made this gift, I was dwelling in the Mahendra hill equipped
with ascetic energy, when, hearing of thy snapping of the
bow, I have speedily come hither. Do thou now, O Rama,
agreeably to the cannon of the Kshatriya morality, take
this excellent and mighty bow of Vishnu, that had belonged
to my father and grand-father. And do thou set upon this
best of bows an arrow capable of conquering hostile cities.
And, O Kakutstha, if thou succced, I shail then offer thee
combat.”


SECTION LXXVI.


—_—-_—


Hearne Jamadagni’s words, the son of Dacaratha,
in consideration of the presence of his father, said these
words in subdued tone—“O Bhrigu’s son, I have heard
of the deeds thou hast performed, resolyed on avenging thy
sire. O Brihmana, 1 acknowledge that. But,O Bhargava,
thou ingultest me abiding by ‘the Kshatriya duties, as pusil-
lanimous or devoid of prowess. Do thou to-day witness my
energy and vigor.” Saying this, the enraged Raghava,
endowed with fleet vigor, took up Bhrigu’s noble bow, to-
gether with the shaft, from his hand. And: fixing the string
upon it he set the arrow. And then Rama enraged addressed


BALAKANDAM. | 173


Jamadagni’s son, Rama, saying —""Thou art a Brihmana and
through Vi¢w4mitra, art worthy of my homage. Therefore if is,
O Rama,that I cannot let go this life-destroying shaft. Which
of these shall I reduce to aught, O Rama,—thy aerial
course, or the merit thou hast attained through thy asce-
ticism of ascending unto certain incomparable regions ?
This celestial arrow sprung from Vishnu, capable of con-
quering hostile towns, never hiteth fruitless, with energy
destroying the pride of prowess of foes.” And with she
object of beholding Rama holding that foremost of weapons,
there assembled in a body the celestials and the saints,
with the great father at their head. And the Gandharbas
and the Apsaras and the Siddhas and the Charanas and the
Kinnaras and the Yakshas and the Rakshasas and the Nagas
assembled to behold that mighty wonder. And on Bhargava's
energy having passed into Rama _ bearing that, best
of bows, Jamadagni’s son became bereft of prowess,
and Rama (Paragurima) kept steadily eying Rima. And
rendered inert in consequence of his energy having been
dispelled by Rama's own, Jamadagna mildly addressed Rama
of eyes like lotus petals, saying,—‘'When formerly I gave
away the earth unto Kacyapas he said unto me,—‘Thou
must no longer stay inmy dominions. And in consonance
with the words of my spiritual guide, ever since that time I
have never spent a night on earth. Even this had been
promised by me, O Ka&kutstha. Therefore, O hero, it
behoveth thee not to destroy my course, O descendant of
Raghu. With the speed of the mind shall I now wend my
way to the Mahendra, best of hills. And, O Rama, the
regions I have conquered by my asceticism do thou “destroy
with that foremost of arrows: let there be no delay about it.
Even from thy handling of this bow I know thee to be the
chief of the celestials even that eternal one, the slayer of
Madhu. Hail to thee, O vanquisher ef foes| And all these
celestials assembled are beholding thee, of unparalleled


174 “ RAMEYANA,


deeds, and without an ‘antagonist in fight—And, O Kakuts-
tha, neither ought I to be ashamed (because of this discom-
fiture) ; I have been baffled by the lord himself of the three
worlds. And it behoveth, O Rama to disengage this
peerless shaft (from the bow), O thou—of noble vows; and
on thy shooting the shaft, I shall repair to that foremost
of mountains, the Mahendra. When Jamadagni’s son, Rama,
had said this, the puissant and graceful son of Dagaratha
shet that excellent arrow. And witnessing the destruction
by Rama of his regions earned by his own austerities,
Jamadagni’s son speedily started for that best of mountains,
the Mahendra. And then all the quarters became cleared of
gloom; and the celestials and saints fell to extol Rama
when he had shot the arrow. And that lord, Jamadagni’s son
Rama, having gone round Rama, the son of Dagaratha, and
honoged (by all), set out (for his own quarters).


SECTION LXXVII.


Wren Rama had departed, Dagaratha’s son the illus-
trious Rama, of serene soul, made over the bow unto the
hands of Varuna of immeasurable strength. Then saluting
thé saints headed by Vasishtha, Rama, the descendant of
«Raghu, seeing his father stupified, addressed him, saying,—
“Now that Jamadagni‘s son Rama hath gone away, let the
four-fold forces maintained by thee as their lord, march in the
direction of Ayodhya.” Hearing Rama's words, king Daga-
ratha embraced his son with his arms, and smelt Raghava’s
crown ; and hearing that Rama had gone,the monarch became
exceedingly delighted,—and considered himself and his son
as having attained a second birth. And he urged on his army,
and speedily arrived at the city, graced round with standards
bearing pennons, and lovely to behold, and resounding with


BALAKENDAM. 175


the sounds of trumpets, with its tigh-ways watered, and
beauteous, and sprinkled around with flowers, crowded swith
citizens looking cheerful on account of the king’s ap-
proach, bearing auspicious articles in their hands, and beau-
tified with the vast concourse of people. And received by
the citizens as well as the regenerate ones inhabiting the
city coming forward a long way, and followed by his
graceful sons, the handsome Majesty of ilustrious name, en-
tered his own dear residence, like unto the Himfvat. And
entertained by his own relatives with all objects of enjoy-
ment, the monarch rejoiced exceedingly. And Kaugalya and
Sumitra and the slender waisted Kaikeyi, together with other
wives of the king, were busy, receiving the brides, with the
necessary ceremonies, And the royal spouses received the
exalted Siti and the famous Urmild and both the daughters
of Kugadhwaja, graced with silken apparel, with jomas
performed and blessings invoked, on their behalf. And hav-
ing paid reverence at the abodes of the gods, and rendered
homage unto those that deserved the same, the daughters of
the kings, well pleased, in private, took joy with their pus-
bands. And having attained brides, and arms, with wealth
and friends, those foremost of men, engaged in ministering
unto their father. Pi

And once on a time that descendant of Raghu, king Da-
garatha addressed Bharata, saying,—‘O son, this son ofthe
king of the Kekayas thy uncle, Yudhajit stayeth here
that hero, having come to take thee over.” And hearing
these words of Dagaratha, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, prepared
for the journey, together wjth Satrughna, And having
greeted his father, and Rama of unflagging energy, and his
mothers, that foremost of men, the heroic (Bharata) departed
with Satrughna, And having Bharata as well as Satrughna,
the heroic Yudhajit, with a delighted heart, entered his own
city ; and his father rejoiced exceedingly. And on Bharata
having departed, Rama and the exceedingly mighty Laksh-


SENATE


AiR iahiag: Gelestiat. And paying.
command. of his’ father, Rima dis-
charged all the. dutiés ef. the city, having for his object the
or welfare (of the citizens). And heedfully rendering
every-a rvice to his: méthers, be on proper occasions observ>
4 the duties pertaining to his superiors. And Dacaratha
was exceedingly delighted ; as also the Brihmanas, and the
traders, and the inhabitants generally, at the conduct and be-
haviour’ of Rama. And Rama having truth for prowess, by
virtue of his excellence appeared unto every one the most
meritorious of (Dagaratha’s son’s) like unto the self create
Himself unto all being. And inthe company of Sité, the
wise Rama, bending his mind to Sitd,with his heart dedicated
-unto her, passed many a season in delight. And Rima’s
beloved Sit, as having been-bestowed upon him by his sire,
by her loveliness, and her perfections as much as by her
loveliness, went on enhancing his joy. And her lord came
to excercise a double influence on her heart. And by her
own heart, the daughter of Janaka, Mithila’s lord, resembling
a gpddess in grace, and like unto Sree (goddess of wealth)
herself in loveliness, completely read his inmost sentiments.
And experiencing delight, Rima, receiving the R&jarshi’s
daughter, exercising her own will—the excellent princess—
Wwoked graceful, even like the lord Vishnu the chief of
céléstials on being joined with Sree.
