vou, 111 PARTS X—XII.
THE
RAMAYANA.
TRANSLATED INTO Enciistt Pxose From THE OKIGINAT.
Sawsxerr ov VaLurat.
ARANYA KANDAM.
RODITED AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED DY
Girish CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Dava Paess, 652, Bravon Strevt,
CALCUTTA.
[ Att rights reserved. }-
OR THE COMPLETE SET IN ADVANGE, INCLUDING POSTAGE.
Is Inpia Rs. 16. in Evrore £:
THE
RAMAYANA.
Traxstarep isto Exarisn PRose FRom THE ORIGINAL
Sanskrit oF VauMixi
ARANYA KANDAM.
FEMITED AND PURLISHED RY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A,
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED LY
aisit CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Press, Gs/z, Beavon Steret,


CALCUTTA.


1892,


[ Ad? rights reserved}


ARANYA KANDAM.


SECTION 1.


Enrerie the extensive forest of Dandaka,the irrepressi-
ble and self-composed R&ma saw the collection of asylums
belonging unto the ascetics, strewn with Kuga and bark,
and environed by spiritual energy; incapable of being beheld ;
Fike the solar disc in the heavens,—the refuge of all crea-
ures-—with their ornamented yards; filled with a great

any deer, and abounding in muttitudes of birds ; in which
jApsards always danced and which they held if respect;
asylums) beauteous with spacious rooms for fire-sacrifice,.

ith sacrificial wecessaries, deer-skins, Kuga, faggots, water~
itchers, fruits and roats , surrounded by mighty and sacred
ret-trees ; ccowned with lucious fruits ; hoaored with Vali*

id Homaj ; holy; resounding with the sounds of Vedic

citatigns ; scattered with divers blussoms ; and containing
flanks filled with lotuses; with ancient ascetics living

mn fruits and roots, having their senses under control,
wearing bark and black deer skins, and possessing the
splenduur of the sun or fire; and adorned by great and
holy sages living upon regulated fare. Belolding that

* Offerings to the spirits of air—T.

+t Burnt offerings, or ablations of clarified butter into the sacred fire, as an
jotering to the gods, accompanied with prayers or invocations,

64 .


506 RAMAYANA,


collection of asylums belonging unto the ascetics, resembling
the regions of Brahm, resonant with the voices of Vedic
recitations ; and grateful; with highly pious Brahmanas
versed in the Vedas,—the exceedingly energetic and graceful
Raghava entered the same, having first unstrung his
mighty bow. Thereupon, seeing the righteous R&ma resembl-
ing the moon risen, as well as Lakelmana and the illustrious
Vaidehi, those Maharshis endued with spiritual intuition,
came forward (to meet the incomers) ; and, having uttered
benedictions, those persons of rigid vows, received them,
And thoso dwellers of the wood, struck with wonder, beheld
Rama's tender grace and loveliness and elegance of dross.
And struck with astonishment, those inhabitants of the woods
of pre-eminent piety saw Vaidehi, Lakshmana and
Rama, with winkless eyes. And those persons of exalted
virtue, engaged in the welfare of all creatures, made Raghava,
their guest, sit down in their thatched cottage. Then
having received Rama respectfully according to scriptural
prescription, those virtuous ones of eminent piety, resembling
fire, procured water (for Rama). And, experiencing great
delight, those high-souled ones, uttering _benedictions,
procured wild fruits, flowers and roots ; and, having assigned
an asylum (unto Rama), those persons cognizant of righteous-
ness, said with joined hands. Possessed of high fame, thou,
the protector of righteousness, art the refuge of these
people. Thou shouldst bo honured and worshipped, being
their king, holding the rod, and their superior, O Raghava, it
is because he that governs his subjects,is a fourth part of Indra
himself, (hat the king, being bowed down unto by all,
enjuys the choicest things. And we, being in thy dominions,
ought to be protected by thee. Whether living in the city
or in the woods, thou, lord of men, art our sovereign, We
have renounced chastising others ; and, O monarch, we have
conquered our anger, and subdued our passions, Therefore,
‘evenas a child in its mother’s womb (should be protected


ARaNVARANDA HM. 507


by her), should we be protected by thee.” Having said this,
they entertained Righava, along with Lakshmana, with fruits
and roots and flowers and diverse other edibles procurable in
the woods. In the same way, other ascetics of accomplished
purposes, living lives of integrity, duly pleased that lord,
Rama, resembling Vaigyfinara.


SECTION Ht.


Hawise received the homage of the ascetics, Rama about
sun-rise, having greeted them all, entered into the forest,
And Rama, followed by Lakshmana, saw the heart of the
forest abounding in various kinds of beasts,—ranged by bears
and tigers, with its trees and shrubs torn and trampled, its
pools turbid, and its birds crying. And, having m company
with Sita arrived at that forest abounding in terrible beasts,
Kakutstha saw a man-eater, resembling a mountain-summit,
emitting tremendous roars, with hollow eyes, a huge face,
frightful, having a deformed belly, disgusting, dreadful,
Cyclopean, mis-shapen,of a horrible sight, clad in a tiger-skin,
besmeared with fat, covered with blood, capable of frighten.
ing all creatures, with his mouth widely extended, like unto
the Destroyer himself, and uttering loud shouts,—-who stood
piercing with his iron dart three lions, four tigers, two
leopards, four Prishatas. and the huge tusked head of an
elephant dripping fat. Having seen Réma and Lakshmana
as well as Sitd the daughter of Mithila, he growing angry,
rushed (against them), like the Destroyer himself rushing
against creatures at the universal dissolution. Uttering a
dreadful yell, and, as if making the earth tremble, he took
Vaidehi on his waist, and, going a little distance, said, "O ye
wearing bark and matted locks, O ye of feeble strength, that
accompanied by your (common) wife, have entered the forest


508 RAMA ANA,


of Dandaka, bearing bows and arrows and scimitars, why,
being ascetics, do ye wish to associate with a (single) woman ?
Ye wicked wretches, ye impious wights, who are ye that bring
disgrace upon ascetics ¢ I am a Rakshasa, Vir&dha by name.
This forest is my fastness. Accoutred in arms, 1 range
(here), feeding on the flesh or ascetics. This transcendentally
beauteous one shall be my wife. And in battle I shall drink
your blood, wretches that ye are.” Hearing the wicked
and vaunling speech of the impious Viradba, as he said
this, Janaka’s daughter, Sit8, began to tremble from fear, like
a plantain tree shaken by the wind. Seeing the graceful
Sit& on the waist of Viradha, Raghava with a blank counten-
ance said unto Lakshmana, “O amiable one, behold the
daughter of king Janaka, my wife of pure ways, an illustrious
princess brought up in Juxury—on Virddha’s waist. O
Lakshmana, what had been wished for by Kaikeyi with
reference,“to us, (hath taken place), and the dear boon (that
she had asked) hath borne fruit. That far-sighted lady—my
second mother—who had not been satisfied with having
secuted the kingdom in the interest of her son, and by whom
1 that was dear unto her above all other creatures, had been
Wanished to the woods hath to-day her wishes crowned
with success. O Sumits’'s son, nothing can impart unto me
greater anguish than the touching of Vaidehi by another—
which surpasses my father’s demise and my having been
deprived of the kingdom.” As Kakutstha with his eyes
flooded with tears was speaking thus, Lakshmana flying into
a rage, spoke like unto a confined elephant : “Why dost thou,
© Kakutstha, being the lord of all creatures and resembling
Vasava himself,—and also backed by myself, thy servant,—
grieve Hke one forlornt The earth shall drink the gore
of this R&kshasa, Virddha, when deprived of life, after he
hath been slain with a shaft by my angry self. That ire of
mine which | had conceived against Bharata hankering alter the
kingdom, will I discharge on Virddha ; even as the wielder of


ARANY ARANDAM. 509


the thunder holt hurls his weapon at a hill, Let my mighty
arrow acquiring velocity from the speed imparted to it
through the energy of my arms, light on his huge breast,
and force his life from forth his body ; and let him whirling
(at length, fall down to the earth.


SECTION Ilt.


TeN* Visadha agaio spoke filling the forest, “Do ye tell
me who ask you,—who are ye and whither are ye going ?”
Thereupon, the highly energetic Rama answered the R&k-
shasa with a flaming face, when he had thus asked (Rama)—

Nhat he belonged to the Ikshwaku race. “Know us that
ale in the forest, for Kshatriyas of respectable character.
I also am anxious of knowing who thou art, that goest
about the Dandakas.” Viradha answered Ram& having
truth for his prowess, “Ab|I will tell thee,O king. Do
thou, & R&ghava understand! I am son unto Java, and
my mothy? is Satarhada. All the Rakshasas of the garth
have called me Vitidha. Having gratified Bralma by my
asceticism, I received (this boon) that none in the world
would be able to slay me by mangling my body with wea-
pons. Forsuking this fair one, do ye renouncing all hope
(of either recuvering her or vanquishing me), speedily flee
away to that place whence ye had come ;—«lse | shall deprive
you of your lives.” Thereat, Rama with his eyes reddened
through wrath roplied unto that Rakshasa of a deformed
shape, the wicked Viildba—saying, “Little! shame on thee
of base purposes! Thou surely seekest thy own death; and
(death) thou shalt get in battle, Stay! Thou escapest


‘The North-West Provinces text hasan additional Stoke ;—Haviug said


this, the graceful Lakshmana spoke unto Virddha as if jestingly, “Whe art thou
that coming to the forest, art ranging it pleasantly ?"—T.


510 RAMAYANA,


me not with life.” Then stringing his bow, Raima,
speedily aiming at the R&kshasa, pierced him with sharpened
shafts ; and (then) from his bow-string let go seven shalts,
having their feathered parts plated with gold. furnished
with great velocity, and coursing like Swparna or the
wind, Thereat, resembling flames, those arrows furnished
with peacocks’ feathers, pierced Vir&dha’s body, and fell to
the earth, covered with blood. On being thus pierced, the
Rakshasa set Vaidehi down, and, upraising a dart, rushed in
wrath towards Rama and Lakshmana. And sending forth a
mighty roar, he took upadart resembling the banner of
Sukra ; and he then appeared like the Destroyer* with open-
ing mouth. Then the brothers showered a blazing volley of
shafts on the Rakshasa, resembling the Destroyer himself,
And stationing himself at a spot, the Rakshasa, laughing
terribly, yawned, and as he yawned the fleet-coursing shafts
fell off from his person. And by virtue of the bestowal of the
boon (by Brahm§), the Rakshasa Virddha drew up bis vital ener-
gies, and, lifting upa pike, darted at the descendants of
Raghu. That best of those bearing arms cut off with two
arrows that dart resembling the thunder-bolt and flaming
inthe sky. And the dart severed by the shafts of Rama,
fell to the earth, as falls a crag severed by the thunder-bolt.
Thereat, swiftly raising up asword, resembling a black
snake, each (of the Raghavas) approached his antagonist,
and began to assail him hastily. Thus hard beset, that
terrible one, seizing them both with his arms, attempted to
make away with those foremost of men, who, however, retain-
ed their calmness. Reading his purpose, Rama spake unto
Lakshmana, “Let the Rakshasa bear us by this way.

* The text has, Xéléntakayamopame—abl—resembling Kéla, Antaka, or
Yama. The commentator cites a sloka, which assigas three several functions
to the three—Kdla executes his office on the occasion of the separation of life
from the body ; Antaka compasses the end ; and Fama Sunally sits in jadgment


upon the departed soul, But this strikes me as misplaced erndition. 1, however,
give the commonsense rendering —T.


ARANYAKANDAM. Sur


No use of letting him. O Sumitr&’s son, let the Rakshasa
bear us wherever he likes. Even this, by which the ranger of
the night is proceeding, is our way.” And lifting up (Rama
and Lukshmana) by his might and prowess, as if they were
striplings, that haughty ranger of the night laid them on his
shoulders. And having deposited the Raghavas on his
shoulders, Virddha—ranger* of night—sending up dreadful
shouts, directed his course towards the forest. And he at
length entered the forest resembling a mighty mass of clouds,
furnished with various kinds of trees, picturesque with diverse
species of birds, and abounding in jackals, serpents and
beasts.


SECTION IV.


ee


Seeme those foremost of Raghus, the Kakutsthas, carried
away, Sif cried in a loud voice,raising up her arms,t “Rama,
the son of Dagaratha, the strong, the truthful and the pure,
is, along with Lakshmana, being carried away by you,
Rakshasa of a terrible appearance. Me bears will devour and
tigers and panthers. Renouncing the Kakutsthas, do thou
carry me away. I bow unto thee, O best of Rakshasas.’”
Hearing these words of Vaidehi, Rama and Lakshmana
bestirred themselves for compassing the death of that wicked
one. And Sumitra’s son broke his left arm; while Rama at
once broke the Rakshasa’s right one. On his arms being
broken, the Rakshasa resembling a mass of clouds, growing
weak, sank down on the ground in a swoon like a hill riven by
the thunder-bolt. Thereupon, they assailed the Rakshasa with


* Another reading is:—That ranger of the night laid on hiz shoulders,
those ones, who were puffed up with their exceeding prowess —T.


+ Another reading is Sxbhu; That isi
ae wabluyan—That one of elegant arms (raising)


sis RAMAPANA.


their fists, arms and feet; and lifting Lim up once and
again, and pressing him, they trod on him over the ground.
Although he was sore pierced by full many an arrow and
cut sorryly by scimitars, and pressed down on the earth
in various ways, yet the R&kshasa expired not. Seeing him
utterly incapable of being killed, and reseinbling a hill, that
inspirer of hope in times of peril, the graceful (Rama), said,
“O foremost of men, in consequence of his austerities, yon
R&kshasa cannot be vanquished with weapons in conftict.
Therefore, let us cast him into a pit. O Lakshmana, dig a
capacious pit in this forest* for this Rakshasa resembling an
elephant, terible, and of a grim presence.” Having said this
unto Lakshmana,—"Do thou dig a pit,” the powerful Rama
remained planting his foot on Vir&dha’s throat. Having
heard Raghava’s words, the Rakshasa spake gently, “Slain
am I, O chief of men, by thee possessed of strength equal to
that of Sakra. Through ignorance, O foremost of men,
Icould not before know thee. Now I know thee that art
Rama, the worthy Son of Kaugalya, my child ; as well as the
lighly virtuous Vaidehi and the renowned Lakshmana. By
virtue of a curse, | entered this dreadful Rakshasa form, Ia
Gandharba, having been cursed by Vaigravana. Being pro-
pitiated by me, that greatly famous one said, ~‘When Rima
the son of Dagaratha, shall slay thee in encounter, thou, at-
taining thy natural condition, shalt repair to the celestial re
gions’ Getting wroth, he cursed me, who had been absent ;
and thus did king Vaigravana address me, who had conceived
love for Rambh&. Through thy grace have I been freed from
this fearful curse, I shall tnow) repair to heaven, Hail, O re-
pressor of foes! Half a Yoyana hence, my child, dwells the
rightegus and potent Maharshi, Sarabhanga, resembling the
Sun, Seek him speedily: he will bring about thy good. Casting
me (into this pit) in the wood, do thou, O Rama, peacefully go
thy way. Even this is the eternal usage of the Rakshasas.


** The reading slightly varies in some tezts.—T.


ARANYAKANDAM. 5t3


Those that die in the forest, attain eternal regions.” Having
said this unto Kakutstha, the mighty Virddha, afflicted with
arrows, having his body deposited (in the pit), attained
heaven, Having heard that speech of Viradha, Raghava order-
ed Lakshmana, saying, “O Lakshmana, do thou in this forest
dig a capacious pit for this Rakshasa resembling an elephant,
dreadful, and of terrible acts.” Having said unto Lakshmana,
“Dig a pit,’ Rama possessed of prowess remained fixing his
foot on Viraidha’s throat. Then taking a hoe, Lakshmana
dug a spacious pit by the side of the huge-bodied* Viridha,
Then when his throat had been freed, (Lakshmana) cast into
the pit Viradha having ears resembling javelins, sending
loud and dreadful sounds. Having vanquished him in fight,
Rama and Lakshmana possessed of activity and steady in
fight, being exceedingly delighted, raising up the dreadful
R&kshasa by main force, cast him howling (into the pit).
Reflecting that he was incapable of being slain (by sharpened
weapons), those foremost of men, exceedingly well versed (in
arms), compassed the death of that mighty Asura, Virddha, in
the pit, after they had dug it. Viradha had himself sincerely
wished for his death at the hands of Rama; and that ranger
of the woods had accordingly told (R&ma),—"My death
cannot be effected by means of weapons.” Having heard
these words, Rama decided upon casting him into a pit. And
when the excessively strong Rakshasa entered the cavity, he
made the forest resound with his cries. Having thrown him
into the hole, Rama and Lakshmana, their fears removed,
appeared with joyful looks, and rejoiced in that forest like
the aun and the moon seated in the heavens.


* Mahatmanam—lit—high- souled. The poet may have applied the epithet
in this sense fa view of Viradha being really a Gandharba. I have, however,
preferred the other sense, as being more in harmony with the character of
Virddha as a Rakshasa; and have accordingly rendered the word Auge.
bodied.—T.

+ Another reading of this line is:—And buried him under stones, The
North- West Provinces text bas four additional lines:—Having slain the

65


514 -  RAMAPANA.


SECTION V.


Having in the forest slain the Rakshasa Viridha
possessed of tremendous strength, R&ma endued with
prowess, embracing and cheering Sit8, spoke unto his brother
Lakshmana of flaming energy, saying, “This dense forest
is hard to live ins; nor are we acquainted with the ways of
the wood. Therefore will we speedily repuir to the ascetic
Sarabbanga.’ Thereupon Raghava set out for the hermitage
of Sarabhanga. And Rama beheld a mighty wonder near
that one of celestial virtue, who had purified his soul through
asceticism. He saw the lord of the celestials, possessed
of a resplendent person, resembling in effulgence the sun or
Vaicw&nara—mounted on a superb car—(saw) him that is
followed by ail the celestials, stationed in the sky, not, touch-
ing the earth, adorned in luminous ornameuts—the god
dressed ina clean apparel; worshipped by many a high-
souled personage dressed in the same way. And froma
distance, (Rima) saw the car stationed in the sky yoked with
green steeds—resembling the infant sun; and he saw the
spotless umbrella possessing the beauty of a mass of white
clouds, resembling the lunar disc,—and graced with varie-
gated wreaths. And his (Indra’s) head was being fanned by
two chowris, costly and furnished with golden handles, held
by two manificent damsels; and innumerable Gandharbas
and Siddhas and prime sages were hymning the celestial
stationed in the welkin. And seeing Sarabhanga engaged
in converse with Satakratu, Rama said unto Lakshmana (the
following words). And pointing out the car, Rama showed
the wonder unto his brother. “Behold, O Lakshmana, yonder
car stationed in the sky, splendid, furnished with exceeding


Réhshasa and taken Mithilé’s daughter, those ones having bows decked in gold,
being delighted, rejoiced in ihat mighty forest, like the sun and the moon
seated in the shy—T.


ARANYARANDAM. 515


grace, wonderful, and seeming as if the sun had fallen from
the heavens, The steeds standing in the sky are for certain
those-of which we had formerly heard as belonging unto
Sakra of many sacrifices. And, thou foremost of men, these
youths environing (the celestis!) by hundreds, wearing ear-
rings, and bearing swords in their hands, are broad of chest,
have arms resembling bludgeons in size, and are clad in crimson
vesture, like unto tigers incapable of being approached. Over
the breasts of all appear chains of blazing sheen ; and, O son
of Sumitr&, their beauty appears that of five and twenty, And
even this is the ever-enduring age of the celestials, as these
foremost of men of sweet looks appear. O Lakshmana, stay
here awhile with Vaidehi, so long asI do not gather
who it is that is in the effulgent car.” Saying unto
Sumitrfs son, “Stay here,” Kakutstha bent his steps towards
Sarabbanga’s asylum. And seeing Rama approach, Sachi's
lord, taking Sarabhanga’s permission, addressed the celestials,
saying, “R&ma is coming hither. Do ye set out for another
place, ere he yet addresses me. He is not fit to behold
me (now), When he shall have vanquished (his foe in fight)
and won success, shall I readily show myself unto him. He
shall have to achieve an act incapable of being achieved by
others.” Then rendering homage unto that anchoret and
conversing with him, the wielder of the thunderbolt—subduer
of enemies—repaired to heaven in acar yoked with steeds.
When the thousand-eyed one had gone away; Raghava
accompanied by his companions appeared before Sarabhanga
in the 4gni-hotra chamber. Taking his feet, Rama, Sit& and
Lakshmana sat down with the permission of the ascetic,
who received them and set apart quarters for them, Then
Righava questioned (the sage)concerning the visit of Sakra ;
and Sarabhanga related everything unto Raghava. “O Rama,
this bestower of boons wishes to take me to the regions of
Brahma. I have conquered them, incapable of being attained
by persons that have not schooled themselyes,—by virtue of


516 RAMAYANA,


fierce austerities. O chief of men, knowing that thou wert
near, I became anxious to go to the minor celestial regions
and the supreme heaven (of Brahma), after 1 had seen thee,
righteous and high-souled, who art my dear guest now. O
foremost of men, | have for aye attained the excellent regions
of Brahma and Nakaprishtha. Do thou receive them as
pertaining to me.” Thus adressed by the sage, Sarabhanga,
that best of men, Raghava, versed in every branch of
learning, said, "O mighty anchoret, } shall acquire atl those
regions myself. { now wish that thou mayst direct me as
to my abode in this forest.” Thus occosted by Raghava
resembling Sakra in strength, the eminently wise Sarabhanga
again said, “O Rama, here in this forest lives a pious and self.
restrained ascetic of mighty energy, named Sutikshna. He
will bring about thy good. O Rama, follow this Mandakini”
flowing among flowers, which (here) runs in an opposite
direction to her usual course ; and then wilt thou reach there.
This is thy course, thou best of men. Do thou now, my
child, for a space look at me; while I leave off my limbs,
even as a serpent renounces its slough.” Then preparing
a fire and with Mantras offering oblations into it, the exceed-
ingly energetic Sarabhanga entered into the fire. The fire
consumed the down, hair, old skin, bones, flesh and blood of
that high-souled one. (Anon) Sarabhanga became a youth
resembling fire; and rising from the flame, he appeared
splendid. And proceediug past the regions of high souled
sages sacrificing with fire, as well as of the celestials, he
ascended those of Brahm’. And that one of pious acts done
on earth—that best of the twice-born race—saw the grand-
father, in company with his followers. And the grand-father
also, beholding that Brahmana, rejoiced greatly, and said,—
“Hall”


ARANY ARANDA. 517


SECTION VI.


Avrrer Sarabhanga had ascended heaven, ascetics in
bodies, assembled together, presented themselves before
Kakutstha, Rama of flaming energy. And Vaikhanasas, and
Valakhilyas, and Sanprakhilas, Marichipas, Agmwakuttas in
numbers, and those ascetics, Patralhdras, and Dantolukhalas,
Unmajjakas next, and G&tracayyas, and Agayy§s and Anava-
kacikas, those ascetics, Salitaharas, Vayabhakshas after them,
Akacanilayas, Sthandilagyis, Urddhavasis of controlled

senses, and Ardrapattavisas given to apa, practising
\penances, and engaged in performing the five kinds of
avsterities—all furnished with the grace that comes of spiritual
enéxgy, and all firmly concentrated in Yoga—these ascetics
preséxted themselves before Rama in the asylum of Sara-
bhanga.. And coming before Rama, the foremost of those
practising righteousness,those sages conversant with morality,
—met in « body, said unto that pre-eminently virtuous one,
“A mighty cxr-warrior, thou art the foremost person of the
Ikshwaku race and the world ; as well as their lord—even as
Maghavan is the lord of the celestials. Famous over the
three worlds in high worth and prowess, in thee are found the
truth and virtue in profusion and obedience unto the mandate
of thy sire. © lord, it behoves thee cognizant of virtue and
attached unto it, to forgive us for what we as suiters say unto
thee, The sin, O lord, of that monarch is mighty that taketh
a sixth part of the subjects’ incomes,but doth not protect them
as sons. But he that, setting his heart on protecting the people,
doth ever carefully protect all the inhabitants of his dominions,
like his own life or like his son dearer unto him than life
itself, reapeth, O Rama, enduring renown extending over
many years, and (at length) attaining the regions of Brahm’
is glorified there. The king that protects his subjects righte-
maugly,i8 entitled to a fourth part of the great religious merit


518 RAMAYANA.


that is reaped by an ascetic subsisting on fruits and roots.
© Rama, this many Brabmanas—this great body of men that
have assumed the Vanaprastha mode of life, although having
thee for their lord, are being sorely troubled by Rakshasas,
as if they had none. Come and behold the bodies of innu-
merable ascetics of pure hearts that have in various ways
been slaughtered by R&kshasas in the forest. And great
is the worry that is experienced by the dwellers on the river
Pamp& and the Mand&kini as well as those that reside in
Chitrakuta. We cannot bear the terrible affliction of the
ascetics in the forest at the hands of Rakshasas of dreadful
deeds, Therefore, for obtaining refuge, have we come before
thee who art the refuge (of all). Do thou, O Rama, deliver
us all, who are being exceedingly afflicted by the rangers of
the night. O hero, we have no greater refuge on earth than
thyself, Do thou,O king’s son, rescue us all from Rakshasas.”
Hearing these words of the sages and ascetics, that righteous-
souled one addressed them, saying, “It doth not behove you
to speak thus. {should be commanded by the anchorets. I
have entered the forest solely with a view to my own purpose.
Thave entered this forest in obedience to the mandate of my
father, with the object (at the same time) of putting an end to
these ravages of the R&kshasas on you. I have at my own
will come hither for securing your interest. Then shall my
stay in the woods be crowned with mighty fruit. I wish to
slay in battle the enemies of the ascetics, Let the sages and
ascetics behold my prowess as well as that of my brother.”
Having been conferred a boon by the ascetics, that hero
entered upon a noble undertaking, and accompanied by the
ascetics, in company with Lakshmana directed his course to
(the hermitage of) Sutikshna.


BRANSARANDAN. 5g


SECTION Vil.


Ann Rama accompanied by his brother as well as Sitf
went to the asylum of Sutikshna in company with the twice-
born ones. And having proceeded far, and crossed many a
stream of copious waters, Rama saw a holy peak towering
high like the mighty Meru. Then those worthy acions of the
Ikshwaku race—descendants of Raghu-with Sit& entered
the forest ever furnished with various kinds of trees. And
having entered the dense forest abounding in blossoms and
ruits and trees, Rama saw in a recess an asylum glittering
with bark and garlands. There Rama duly addressed an
ascetic seated in the lotus-attitude* for warding off evil, even
Sutikshna, “O thou coversant with righteousness, speak to
me, O Maharshi, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess.”
Thereupon, eying Rama keenly, that calm (ascetic)—the
foremost of those practising righteousnes, embracing him
with his arms, said, ‘Welcome, thou foremost of the Raghus,
O Rama, thou the best of those practising righteousness.
This asylum now hath been furnished with its master
in consequence of thy visit. O illustrious one, O hero,
expecting thee, | have not yet ascended heaven, renouncing
on earth this body of mine. I had (already) heard that, coming
to Chitrakuta, (thou hadst been staying there), having been
deprived of the kingdom. Here came, O K&kutstha, the
Sovereign of the celestials of an hundred sacrifices. Coming
to me, that mighty deity, the Sovereign of the celestials, said
that I had acquired all the worlds by my pious acts, Do thou,
by my grace, in company with thy wife and Lakshmana,dwell
delightfully in those regions won by my asceticism,
containing Devarshis.” Thereupon the self-possessed Rama
answered that blazing and truth-telling Brihmana of fiery
austerities, like Vasava answering Brahma, saying, “O


* The yoga system has many positions for concentrating thought —T.


520 RAMAYANA.


mighty ascetic, I myself will win those regions. I wish to
be directed to a dwelling in this forest. Thou art possessed
of ability in respect of everything, and art (at the same time)
engaged in the welfare of all beings,—this hath been told
unto me by the high-souled Sarabhanga of the Gautama race.”
Thus addressed by Rama, that Maharshi known over all the
worlds, spoke sweet words in great joy, 'O meritorious
Rama, even this is the asylum (for thee. Do thou live here
pleasantly. It is inhabited by numbers of saints and is always ”
provided with fruits and roots. This forest is haunted by
herds of deer that range here without doing harm to any
‘one, although they possess great energy ; and go away, having
bewitched people (by their beauty), Save what comes from
these deer, there isno other evil to be encountered here,”
Hearing those words of the Maharshi, the placid elder
brother of Lakshmana, taking up his bow with the arrow set,
said “O exalted one, if by means of sharpened shafts blazing
like lightning, I slay those herds of deer when they come, it
shall impart pain unto thee,—-and what can be more
unfortunate than this? Therefore I shall not be able to
dwell long in this asylum.” Having said this, Rama ceased
and became engaged in his evening adorations, and, having
finished them, along with Sita and Lakshmana fixed his
quarters in the asylum of Sutikshna. Then, when the evening
had passed away and night fell, Sutikshna, having done
homage unto those chiefs of men, offered them excellent fare,
suitable to ascetics.


SECTION VIII,


FHlavine been well entertained by Sutikshna, Rama in
company with Sumitra's son, having passed away the night
there, awoke in the morning. And arising in due time,


ARiNyAKANDAM. sat


Rama along with Sita, bathed in cool waters odurous with the
aroma of lotuses; and having in proper time duly worshipped
Fire as well as the deities, in that forest containing abodes
of ascetics, Rama, Lakshmana and Videha’s daughter, their
sins purged off, seeing the sun risen, approached Sutikshna
and spoke unto him these mild words, saying,~~"O Reverend
sir, we have stayed here pleasantly, being excellently
ministered unto by thee. We greet thee, and go away. The
ascetics urge speed upom us. We hasten to view the
collections of asylums that belong unto the holy sages
inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. Now we crave thy’
permission along with that of these foremost of anchorites,
steady in virtue, crowned with asceticism and self-controled,
resembling smokeless flames. And we intend to set out ere
the sun, like unto a low-sprung one that hath attained to
auspicious fortune through evil ways, with rays incapable of
being borne, shines too fiercely.” Having said this, Raghava
along with Sit@ and Sumitr&'s son bowed down unto the
ascetic’s feet. And as they touched his feet, that best of
ascetics, raising R&ma and LaSshmana up, embraced them
closely and said, “O Rama, go thy way safely, in company
with Sumitra’s son and this Sit& that followeth thee like a
shadow. Bebold the beauteous asylums, O hero, of these
pure-spirited ascetics inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. Thou
wilt see blossoming woods garnished with fruits and rools,
containing goodly deer, and mild feathered tribes; tanks and
pools laughing with blown lotuses,containing pleasant waters,
and abounding in Karandavas; charming mountain-springs ;
and romantic forests picturesque with peacocks, Go, O
child; and go thou also, O Sumitra’s son. And come again
to my asylum after having seen these.” Thus addressed,
Kakutstha along with Lakshmana, baving gone round the
ascetic, prepared for departing. Then Sit of expansive eyes
handed to the brothers excellent quivers, bows and shining


swords. Then fastening the graceful quivers, and taking the
66 .


52a RAMAYANA,


sweet-sounding bows, both Rama and Lakshmana issued from
the hermitage. And permitted by the Maharshi, the
Raghavas furnished with grace, equipped with bows and
scimitars, swiftly set out along with Sita,


SECTION IX.


—


Wren the son of Raghu had set out with Sutikshna's
permission, Sila addressed him in affectionate words and
convincing speech, saying—“‘Although thou art great and
followest the narrow way (of righteousness), yet thou art
on the eve of entering into unrighteousness. But thou
couldst by refraining from action, eschew this unrighteousness
that springs from an evil begot of desire. This evil begot
of desire is threefold. One prominent evil is falsehood,
and both the others are of weightier significance,—associa-
tion with others’ wives, and vindictiveness without any
(basis of) hostility. Falsehood, O Raghava, hath never been
thine, nor can it ever be thine (in the future). Nor yet, O
foremost of men, canst thou ever even in fancy be (guilty of)
going after others' wives, which marreth all religious merit.
These, O Rama, are by no means in thee. O King’s son, thou
ever and a day directest thy attentions unto thy own wife.
And thou art righteous and truthful and doest the will of thy
sire, In thee are established virtue and truth—and every
thing; and by help of thy conquered senses, thou, O mighty-
armed one, art capable of bearing everything. And, O thou
of a gracious presence, thine is control over sense. The third
evil that leads men through ignorance to bear hostility tawards
others without any (cause of) hostility, is now present (unto
thee). Thou hast, O hero, for the protection of the saints
dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, promised the slaughter of
R&kshasas in battle. And it is for this reason that equipped


ARANTVAKANDAH. 323


with bows and arrows, thou hast along with thy brother set.
out for the forest known as Dandaka. Seeing thee set out,my
mind reflecting on thy truthfulness as well as thy happiness
in this world and welfare in the next, is wrought up with
anxiety. And,O hero,I do not relish this journey to Dandaka.
Thereof I will tell thee the reason. Do thou listen tome as
I tell thee. Bearing bows and arrows in thy hands, thou hast
come to the wood along with thy brother ; and (it may well
ihappen) that seeing grim rangers of the forest, thou mayst
discharge thy shafts And even as the vicinity of faggots
increases the energy of fire, the proximity of (the bow)
enhances the strength and energy of the Kshatriya. Formerly,
© long-armed one, in a sacred wood haunted by beasts and
birds,there lived a truthful ascetic of a pure person. Intending
to disturb his auterities, Sachi’s lord, Indra, bearing a sword
in his hand, came to the asylum in the guise of a warrior,
And in that asylum, that excellent scimitar was deposited as
a trust with that righteous person practising asceticism,
Receiving that weapon, that ascetic intent upon preserving
his trust, rangeth the forest, maintaining his faith. And
intent upon preserving his trust, he goeth nowhere for
procuring fruits and roots without that sword deposited with
him as a trust. Constantly carrying the sword, by degrees,
the ascetic, foregoing all thoughts about asceticism, had his
mind involved in fierce sentiments. Thus in consequence of
bearing that weapon, that ascetic taken up with fierce
thoughts,losing his sobriety and led astray from righteousness,
went to hell. This ancient story anent the carrying of arms,
asserts that even as fire worketh change in a piece of wood,
the presence of arms worketh alteration in the mind of him
bearing them. From affection and the high honor in which I
hold thee, I merely remind thee of this matter. I do not
teach thee. Equipped with bows as thou art, thou shouldst
renounce all thoughts of slaying without hostility the
Rakshasas residing in Dandaka. Without offence none should


524 RAMAP ANA.


be slain.—It is the duty of Kshatriya heroes by means of their
bows to protect persons of subdued souls, come by any
calamity. Where are arms? And where is the forest ?
Where is Kshatriya virtue ? And where is asceticism ? These
are opposed to each other,—let us, therefore, honor the
morality that pertains to this place. From following arms,
one’s sense gets befuuled and deformed. Again going to
Ayodhy, thou wilt observe the duties of Kshatriyas, Then
my mother-in-law and father-in-law shall experience enduring
delight, if, having renounced the kingdom, thou lead the life
of an ascetic. Interest springs from righteousness ; and
happiness also results therefrom. One attains everything


through righteousness—in this world the only substantial
thing. Repressing self by diverse restrictions, intelligent
people attain righteousness ; but virtue crowned with felicity,
is incapable of being attained by following pleasure. O mild
one, ever cherishing thy heart in purity, do thou practise
piety. in the wood of asceticism. Everything—the three
worlds—are truly known unto thee. I have spoken this
through feminine fickleness. Who can speak of righteousness
unto thee? Reffecting on and understanding things, do thou
along with thy younger brother speedily do what thou likest.”


SECTION X,


“PLearinc Vaidehi's words spoken through high regard
(for her husband), Ruma with his energy enhanced, answered
Janaka’s daughter, saying, "O noble lady, thou hast spoken
mild words fraught with worth and profit; and, O Janaka’s
daughter versed in virtue, thou hast expounded the duties
of Kshatriyas. What, O exalted one, shall 1 say ? Thou hast
thyself by thy words (furnished an answer to what thou


ARANVARANDAM, 535


hadst said). Kshatriyas wear bows in order that the word
‘distressed’ may not exist (on earth). O Sit&, those ascetics
of severe vows that are beset with perils in Dandaka, having
personally come unto me, who am their refuge, have sought
protection at my hands. Always dwelling in the forest, sub-
sisting on fruits and roots, they on account of Rakshasas of
cruel deeds, do not O timid one, attain ease. These ascetics
are devoured by (terrible Rakshasas) living on human flesh,
Being eaten up (by the R&kshasas), the anchorites living in
the forest of Dandaka—those best of the twice born ones—~
said unto us—'Be thou gracious unto us.” Hearing those
words of theirs which fell from their lips, I, resolving to act
\in accordance with their request, said,—‘Be ye propitious.’
‘his is surpassing shame unto me that such Vipras who
tiemselves are worthy of being sought, seek me. What shall
IQot I said this in the presence of those twice-born ones.
Tintreat all those that had come, said, ‘We have been, O
Ran, immensely harassed in the forest of Dandaka by
R&kshasas wearing shapes at will. Do thou deliver us. These
irreprigsible RAkshasas living on human flesh vanquish us at
the tinie of Homa, and on the occasions of Purvas, O sinless
one, Of the saints and ascetics afflicted by the Rakshasas,
who are on the search for their refuge, thou art our best
refuge. We can by virtue of the energy of our asceticism
easily destroy the rangers of the night; but we are loath
to lose our asceticism earned ina long time. O Raghava,
our austerities are constantly disturbed, and we can hardly
perform them. Therefore, although sore afflicted and
devoured by the Rakshasas dwelling in the forest of Dandaka,
we da not cast our curse on them. Thou along with thy
brother art our protector: thou art our master in this forest.’
Having heard these words, I promised my parfect protection
unto the saintsin the forest of Dandaka, O daughter of
Janaka. Having promised, I living cannot violate my vow
Concerning the ascetics ; verily truth is ever dear unto me.


526 RAMAPANZ,


Thad rather renounce my life, or thee, O Sita, along with
Lakshmana,—but by no means my promise made, especially
unto Br&hmanas. O Videha’s daughter, the protection of
the saints is incumbent on me even without any represent-
ation —and what (shall l say) when Ihave promised the
same ? Thou hast spoken this unto me through affection
and friendship. I have been well pleased with thee, O Sita.
One doth not instruct another that one doth not bear affection
to, O beauteous damsel, (what thou hast said) is worthy of
both thy love and thy race.” Having said these words unto
Mithila's princess, the beloved SitS, the high-souled Rama,
equipped with bows, along with Lakshmana, directed his
steps towards the inviting woods of asceticism.


SECTION XI.


"Rama went first;in the middle, Sith; and bear-
ing abow in his hand, Lakshmana went in their wake.
And they went with Siti, seeing many mountain-peaks,
and forest, and delightful streams, and Chakravakas
haunting river islets, and tanks with lotuses containing
aquatic birds, and herds of deer, and horned buffaloes
maddened with juices, and boars, and elephants—~focs
to trees. Having proceeded a long way, when the sun was
aslant, they together saw a delightful tank measuring
a yoyana, filled with ced and pale lotuses, graced
with herds of elephants, and abounding in aquatic cranes,
swans and Kadameas. And in that tank containing charming
and pleasant waters, they heard sounds of song and
instrumental music ; but no one was seen there. Thereat,
from curiosity, Rama and Lakshmana—mighty car.
warrior—asked an ascetic named Dharmabhrit, saying,


ARANVAKANDAM. 527


“Hearing* this mighty wonder, we have been worked up
with intense curiosity, Do thou tell us what this is. Thus
accosted by Raghava, the ascetic then at once began to
expaliate over the potency of the pool. "This tank
yoes by the name of PanchSpsard, and is always filled with
water. It was made, O Rama, by the ascetic Mandakarni,
by virtue of his asceticism. In yonder tank, the mighty
ascetic, living on air, performed signal austerities for ten
thousand years. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, all the
deities with Agni at their head, assembled together, said,
‘This ascetic wishes to have the position of one of us,’ Thus
ull the deities present there were filled with anxiety, Then
with the view of disturbing his austerities, the deities ordered
five principal Apsar&s, possessed of the splendour of live
lightning. And for compasssing the end of the celestials,that
ascetic conversant with the morality and otherwise as well
of this life as that to come, was brought by those Apsar&s
under the sway of Madana. And those five Apsaras (ulti-
mately) became the wives of the ascetic; and their hidden
residence was reared in the pool. And there the five
Apsarfs living happily, pleased the afchorite, established in
youth through asceticism and yoga. As thy sport, we hear
the sounds of their musical instruments, and the sweet voice
of their'song mixed with the tinklings of their instruments.”
(Hearing this), the illustrious Raghava along with his brother
declared the story narrated by that one of a pure heart to
be wonderful. Thus conversing, Rima saw the collection
of asylums, strewn with Kuga and bark, and be-girt with
energy derived from Brahma lore. Entering (the place) along
with Vaidehi and Lakshmana, the highly famous Raghava
dwelt there respected by all the ascetics. Having happily
dwelt in those collections of graceful asylums, lionored of
the Maharshis, Kakutstha by turns went to the hermitage of
those ascetics with whom that one well versed in arms had


* Some texts -—Seeing.


528 RAMAYANA.


dwelt before. And Raghava happily passed his days some-
where fur ten months, somewhere for one year, somewhere
for (our months somewhere fur five or six months, somewhere
fur many months, somewhere for a month and a half,—some-
where for more, somewhere for three months, and somewhere
for eight. And as Rama lived in the assylums of the
ascetics and amused himself through their good graces, ten
years were passed away (in this way). Having gone round
the asylums of all the ascetics, RAghava cognizant of
righteousness returned to the hermitage of Sutikshna, Coming
to this asylum, respected by the ascetics, that subduer of
enemies, Rima, stayed there fora time. Once upon a time,
as K&kutstha dwelling in that asylum was seated, he humbly
observed unto that great ascetic. “I have always heard from
men speaking on the subject that that foremost of ascetics,
the reverend Agastya, lives in this forest. On account of
the vastness of this forest, I do not know that place. Where
is the hermitage of that intelligent Maharshi ? For propitiating
that revered one, I, accompanied by my brother and Sita,
will go to Agastya for paying our respects unto the ascetic.
This great desire is burning in my heart, that I should myself
minister unto that best of anchorets.” Hearing these words
of the righteous-souled Rama, Sutikshna, well pleased,
answered Dagaratha’s son, saying, ‘1 also am desirous of
telling thee this along with Lakshmana. Repair unto
Agastya in company with Siti, O Raghava. By luck thou
hast thyself said this unto me as to thy purpose. I will, O
Raina, tell thee where that mighty ascetic, Agastya, is. My
child, go four miles from the hermitage in a southerly direc-
tion ; and thou wilt come to the hermitage of the brother of
the auspicious Agastya situated on a land covered with trees,
graced with Pifpalé woods, abounding in fruits and flowers,
charming, and resonant with the notes of various birds. There
are many tanks containing delightful waters, swarming with
swans and Karandavas, and beauteous with Chakravakas.


ARANYAKANDAM. 529


Passing a night there, do thou, O Rama, in the morning,
taking a southerly course, go by the skirts.of the forest tract. ”
Passing a yojana, thou shalt come upon Agastya’s asylum,
located atacharming woedland graced with many a tree,
There Videha’s daughter and Lakshmana shall experience
delight in thy company. O magnanimous one, if thou intend
to see the mighty ascetic, Agastya, in that charming wood-
land, containing a great many trees, then do thou make up
thy mind to set out this very day.” Hearing these words of
the anchoret, Rama, saluting hi


, along with his brother, set
off for Agastya’s (place) with his younger brother and Sita,
And, pleasantly proceeding by the way directed by Sutikshna,
seeing picturesque woods, hills resembling clouds, watery
expanses and streams flowing by their path ; Rama filled with
delight said these words unto Lakshmana, “Surely we see the
arylum of that high-souled one, the ascetic, Agastya’s brother
of pious acts, These trees standing by thousands on
the way bending beneath the weight of fruits and
flowers, bear the signs that had been mentioned to me as
belonging to this wood. And from the wood is wafted by
the wind the pungent odour of ripe pippalis. And here and
there are found heaps of fire-wood, and torn Darva are seen,
of the lustre of lapises. And the top of the column of smoke
belonging unto the fire lit in the asylum in this wood,
appears like the peak of a dark mountain. And twice-born
ones, having performed their ablutions in sacred and retired
bathing places, are off-ring flowers gathered by themselves.
O placid one, from what Thad heard from Sutikshna, this
would appear tobe the asylum of Agastya’s brother, The
righteous Agastya it is who, wishing for the welfare of the
worlds, destroying by virtue of his austerities a Daitya re.
sembling Death, hath rendered this quarter habitable. Once
on a time here dwelt together two mighty Asuras, brothers,
given to slaughtering Brahmanas—the wily VAtipi and Twala,
Wearing the form of a Brihmana, and speaking Sanskrit,


67


530 RAMRY ANA,


the cruel one used to invite Vipras toa Sr4ddha. And, cook-
ing his brother wearing the shape of a sheep, he used to feed
the twice-born ones according to the rites prescribed for
Sréddhas. Then when the Vipras had fed, Ilwala said, —
“O V&tapi, come out, uttering aloud sound.” Hearing his
brother's words, Vat&pi, bleating like a sheep, came out, riving
their bodies. In this way, thousands of Brahmanas gathered
together, were destroyed hy flesh-eating ones wearing shapes
at will, (And it came to pass that once upon atime) the
Maharshi Agastya, having been invited to a Sraddha, fed on
the mighty Asura. Thereupon uttering—Finished’ and offer-
ing water to wash hands with, Hwala said unto his brother,
‘Come out’! And, as that brother of Valapi, given to slaught-
ering Vipras was speaking thus, that foremost of ascetics,
the intelligent Agastya, said with a laugh, ‘Where is the
power of coming out, of the R&kshasa, thy brother wearing
the shape of asheep, who hath gnne to Yama's abode ?'
Heating his words, from wrath the ranger of the night pre-
pared to assail the ascetic, and he rushed against that fore-
most of the twice-born ones And, being consumed by that
ascetic of flaming energy with his eyes resembling fire, the
R&akshasa met his end. This asylum graced with pools and
groves belongs to the brother of him who hath performed
this arduous feat from compassion for the Vipras.” As
Rama was thus conversing with Sumitra’s son, the sun
set and evening approached. Then, duly performing his
afternoon adorations along with his brother, Rama entered
the hermitage, and saluted the ascetic. Well received by the
ascetic, RAghava spent there a night, eating fruits and roots.
When the night had passed away, and the solar disc arose,
Raghava greeted Agastya’s brother, saying, “O reverend
Sir, Isalute thee. I have pleasantly passed the night. I greet
thee ; I shall go to behold my preceptor, thy elder brother.”
Thereat, on the ascetic’s saying, ‘Go thou,’ the descendant of
Raghu went away by the prescribed route. And Rama viewed


ARAN YARANDAM. 530


the forest, and Nihdras, and Panagas, and Salas, Vanjulas
and Tinisas, and Chirivilwas, and Madhukas, and Vilvas, and
Tindukas,—all in full fluwer, and graced with blossoming
creepers, and trees in the wood by hundreds, roughly handled
by clephants with their trunks, and graced by monkeys, and
resounding with Lhe voices of an hundred maddened warblers,
Then the lotus-eyed Rama said unto that enhancer of auspi-
ciousness, the heroic Lakshmana, who was by him, and was
following him at his back. “The leaves of these trees are
glossy, and the beasts and birds are mild, even as (we had
been told). The asylum of the pure-hearted Maharshi must
not be far. This asylum capable of romoving the fatigue, of
the weary, bélonging to him that is known among men as
Agastya by his own acts, is seen, with the (neighbouring
woods) filled with smoke, and itself decorated with bark and
wreaths, containing herds of mild deer, and ringing with the
notes of various birds. This is the asylum of that pious one,
who destroying (the Asura resembling) Death, hath, desirous
of the welfare of mankind, rendered the Southern quarter
habitable, and through whose potency the Rakshasas from
fear barely cast their eyes in this directicn, but do not
approach. Ever since that one of pious ways possessed himself
of this quarter, the rangers of the night have foregone their
hostility, and assumed a peaceful attitude, This Southern
quarter rendered safe (by Agastya), and incapable of being
harassed by those ones of tortuous ways, is celebrated over
the three worlds in connection with the name of the reverend
ascetic. And this graceful asylum ranged by mild beasts
belongs to that long-lived one of renowned achievements—
Agastya—in obedience to whose command, the Vindhya
mountain—foremost of its kind—which had always obstructed
the way of the Sun, doth not increase. This pious one
honored of men, ever engaged in the welfare of the righteous,
shall do good unto us, who have come to him. I shall adore
the mighty ascetic, Agastya, anb, O mild one, O master, here


532 RAMAYANA,


pass away the remainder of the term of my banishment. Here
celestials with the Gandharbas, and Siddhas and eminent
saints, observing restrictions in respect of food, aye adore
Agastya. And the ascetic is such that a liar cannot live here,
nor a cunning or a crafty person, nor a wicked wight, nor one
that is given to unrighteousness. And adoring righteousness,
celestials, and Yakshas, and Nagas, and birds, live here
restricting their fare. And high-souled Siddhas and eminent
saints, renouncing their bodies, repair to the celestial regions
in cars resembling the sua. And adored by auspicious
individuals, the deities here confer on them the states of
Yakshas and celestials, and divers kingdoms. O Sumitra's
son, entering the asylum before us, do thou announce unto
the saints that T along with Sita, have arrived here.”


SECTION Xti


Havine entered the asylum, R&ghava's younger
brother, Lakshmans, coming to a disciple of Agastya, spoke
unto him, saying, "There was a king, named Dagaratha,
His eldest son, the strong Rama, hath come (to this asylum)
along with his wife, Sid for seeing the ascetic.—Named
Lakshmana, I am bis younger brother, obedient and devoted
to bim.—Thou mayst have heard of it. Having entered this
horrid forest, in consonance with the mandate of our sire,
we desire to see the reverend one. Tell this unto him.”
Hearing Likshmana’s words, that ascetic, saying, "So be it,”
entered the chamber of the sacrificial fire, for the purpose
of communicating (the news unto Agastya). Entering in,
Agastya’s beloved disciple, with joined hands communicated
unto that foremost of ascetics, incapable of being repressed,*


* Some texts :—Efulgont.


ARANIAKANDAM. 533


exactly what Lakshmana had told him,—"For seeing the
reverend one, and serving him as well, those subduers of
their foes, Dagaratha's sons, Rama and Laashmana accom-
panied by Sit, have entered this asylum. It now behoves
thee to command what is to be done next.” Hearing from
his disciple that Rama had come along with Lakshmana and
the highly virtuous Vaidehi, Agastya said, “By luck it is that
alter a long time, Rama hath come to see me, 1 had mentally
wished for bis arrival. Go thou; and let Rama, having been
respectfully received, come before me. Why hast thou not
brought him thyseli?” Thus addressed by the high-souled
the disciple saluting him, with joined
hands, said, “So be it.” Then issuing out, the disciple said
unto Lakshmana, "Where is Rama? Let him come and
Thereat, going to the asylum in company with the
disciple (of Agastya) Lakshmana showed unto him K&kutstha
and the daughter of Janaka, Sita. Then joyfully communicat-
ing unto R&ma the words of the reverend one, the disciple
(of Agastya) duly took in that one worthy of being honored.
And seeing the asylum (eeming with mild deer, Rama entered
in with Lakshmana and Sita. And there Rama beheld the
place of Brahma, and that of Agni,—that of Vishnu, and that
of the great Indra, the place of Vivaswat, and that of Soma,
and that of Bhaga, aud that of Dhata and Vidhata, and that of
Vayu, and that of the high-souled Varuna having the noose
in his hand, and that of Gayatri and that of the Vasus, and
that of the monarch of the Mégas, and that of Garura, and
that of Kartikeya, and that of Dharma. And it came to pasa
that, surrounded dy his disciples, the ascetic came (before
Rima), And Rima saw that one of flaming energy at the
head of the ascetics; and the hero said unto Lakshmana,
tuhancer of auspiciousness, “O Lakshmana, the revered saint,
Agastya, is cuming out. I recognize that mass of asceticism
vy a certain kind of majesty (that characterizes him).”
Having said this touching Agastya of the splendour of the


and righteous asc


534 RAMEPANA. .


sun, that son of Raghu took held of his feet. Then, having
paid him homage, Rama with joined hands stood there in
company with Videha's daughter, Sit8,*and Lakshmana.
Thereat, embracing Rama and honoring him with water and a
seat, and asking him questions anent his welfare, the saint
said, “Welcome!” Offering oblations unto the fire, and
presenting Arghya unto the guests, and paying them homage,
that ascetic entertained them with food iu accordance with
the Vanasprastha mode of life; and then first sitting down,
that foremost of ascetics, the pious Agastya, addressed Rama
cognizant of righteousness, staying with joined hands, “O
Kakutstha, if an ascetic acts otherwise (in respect of guest),
he-in the next world feeds on his own flesh, like a false
witness. he sovereign of all the worlds, righteous, a mighty
car warrior, worthy of being honored aud worshipped, thou
hast become our beloved guest.” Having said this, Agastya,
according to hix desire, worshipping Raghava with fruits,
roots and flowers, said unto him, “O foremost of men, this
mighty, celestial bow belonging unto Vishnu, and constructed
Vigwakarma, and this best of arrows (named) Brahmadatta,
infallible and resembling the sun, and this inexhaustible
couple of quivers filled with sharpened shafts, like unto
flaming fire, were granted unto me by the mighty Indra. And
here is this mighty golden scabbard, and this sword decked
in gold. Having, O Rama, slain the mighty Asuras with this
bow, Vishnu in days of yore in battle secured the effulgent
Fortune of the celestials. O bestower of honor, do thou for
securing victory, take this bow, these quivers, this arrow, and
this scimitar, like the holder of the thunder-bolt, taking the
same.” Having said this, that highly energetic one, the
reverend Ayastya, consigning unto Rama all those weapons,
again said.


ARANYARANDAM. 535


SECTION XIII


ee


“oO Rama, | am pleased with thee; good betide thee!
And, O Lakshmana, I am gratified by thee. Ye are in
trouble in consequence of the great fatigue that ye have
andergone on the way. And Janaka’s daughter, the noble
Maithili, is evidently eager (for rest). Of tender years and
anknown to hardship, she hath come to the forest rife with
roubles, being urged by the love she bears unto her lord.
Do thou, O Rama, conduct thyself so, that Sita may find a
rleasant time of it. By following thee to the forest, itis a
tard task that she is performing. O son of Raghu, this hath
veen the nature of the fair sex from the commencement of
creation, that they gladdea him that is well off, and forsake
. person in adversity. And women imitate the instability of
ightuing, the sharpness of weapons,and the celerity of Garura
nd the wind.* But this wife of thine is absolutely free from
U these defects ; she is worthy of being extolled and the
oremost of those devoted to their lord, like Arundhati
mong the gods. This region, O Rama, will be adorned,
ince, O subduer of enemies, thou along with Vaidehi and
umitra’s sor, wilt dwell here.” Thue addressed by the ascetic,
Yaghava, joining his hands, humbly observed unto that saint
ssembling flaming fire, “Blessed and beholden am I, since
1¢ foremost of ascetics is gratified with my merits as well as

ith those of my brother and wife. Do thou now direct me to
country well watered, and abounding in woods, where rear-
ig an asylum, ]may dwell delightfully and pleasantly.”
‘earing Rams’s words, that best of ascetics, reflecting {or a
hile, spoke these excellent words, “Two Yojanas hence, my
\ild, is a region abounding in fruits and roots, containing


* The commentator explains They imitate the lightning in changing
ir residence, the sharpness of wespons in severing affection, and the celerity
Garura or the wind in doing wrong. —T.


536 RAMEFANA,


countless deer, and beautiful—known by the name of Pancha-
vati. Repairing thither, do thou, rearing an asylum, pass thy
time pleasantly in company with Sumitra’s son, duly doing
the mandate of thy sire. O sinless one, all this news relating
to thyself, has from affection been known to me through the
potency of my asceticism, as also that relating to Dagaratha.
Although thou hast promised to dwell with me in this ascetic
grove.yet by virtue of my asceticism I know the desire that is
in thy heart. I therefore tell thee, repair to Panchavati. That
is a charming woodland, and there Mithila’s daughter shall
dwell with delight. And that tract is worthy of all praise,
and, O Ra&ghava, it is: not distant from here.—lIt is in the
vicinity of the Godavari. Mithil's daughter shall live there
agreeably. And that spot abounds in fruits, and roots, is
frequented by various fowls, is retired, O mighty-arned one,
and is sacred and beautiful. And thou of pure ways, and
competent to protect the ascetics, shall, O Rama, protect
them, Q hero, yonder is the mighty wood of Madhukas.
Directing thy course to the asylum of Nagrodha trees, go by
the north of this Madhuka wood. Then arriving at a spot hard
by a hill, (thou wilt) come upon the celebrated Panchavati,
crowned with blossoming woods.” Thus accosted by Agastya,
R&ia along with Sumitra’s son honouring the truth-speaking
saint, greeted him. Then, having saluted his feet, they, taking
the saint's permission, set out along with Sita for the hermit-
age of Panchavati. And, taking their bows and quivers thosa
sons of the king, of undiminished martial virtue, with intent


minds bent their course to Panchavati by the way laid down
by the Maharshi.


ARANYARANDAM. 537


SECTION Xiv"


AAS he was proceeding to Parchavati, Raghu's son saw a
huge-bodied vulture of terrible powess, And seeing him in
the forest, the exalted Raima and Lakshmana, as they were
conversing with each other, knowing the bird to be (in
reality) a Rakshasa, asked him, saying, “Who art thou ?”
Thereupon, in soft and sweet worde, he, pleasing them, said,
“My child, know me fora friend of thy father.” Knowing
him to be a friend of his sire, R&ghava paid him homage, and
enquired for his name and lineage. Hearing Rama’s words,
he mentioned his own lineage, and related the origin of alt
beings. “O mighty-armed one, ! shall describe ‘unto thee)
from the very beginning the (history of) those that were
Praj&patis in days of yore. Listen, O Raghava. Of these,
the fird® is Kardama, then Vikrita, and then Sesha, Sancraya,
the powerful Vabuputra, Sthanu, Mérichi, Atri, the mighty
Kratu, Pulastya, Angira, Pracheta, Pulaha, Daksha,
Vivaswat, Arishtanemi, OQ Raghava, and the exceedingly
energetic Kacyapa. These had the west. The Praj&pati
Daksha, it hath been heard by us, O Rama, had sixty famous
and illustrious daughters. Of these Kacyapa wed eight,
with elegant waists ;—Aditi, Diti, Danu, Ka&lika,* Tamra,
Krodhavas&, Manu and Anal&. Then, well pleased, Kacyapa
again said unto those damsels, “Do thou bring forth sons like
unto myself, who shall be lords of the three worlds.” There-
af, Aditi, O Rama, Diti, Danu, and Kalika, O mighty-acmed
one, consented,the rest were of another mind. And of
Aditi were born thirty-three deities, O repressor of thy foes,
viz., the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Agwinas, O
subduer of enemies. And, my child, Diti gave birth to those
sons, the renowned Daityas. Formerly, this earth girt with
seas was in the possession of these. And, O vanquisher of


* Some texts :—Kalate.—I.


67


538 ¢ RRAIAY ANA,


thy foes, Danu gave birth to a son, named, Acwagriva. And
Kalika brought forth Naraka and Kilaka. And Timra gave
birth to these five daughters celebrated in the world,—~
Kraunchi, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhritarashtri, and Suki. And
Kraunchi gave birth to the Ulukas, and Bb&si, to Bhisas, and
Syeni to hawks and vultures possessed of energy; and
Dhritarashtri to swans, all kinds of Kalahansas, and
Chakravakas, and that damsel, Suki, to Nat3. And
Vinat& was Nat&’s daughter. And Krodhavasi, O Rama,
brought forth ten daughters, vis., Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari,
Bhadramad&, Ma&tangi, S&rduli, Swet&, Surabhi crowned
with every (auspicious mark), Surasi and Kadruk&. And,
thou foremost of the best of men, Mrigi’s sons were all
the deer, and those of Mrigamand& were bears, Srimaras
and Chamaras. And Bhadramad& bore one daughter, Iravati.
And Iravati’s son is the mighty elephant,who is the lord of they
worlds. And Hari’s sons are lions and the nimble m@pkeys.
And Sarduli brought forth as her sons, Gol&ngulas, and
tigers ; and the offspring of M&tangi were mad elephants,
© best of men. And Sweti O K&kutstha, gave birth to
the elephants of the cardinal points. And, O R&ma,
Surabhi gave birth unto two daughters—the famous Robini,
and Gandharbi. Rohini produced kine, and the sons of
Gandharbi are horses, And Suras&, O Rania, gave birth to
Na&gas, and Kadru, to Pannagas. And K&cyapa’s other
wife Manu begot mankind—Br&hmanas, Kshatriyas,
Vaigyas, and Sudras. From the mouth, it is known,
sprang Brahmanas, from the breast, Kshatriyas, from the
thighs, Vaigyas, and from the feet, Sudras. And Anali
produced all trees bearing sacred fruits. Vinat% (was) Suki’s
grand-daughter, and Kadru, Surasa’s aunt, And Kadru gave
birth to a thousand N&gas with the bolder of the Earth. And
Vinat& brought forth two sons,—Garura, and Aruna. And
from Aruna sprang myself and my elder brother Sampiti. O
subduer of enemies, know me for Jatayu, the son of Syeni.


ARANYAKANDAM. 539


If thou will, I shall become thy help during thy abode (in the
woods). And, O child, [ shall protect Sit& when thou shalt go
out along with Lakshmana.” There Raghava paying homage
unto Jatfyu, and embracing him joyfully, bent low; and that
soll-possessed one listened to the story of Jatayu's friendship
with his father, as related by him repeatedly. Then consign-
ing unto that bird of exceeding strength, Mithila’s daughter,
Sita, Rama accompanied by Lakshmana went to Panchavati,
destroying his foes and protecting the worlds.


SECTION xv


Ten repairing to Panchayati filled with various animals
and beasts of prey, Rima remarked unto his brother of flam-
ing energy, ‘“(Now) we have come to the place to which we
had been directed by the ascetic. This, O amiable one, is
Panchavati furnished with blossoming woods. Do thou cast
thy eyes around this forest, and (ascertain) what spot shall
suit our asylum. Do thou find out such a place in the vicinity
of a tank where thyself Sit% and I may dwell happily, which
is graced with the garniture of woods and delightful with
liquid lapses, and whose neighbourhood yields fuel, flowers,
Kuga and water.” Thus addressed by Rama, Lakshmana
with joined hands, said unto K&kutstha in the presence
of Sita, “O Kakutstha, even if I were to stay with thee for
an hundred years, [ shall renffin thy servant. Thyself
selecting some beauteous spot, do thou tell me,——Construct
{an asylum)’ Well pleased with the words of Lakshmana,
that highly effulgent one, after due reflection, selected a site
having every recommendation. Going to that romantic spot
for rearing an asylum, Rima, taking the hand of Sumitr’’s
son in his, said unto him, “This place is evel, graceful, and
surrounded with blossoming trees, Do thou duly construct


540 ‘ RAMAPARA.


an asylum at this spot. Hard by is seen a beautiful pool,
embellished ‘with lotuses, resembling the sun, and breathing
balmy perfume, And, as told by that pure-hearted ascetic,
Agastya, this is the graceful Godavari, bordered by flowering
‘rces ; -swarming with swans and KArandavas, delighted with
Chakravakas ; thronged with herds of deer,* not far, yet not
so very near. And resounding with the cries of peacocks ;
charming ; elevated ; containing full many a cave; do thou, O
amiable one, behold these hills, covered with trees in full
flower; and they are shining like elephants painted with
divers colors by persons with the utmost care; adorned
with Salas, palmyras, Tamalas, dates, Panasas, Nivaras,
Tinisas, and PunnSgas. And covered with mangoes, and
Tilakas, and Ketakas, and Champakas, and trees entwined
by flowers and herbs and plants ; and containing Syandanas,
sandals, Nipas, Panasas, Lakuchas, Dhavas, Agwakarnas,
Khadiras, Samis, Kingukas and Patalas. This spot is sacred
. this spot is charming—this spot abounds in beasts and
birds, Here will I dwell, O Sumitra’s son, in company wif
this bird.’t Thus addressed by Rama, the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana, slayer of hostile heroes, in a shart time
raised an asylum for his brother. And the exceedingly stout
Lakshmana created there for Raghava a spacious but thatched
with leaves made of clay, furnished with pillars, constructed
with long bamboos, graceful,—spread with Sami boughs;
tightly fastened with strong cords; covered with KusS,
reeds, and leaves; with its floor well leveled; and charming ;
beautiful to look at, and @«ceedingly excellent. And then
going to the river Godavari, the lovely Lakshmana, perform-
ing his bath, and securing lotuses and fruits, came back (to
the asylum), Then offering flowers, and duly performing
rites for the peace (of the habitation), Lakshmana showed
the asylum which he bad made unto Rama. Seeing the


* Gome to slake their thirst —R&miyana—T.
+ Jatdyy,


ARAN VARKANDAM. 7 an


beautiful asylum along with Sit’, Raghava. experienced high
raptures. And joyfully embracing Lakshmana with his arms,
Rima said these exceedingly calm and solemn words,"Pleased
am I with thee. Thou hast done a great deed, my brother ;
for which Ihave granted thee my embrace by way of re-
ward. While thou, his son, skilled in reading thought, grate-
ful, and cognizant of righteousness art alive, O Lakshmana,
my father is not dead.” Having said this unto Lakshmana,
R&ghava—the enhancer of auspiciousness—experiencing feli-
city, began to dwell happily in that region filled with fruits.
And ministered unto by Sité and Lakshmana, that righteous
one lived there, like the immortals in heaven.


SECTION XVI.


As the high-souled Raghava was dwelling there peace-
fully, after autumn had departed, the welcome winter com-
menced. And it came to pass that once on a time, when the
night had passed away and day broke, that son of Raghu
went to the romantic river Godavari for performing his bath.
And as the humble son of Sumitra R&ma’s puissant brother
bearing a water pitcher in his hand was following Rama along
with Siti at his back, the former said unto Rama, “O sweet-
speeched one, now is come that season which thdu hast ever
held dear; and as if decorated by which comes on the entire
auspicious year. Now people have their persons rendered
rough from dew ; the earth is replenished with corn ; water
is difficult of being used ; and fire becomes enjoyable. And
men having worshipped the gods and the Pitris by celebrating
Agrah&yana on the occasion of prataking new rice, have at
this season, their sins purged off. The provinces overflow
with food, and abound in milk and articles prepared there-
from ; and kings bent on conquest, range about for surveying


54a RAMAYANA,


them. And on the sun having veered steadily to the quarter
presided over by the Destroyer*, the north appears like a
female without her ¢/eéat. Naturally abounding in snow,
and now having the sun at a great distance, the mountain
Himavant justly bearcth that name. At mid-day the days are
delightful to a degree to range in, feel highly agreeable, and
have pleasant suns ; while shade and water are uncomfortable,
And the days now have mild suns, are covered with
dew, severely cold, with the forests remaining idle§,
and the lotuses destroyed by frost. And now at night people
cannot lie down in unsheltered places; and the nights are
inferred from the presence of Pushya, And at night the
atmosphere (being covered with vapour) looks brown ; and it
is bitter cold then; and the hours are long. And the good
fortune of the Moon hath fallen to the Sun ; and the disc of
the former is reddish with vapour; and like unto a gla
ebreathed upon, it doth not shine clearly. And the moonligh
furnished by vapour doth not appear pleasant; and Sita
pallid because of (exposure to) sunshine, is perceptible, but
doth not look beauteous. And at this season the western
wind naturally of gelid feel, being permeated at present with
cold, blows with double coldness. And the forests enveloped
in mist, and stocked with wheat and barley, look brilliant at
sunrise, with Kraunchas and cranes crying (in chorus),
Golden-hued paddy slightly inclined, appear graceful, with
their heads fike unto date-flowers filled with rice. And the
sun although high advanced, yet having its rays cover-
ed with thick mist, appeareth like the moon. And feeble
at the first part of the day, and of agreeable touch at mid-day,


* £ e—The South.—T.

+ Amark made with colored earths or unguents upon the forebead and
between the eye-brows either by way of ornament or a sectarial distine-
tion —T.

{ Himaodn means having snow—T.

$ ‘Of antras vast and deserts idle.’ Othello, Although not in common use,
the wotd is very picturesque, and hence the adoption—T.


ARANYARANDAH., 543


the sunshine, being surcharged with mist, appeareth palish
over the face of the earth, And in the woods,swards covered
with greet grass, and with dew-drops on it, look handsome
on the morning sun brightening it up. And wild elephants
waxing exceedingly thirsty, draw away their trunks,
just as they touch beautifully clear and cold water., And
those aquatic fowls seated by, d> not dip themselves in the
water, like unto cravens shunning fight. And the rows of
trees, shorn of their blossoms, on being enveloped with dew
at night and mist at morn, look as if they were fast asleep.
And the streams appear with their waters enveloped in
vapour, and the cranes, perceived through their cries, and their
banks having their sands wet. And what on account of the
snow-fall, what of the mildness of the sun, and what through
the cold, water even when it is on a mountain top, tastes
aweet. And lotuses afflicted by the cold, with the stalks only
Jeft, and with their petals dropping down and their pericarps
and filaments shrivelled up, do not appear beautiful. And,
O foremost of men, at this season, influenced by regard for
thee, Bharata undergoing affliction of spirit, is performing
mortifications in the city. And forsaking kingdom, and
dignity,and the many and various enjoyments, Bharata pract-
ising asceticism and restraining himself in respect of (ood,
in this winter lieth down on the bare earth. And he also, for
certain, at this hour of the day, surrounded by his subjects,
daily wendeth to the river Sarayu for performing his ablutions.
Brought up in luxury, and exceedingly tender, how can he,
afflicted with cold, perform his ablations during the latter part
of the night? Of eyes resembling lotus petals, grey-hued,
endued with grace, with a navel depressed, and mighty,
Bharata understandeth righteousness, is truth-speaking, of
restrained senses (in respect of others’ wives) and also of
subdued senses. And he speaketh fair, and is sweet-tempered,
and long-armed and the vanquisher of foes. And renouncing
various pleasures, he hath devoted himself unto the noble


544 RAMAYANA,


one. Thy high-souled brother hath secured heaven, since he,
tesorting to asceticism, is imitating thee that resident in
the woods. The saying that people follow their mother and
not their father, is falsified in the case of Bharata. How can
mother Kaikeyi, whose husband is Dagaratha and son the
righteous Bharata, have such crooked way ?” As the virtuous
Lakshmana was speaking thus from affection, Raghava,
not bearing the blame cast upon his mother (Kaikeyi), said,
“My brother, thou shouldst by no means, tax our second
mother, Do thou talk of that lord of the Ikshwaku race,
Bharata. Albeit my mind is firm as regards my sojourn in
the woods, yet is my mind unsteady, being inflamed with
affection for Bharata. 1 remember his dear sweet words,
taking the heart, resembling ambrosia, filling the soul with
delight. When shall I, O son of Raghu meet with the high-
souled Bharata, and the heroic Satrughna, and thyself.”*
Having bewailed thus, Kakutstha, coming to the river God&-
vaci, there performed his ablutions in company with his
younger brother and Sita. Then having offered his adorations
with water unto the gods and the Pitris, those sinless ones
hymned the risen sun as well as the celestials. Having with
Sit& as the second and Lakshmana,performed his bath. Rama
looked beautiful like that lord the reverend Rudra in company
with Nandi and the daughter of the king of mountains,


SECTION xvii.


Havine bathed, Rama, Sita and Sumitr&’s son went to
their own asylum from the banks of the Godavari. Arriving
at the asylum, Raghava along with Lakshmana, performing
his morning devotions, entered the cottage. And honored
of the Maharshis R&ima happily dwelt in that cottage ; and


© Thyself, the meaning is evident when shall we all mcct together—T.


BRANYARAND AL. 545


seated with Sit that mighty-armed one looked like the Moon
ia conjunction with Chitra. And he carried on various con
verse with his brother Lakshmana, As Rima was thus seated
with his mind engrossed in that talk. A Rakshasi came to
that region at her will, And that one named Surpanakha,
sister unto the ten-necked Rakshasa, coming upon Rima, saw
him like a celestial, having aleonine chest, mighty-arms,
‘and, expansive eyes resembling lotus leaves, with the power-
ful gait of the elephant, wearing a head of matted locks, with
resplendent countenance, bearing regal marks. And be-
holding Rama dark-blue like the lotus, and becoming like
Kandarpa himself,and resembling Indra, the Rakshasi was
maddened with desire. R&ma was graced with a beauteous
countenance, that R&kshas hada hideous face ; Rama had
a slender;waist, she had a huge abdomen ; he had expansive
eyes, she-had terrible eyes; he was gifted with an elegant
head of hair, she had coppery hair; Rima was of a
dear presence, she was of an unsightly presence ; Rama
had a.sonorous voice, she had a hideous voice; Rima
was youthful, the R&kshasi was an old hag; Rima had
mellifluous accents, she had harsh accents; Rima was
ever abiding by justice, she was unruly; Rama was
handsome, she was ugly. That Rakshasi being wrought
up with passien addressed Rama saying, “Wearing matted
locks, and equipped with bows and arrows, why hast
thou along with thy wife come to this region haunted by
Rakghasas ? It behoveth thee to say what the object of thy
visi is." Thus accosted by the Rakshasi, Surpanakb’, that
subduer of his foes from sincerity of disposition began to
telate everything :—“There was aking named Dagaratha
endued with the prowess of acelestial. I am his eldest
son known among men by the name of Rima. This is my
younger brother (named) Lakshmana, (ever) serving me.
This is my wife, known by the name of Sit Commanded
by my father and mother, I in obedience to their mandate,
69


546 RAMAYANA.


desirous of acquiring religious merits, have for the purpose
of securing righteousness, come to the forest for dwelling
here. Talso am anxious to know thee. Whose daughter
art thou,? And what is thy name, and what thy lineage ?
Possessed of a captivating form, thou appearest to me as a
Rakshasi. Tell me truly why thou hast come here.” Hearing
these words the Rakshasi, affficted with lust said, “Listen,
O Rama. Iwill relate everything truly. I am a R&kshasi,
capable of wearing shapes at will. My name is Surpanakhd.
Striking terror into the hearts of all, I range this forest
alone. My brother is named R&vana.* Thou mayst have
heard of him. And he that is given to long sleep—the
mighty Kumbhakarna, the righteous Bibhishana, who never
serves the RA&kshasas, and the brothers Khara and Dushana
renowned in conflict (are also my brothers). O Rama, I have
surpassed them all (in prowess). At first sight of thee,
*Lapproach thee, thou best of men, as my husband, with
{feelings of) love. I am endued with power, and range
about at will by virtue of my strength. Become my husband
for ever and aday. What wilt thou do with Sita ? Deformed
and unsightly, she is not worthy of thee. 1 am fit for thee.
Do thou look upon me asawife. This unsightly, grim
unchaste and human one with a Jean abdomen, will I devour
up. along with this brother of thine. Then having thy wish,
in company with me, thou wilt range the Dandakas, surveying
the various mountain summits and forests.” Thus addressed,
Kakutstha having charming eyes, well skilled in speech,
with a smile, began to speak thus.


™ Another reading is: my brother is named Révana—a Rékshasa, and the
lord of RAkshasas. He is the som of Viasavan. Thow mayst have heard of
dim—T,


ARANSAKANDAH. 547


SECTION xvili.


Waa a smile, Rima jestingly addressed Surpanakh&
who had been ensnared in the noose of love, in soft words,
saying, “Gentle one, 1 am already wedded; this is my
beloved wife. To females like unto thee co-wife-hoad is
exceedingly miserable. This young brother of mine is good-
looking, and is of an excellent character ; he is graceful, and
is still unmarried. The powerful one is named Lakshmana,
He hath not yet tested the pleasures of a wife's company, and
is. desirous of having a spouse. And he is youthful and of
an inviting presence. He will become a fit husband for thee,
considering this thy beauty. © thou of expansive eyes, seek
this brother of mine as thy husband, even as the solar beam
seeks Meru, (By doing so),thou O supremely beautiful damsel,
wilt not have to fear aco-wife.” Having been thus addressed
by Rama, the Rakshasi intoxicated with lust, at once leaving
Rama, spake unto Lakshmana, saying, “I am fit to be thy
wife possessed of transcendental grace, having regard to this
beauty of thine. And with me thou wilt happily range these
Dandaka’s.” Thus accosted by the R&kshasi, Sumitra’s son,
Lakstmana versed in speech, with a smile appropriately
observed unto Surpanakh3, “Why wishest thou to be the
servant of me who am a servant myself *  lotus-hued one,
T am dependent on my noble brother, O thou of expansive
eyes, be thou securing the summum bonum, with a joyful
heart, become, O superbly beautiful wench, the younger
wife of the noble one of great good fortune. Renouncing
this frightful, unchaste, hideous, old wife possessed of a
laan abdomen ; he will devote himself unto thee. O Paragon
among damsels, O supremely charming lady, what man
possessed of discernment, passing by such grace, would bear


= The text is difficult to render literally Way wishest thou to be the female
servant of me who am myself a male servant-—T.


548 RAMAYANA,


affection to a human female ?” Thus accosted by Lakshmana,
that hideous one having a lean abdomen being incapable of
understanding jest, tovk his words as true. Thereupon as
that subduer of enemies, the irrepressible Rima, was seated
in the cottage in company with SitA,the Rakshasi,transported
with lust, said unto him, "Forsaking this deformed, unchaste,
horrible old wife of thine possessed of a lean abdomen, thou
dost not regard me. To-day, thou looking on, I shall eat up
this human female. And [ shall, rid of a co-wife, happily
range with thee.” Having said this,even as a mighty meteor
atriketh Rohini, that one having eyes resembling live coals,
waxing exceedingly enraged, rushed towards that (damsel)
with the eyes of a doe. Thereupon, hindering the Raksha
resembling the noose of death, as she was rushing on, the
mighty Rama, growing wroth, said unto Lakshmana, “O
Saumitri,® what is the good of jesting with a base and
wicked one? No use of doing it. Look, O amiable one,
Vaidehit is well nigh dead. It behoves thee, O foremost of
men, to deform this frightful, uuchaste R&kshasi of a huge
abdomen, transported with lust.” Thus desired the exceed-
ingly strong Lakshmana, fired with wrath, taking out his
sword, in the sight of Rama, cut off her nose and ears. Her
ears and nose cut off, the terrible Surpanakhd, uttering fright-
ful cries, fled amain into the forest whence she had come.
And being deformed, and covered with gore, the dreadful
Rakshasi sent up many a roar, like clouds rumbling in the
rains, And bleeding profusely, the grim-visaged Rakshasi,
lifting up her arms, and roaring, entered the mighty forest.
Then, having been deformed, {the Rakshasi) approaching,
her brother of fierce energy, Khara, come to Janasthfna, seat-
ed surrounded by numbers of Rakshasas), fell down to the


* We are pbliged to use this epithet ax it is in order to prevent the too
frequent recarrence of Sumitrd’s sox—T.

+ Videha’s danghter. We retain this epithet also for the reason assigned
above—T.


BRAN YARANDAM. 549


earth, even as the thunder-bolt bursts from the sky. Then
that sister of Khara, bathed in blood, and deprived of her
senses through fright, related all about Rima’s arrival at the
forest along with Lakshmana and his own wife, as well as the
circumstances connected with her being deformed.


SECTION XIX.


Sreines, s sister deformed, and covered with blood, fallen
on the ground, the Rakshasa, Khara, fired with wrath asked
her, saying, “Arise ! Leave off fear and amazement. Tell me
plainly by whom thou hast been thus deformed. Who is it
that with his finger-end hath by way of sport hurt a black
venomous snake that was innocent? He that coming in
cantact with thee hath to-day drunk virulent poison, winding
afatal noose round about his neck, knoweth it not through
ignorance. Endowed with strength and prowess, ranging
about at will, wearing shapes at pleasure, and resembling the
destroyer himself, going to whom hast thou come by this
condition? Who among the gods, Gandharbas or creatures
or the high-souled saints is of such mighty energy as to have
deformed thee? In this world Ido not see him that would
do me wrong. Even as a crane afflicted with thirst appro-
priateth milk mixed in water (leaving the latter out), so by
means of fleet and life-destroying shafts will I among the
immortals take the tife of that chastiser of Paka, the thousand.
eyed mighty Indra. The forthy blood of whom, having his
marrow pierced (by me) and slain by me in battle, doth the
Earth wish to drink ?Tearing off flesh from the cropse of whom
slain by me in conflict, shall the birds so joyfally feed on it?
Him, whom I shall wrong mightily, neither the gods, nar the
Gandharbas, nor the Pig&chas,* nor the Rakshasas, will be
able to rescue in fierce encounter. Recovering by degrees


© A kind of foul apirits,


550 RAMAYANA.


thy sense, it behoves thee to tell me what individual it was of
execrable character, who by his prowess, hath humbled thee
in the forest.” Hearing these words of his brother, who was
under the influence of extreme rage Surpanakh& with tears in
her eyes, said, “Tender, and endowed with beauty, possessed
of youth and gifted with great strength, with expansive eyes
resembling white lotuses; clad in bark and dark dear-skins ;
subsisting on fruits and roots, having their senses under
control ; leading an ascetic life and a Brahmacharya mode of
existence ; there are two sons of Dagaratha the brothers Rama
and Lakshmana resembling the Sovereign of the Gandharbas,
and marked with signs betokening royalty. I cannot
ascertain whether they be celestials, or human beings. And
between them I saw there a youthful female furnished with
grace, and having a dainty waist ; adorned with every kind of
ornament. And it is on account of this female that I have
like one unchaste and uncared for, have come by this condi-
tion at their hands. Nor 1 wish in the midst of encounter to
drink the forthy blood of that crooked one as well as those
two slain (in battle). Let this my prime wish be crowned
there with fruition. Her and their blood will I drink in dread-
ful conflict.” As she said this, Khara wrought up with bound-
Jess passion, said, “Two human beings accoutred in arms,
and wearing bark and dark deer-skins have in company with
a female entered this deep Dandaka forest. Do ye return,
alter slaying them, as well as that wicked one, And this
sister of mine will drink their blood. Ye Rakshasas, even
this is my sister's dear desire, Repairing thither, speedily
accomplish this, bearing them down by your native might.
Seeing those two brothers slain by you, this one, exceedingly
rejoiced, will drink their blood in the field.” Thus commis-
sioned, those fourteen Rakshasas set out there like clouds
driven by the winds, accompanied by Surpanakha.


ERAN VAKANDAM. 5st


SECTION xx.


Tien the grim Surpanakh&, coming to Raghava’s asylum
pointed out to the Rikshasas those brothers in company
with Siti. And they saw the mighty RAma seated in the
cottage in company with Sith, and ministered unto by
L&kshmana. And seeing her, as well as the Rakshasas who
had come, Rama remarked unto his brother, Lakshmana of
flaming energy, saying, ‘O Sumitra’s son, do thou fora
while guard Sit&, Ishall slay these that have come to
this asylum here.” Hearing these words of Rama versed
in the knowledge of self, Lakshmana honored his speech
by saying, “So be it.” And the righteous Raghava strung
his mighty bow decked with gold; and addressed the
Bakshasas, saying, “We that have entered into this
untractable forest of Dandaka in company with Sita are the
sons of Dagaratha, the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana,
Why do you intend to do injury unto us. Suhsisting on
fruits and roots, having our senses under control, carrying
on asceticism and leading a Brahmacharya life, we are
passing our days in the forest of Dandaka. It is to destroy
you, wicked, and troublesome that I equipped with the bow
have come here at the desire of the saints. Stay there con-
tent you should not move further. If you havea care for
your lives, desist, ye rangers of the night.” Hearing those
words of his, those fourteen grim Rakshasas bearing darts
in their hands, exceedingly enraged, with their eyes
reddened, breathing high spirits, harshly said unto the sweet-
speeched Rama, having his eyes reddened, whose prowess
they had not seen before, “Having excited there our
lord, the high-souled Khara, it is thou that shalt lose thy
life no later than this day, being slain by us in battle. What
Power hast thou, being one, to stay before us many, in the
field,—what shall I say of thy coping with us in conflict ?


552 RAMAPANA,


in consequence of the parighas, darts,and pathifas discharged
by our arms, thou wilt surely lose thy life, along with thy
prowess, and this bow which thou pressest with thy hand.”
Having said this in wrath,those fourteen R&kshasas, uplifting
their weapons and daggers rushed towards Rama; and
discharged darts at the invincible R&ghava. Thereupon
Ka&kutstha by means of shafts decked with gold, cut off those
fourteen darts of theirs. Seeing this, that exceedingly ener-
gelic one,waxing highly enraged, took out fourteen nérdches,
whetted on stone, resembling the sun. And even as Satakratu
hurls the thunder-bolt, Raghava drawing his bow and taking
his aim at the Rakshasas, let go those shafts. And those
Rikshasas, their breasts pierced with vehemence, and

themselves bathed in blood, fell down to the earth, like
snakes dropping down from an ant hill. And with their
breasts pierced, they dripping with blood, deformed and
“deprived of their lives, lay on the ground like trees whose
roots have been severed. Seeing them fallen on the ground,

the Rakshasi, beyond herself in wrath, approaching Khara,
with her blood a little dried up, again in distressful guise
threw herself on the earth, like a plant exuding gum. And
in presence of her brother, she set up a mighty roar; and
then her face grown pallid, she dropped tears, emitting cries,
Seeing those Rakshasas stain in battle, Surpanakb& again
hastened (to his brother), and the sister of Khara, related in
detail the slaughter of those R&kshasas.


SECTION xxl,


Sreinc Surpanakh& again tying on the ground, Khara
in anger spake out unto that one, who had come to bring on
evil, saying, “I had but receatly commissioned for thy behoof
those heroic Rakshasas living on fiesh. Why then dost thou


ARANY ARANDAM. 553


again weep? Bearing-regard and attached unto me, and
ever engaged in my welfare, they, assailed by others, are
incapable of being slain ; nor do they not obey my orders.
What can it be? 1 would hear of the occasion owing to
which again, crying ‘Ah lord,’ thou rollest on the earth like
a serpent. Why dost thou beweep like one forlorn, while
I thy lord, am living? Arise! Arise! Do not fear, cast off
thy stupor.” Thus addressed, and consoled by Khara, that
irrepressible one,wiping her eyes, spoke unto Khara, “Having
had my nose and ears cut off, I had come hither, covered with
blood ; and thow hadst consoled me. And thou also hadst
despatched fourteen heroic R&kshasas, for my behoof, for
slaying the terrific Raghava along with Lakshmana, But alt
those, bearing ill will (towards Rama), bearing darts and
pathsas in their bands, have been slain in conflict by means
of weapons penetrating into the vitals. Seeing those possessed
of great speed, in a moment laid low on the ground,—as well
as (witnessing) Rama's mighty deed, great fear hath taken
possession of me. O ranger of the night, 1 am afraid, and
agitated, and cast down. I have (at length) found in thee a
refuge, seeing fear on all sides. Wilt thou not rescue me
who am sinking in this ocean of grief having sorrow for ita
ators and affright for billows? And these Rakshasas,
living on flesh who had arrived at that place, have been slain
by Rama with sharpened shalts. If thou hast any kindness
for mo as well as those sons of Rakshasas and, O ranger of
night, if thou hast strength and energy to cope with Rama do
thou kill this thorn of the Rakshasas, who hath set up his
dwelling in the forest of Dandaka. If thou do not to-day slay
that destroyer of foes,“ Rama, I shall banishing shame, give
up my life in thy very presence. Meseems, thou backed by
thy forcest art incapable of staying in battle before Rama in
high encounter, Thou plumest thyself on being a hero; but


* Another reading is that enemy of mine.—T.
+ Some texts—(Rima) equipped with the bow.—T.
jo


554 RAMAYANA,


art really none such.- Prowess hath been falsely attributed
unto thee. Go off from Janasthina without delay, along with
thy friends, © stainer of thy line, do thou in battle slay
those fool-hardy ones, But if thou fail in slaying those human
beings, Rama and Lakshmana, then how canst thou void of
strength and of slender prowess,stay here ? Overcome by the
energy of Rama, thou shalt speedily meet with destruction,
Dagaratha’s son, Rama, is endued with energy. His brother
is possessed of high vigour by whom! have come to be
deformed.” Having thus bewailed long, that R&kshasi,
possessed of aspacious abdomen, through sorrow, became
bereft of her senses before her brother, and exercised with
great grief cried, striking her abdomen with her hands.


SECTION xxii.


On being thus taunted by Surpanakb&, Khara spoke
these sharp words in the midst of the Kakshasas, “Arising
from this thy humiliating censure, my wrath is beyond
compare. I can not bear it, like salt-water cast on a sore.
From my prowess 1 count not Rama who is a human being
possessed of a frail life—him whe slain by me shall to-day in
consequence of his misdeed give up existence. Restrain thy
tears, and remove thy fear. | shall despatch R&ima along with
his brother to the abode of Yama. Thou shalt O Ra&kshasi,
quaff on the ground the hot blood of Rima of evil life,
slain by my axe.” Overjoyed on hearing the words that
dropped from Khara’s mouth, she again through fickleness
extolled that foremost of Rakshasas, brother. At first
reprimanded by her and then praised, Khara spoke unto
his general, named Dushana, saying, “Do thou, O gentle


ARANY ARANDA. sss


one, atray fourteen thousand of those Rikshasas, gifted with
furious vehemence, ever following my wish, who nevér turn
away from the field; who are hued {ike unto purple
clouds, who revel in cruelty,* and who are elated (in con-
sequence of their prowess). And thou gentle one, do thou
atonce bring my car as well as my bows, and pasty colored
arrows and scimitars, and darts, and various whetted
javelins. O thou versed in warfare, for slaying this haughty
Rama, { go in the very fore-front of the high-seuled Paulas-
tyas.t As he said this, Dushana brought his great cas hued
like the sun, yoked with excellent steeds of various colors.
And thereupon ina passion Khara ascended that car
resembling a peak of Meru, embellished with burnished-gold,
furnished with golden wheels, open; having its pole studded
with lapises ; surrounded with fishes and flowers and trees
and stones, and the sun and the moon and gold, and auspi-
cious articles; and swarms of birds, and stars ; having
streamers and swords ; garnished with bells;and yoked
wite superb coursers. And behoiding that mighty army
consisting of cars and arms and pennons, Khara as well as
Dushana, said unto that multitude of Rakshasas, “March
forth 1? And then uttering tremendous roars, rushed out
with great vehemence four and ten thousands of those ter-
rible Rikshasas equipped with clubs and paftisas and darts
and sharpened axes, and scimitars and discuses,—shining
beautifully in their bands and satis and dreadful parighas
and innumerable bows, and maces, and mushalas and vajras
fearful to behold, griped fast. And those following the will
of Khara issued out of Janasthana. Seeing those Ra&kshasas
of dreadful forms cushing out, Khara’s car remaining a little


Then


1, possessing the pride of the lion, having large mouth,
high-souled, revelling im cruelty, endued with strength, of farce energy.—T.

+ Lit —pulastya's sons. The Rakshasas were commonly desconded from
Pulastya.—tT.


SALAR JUNG LIBRARY
1% 020


556 RAUL ANG.


taking the permission of Khara, the charioteer drove at
speed those powerful steeds decked in shining gold. And
driven with speed. the car of Khara—slayer of foes—filled all
directions with its rattle. And Khara, fired with wrath, and
having piercing voice, hastening to destroy his enemy like
the Destroyer himself, again urged his charioteer with roars,
like a mighty cloud showering down stones.


SECTION XXxtiT.


As those terrible and inauspicious forces were marching
on, a mighty sable cloud with dreadful sounds began to
shower down blood, And the steeds yoked to his (Khara’s)
car, gifted with great celerity, dropped down all of a sudden
on the level high ways strewn with blossoms. A dark circle
bordered with red, resembling that of charcoal, appeared in
the vicinity of the sun, Anda frightful vulture, having a
huge body, approaching the banner, sat upon the upraised
golden flagstaff. And beasts and birds having shrill voices,
living on flesh, remaining near Janasthana, emitted various
dissonant notes. And in the quarter lighted up by the sun,
fierce jackals having mighty voices, in dreadful cries pre-
saged evil unto the R&kshasas. And terrific clouds surcharged
with water and blood, and resembling elephants with rent
temples, enveloped the sky. And a dense darkness appeared,
capable on making one’s hair stand on end, and no quarter
was distinctly visible. And out of season, there appeared
evening hued like a cloth soaked in blood. And facing
Khara, terrible beasts and birds set up cries. Kankas,
Gomayas and vultures, portending fear, began to cry. Ever
inauspicious in war, jackals presaging evil, with their
mouths belching forth flame, howled in the face of the forces,
And comets, resembling parighas appeared beside the sun.


ARANVAKANDAM. 587°


That mighty planet Swarbhanu seized the sun when there
was no parva. And the winds blew violently; and the sun
was without lustre. And when there was no night, stars
wearing the sheen of fireflies, began to fall. And in the tanks
fishes and fowls were inert, and the lotuses were withered.
And at that hour the trees were shorn of fruits and flowers ;
and without wind there arose dust dusky like clouds. And
the parrote uttered wild notes—chichikuch?. And meteors of
terrific aspects fell with loud noises. And the earth with her
mountains, woods, and forests, shook. And as the intelligent
Khara was roating from his car, his left arm shook, and his
voice fell, and as he surveyed around, his eyes moistened,
and his head ached ; yet through ignorance, he did not desist.
Witnessing these mighty portents capable of making one’s
hair stand on end, Khara with a laugh, addressed the whole
body of Rakshasas, saying, “Even as a strong person from
Prowess counts not a weak one, I do not dwell upon all these
mighty portents, dreadful to behold, that have appeared.
Even the stars will ] bring down from heaven with my sharp
shafts; and even Death will I engaged, bring to mortality,
Without slaying Raghava puffed up with pride as well as
Lakshmana, by means of sharp weapons, I return not (from
the conflict). Let that sister of mine, for whom Rama and
Lakshmana have had sense perverted, attain her desire, by
drinking their blood. I had never before met with defeat in
conflict. Ye have witnessed it. I do not speak a falsehood,
Wrought up with rage, { shall slay in fight the sovereign of
the celestials himself, going on his mad Airfvata, with the
thunder-bolt ia hand —what shall [ say of those two, who
are human beings? Entangled in the noose of death, that
mighty army of the Rfkshasas, hearing his challenge,
experienced boundless enthusiasm. And anxious to see the
encounter, there came high-souled saints, and celestials, and
Gandharbas, and Siddbas, with the Chiranas. And these
Pious ones assembled, Spoke unto one another, “Welfare unto


558 RAMAPANA,


those cows, and Br&hmanas, and those that are prized by
the worlds! As the discus-handed Vishnu vanquished the
foremost Asuras, may Righava rout in battle. those rangers
ofthe night, the progeny of Pulastya! And saying this as
well as various other things, the supreme saints and the
celcstials stationed in the sky conceiving curiosity (as to the
issue of the conflict), beheld the host of those Rakshasas,
whose days had been numbered. Then impetuously Khara
issued in his car from the van of the army.* And these
twelve endowed with exceeding prowess, vés., Synag&mi,
Prithugyama, Yaynagatru, Vihangama, Duryyaya,Karaviraksha,
Purusba, Kalak’nuka, Maghaw&li, Mah&mali, Sarpasya, and
Rudhir&agana posted themselves around Khara. And Mahf-
kapSla, Sihuldksha Hramathi aod Trigirast—[these four
going before the forces, went at the back of Dushana]. Then
‘as the planets dart towards the sun and moon, that heroic and
dread{ul army of Rakshasas, eager for victory suddenly
rushed towards the princes with great vehemence. |


SECTION XxIV.


Wiuten Khara of fierce prowess had come to the asylum
Rama‘in company with his brother saw all those evil
prognostics, And beholding those dreadful portents, Rima
exceedingly distressed, apprehending some calamity to the
Rikshasas, observed unto Lakshmana, “O mighty armed
one, behold these great presages that have taken place,
capable of annihilating all beings, and which have for their
object the utter extermination of the R&khasas! Yonder


* The N. W. P. text has a different sloka. And secing him come out on the


ground, they themselves came out.—T.
+ The slota in the text is incomplete: The part within brackets, taken


frem the N. W. P. recension completes it —T.


ARANYAKANDAM. 389


threatening clouds of assinine sable, showering down blood
and uttering loud sounds are ranging the welkin, And, O
discerning one, rejoicing at the prospect of my fight, all
these arrows emit smoke, and my bows plated on the back
with gold, “are restless. Meseems from the noise of the
wild birds that impending on us is danger and
uncertainty to life. Without doubt, there shall take place
a mighty conflict. At this critical time, my arm shaking
momentarily, betokens, O hero, victory unto us, and defeat
unto the enemy. And thy face appeareth pleasant with a
delightful lustre. O Lakshmana, the pallid face of those
that prepare for conflict, auger shortening of life. We can
hear the shouts of the Rakshasas as they roar, as also the
blasts of the trumpets of those doomed to be wounded
blown by Rakshasas of remorseless deeds. A considerate
person that wisheth for his welfare, apprehending peril,
should prevent disaster ere it arrives, Therefore bearing
arrows in thy hand, and equipped with thy bow, do thou,
taking Videha’s daughter, take refuge in the mountain
cavern, covered with trees and difficult of access. That thou
shouldst act contrary tomy words, is what Ido not wish,
Swearing by my (eet, go thou without delay, my brother, Thou
art both strong andahero: Thou canst, without doubt,
slay these (Rakshasas). But I wish to slay all these rangers
of the night myself." Thus accosted by R&ma, Lakshmana,
taking arrows anda bow, took refuge in an imaccessible
cave along with Sit&. Thereupon, saying, ‘Ah! we have
spoken it sharp,” Rama put on his mail. And adorned with
that mail resembling fire Rima appeared in the dark like a
mighty flame streaming up. And uplifting his bow, and
taking his arrows, that powerful one stood there, feeling
all directions with the twangs of his bow-string. Then the
high-souled gods and Gandharbas, Siddhas and Ch&ranas
came there, with the inlention of witnessing the fight. And
high-souled saints of the world, and the foremost Brahmarshis,


§60 RAMAYANA,


of pious acts, coming together, spoke unto one another,
saying, “Hail to cows and Brahmanas, and all those in
whom are established the worlds! May R&ghava vanquish
in fight those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya,
even as the discus-handed Vishou routed in battle the fore-
most Asuras!’ Having said this, they again spoke, eying
one another, “There are fourteen thousand of the Rakshasas
of dreadful deeds, while the righteous R&ma is single. How
can fight take place (between two such parties) ?” Having
said this, the R&jarshis, Siddhas, multitudes of the best of
the twice-born ones, and celestials stationed in the sky were
moved with curiosity (as to the issue of the confict), Then
seeing Rama filled with energy, remaining in the field, all
beings from fear experienced great pain. And the peerless
grace of R&ma of energetic deeds became like unto that of
the high-souled infuriated Rudra.* While the gods, Gan-
dbarbas and Charanas were thus conversing, the forces of
the Rakshasas sending up solemn sounds, furnished with
horrible armour, arms and flags,conversing in heroic parlance,
roaring at each other, stretching bows, momentarily
yawning,t sending forth shouts, and blowing trumpets. The
universal uproar filled that (entire) forest. Scared and
terrified at the hubbub the rangers of the wood fled to quarters
free from noise; nor did they cast their eyes backward.
And that army resembling the ocean, and rife with sounds,
equipped with various weapons, with furious speed came
towards Rama. And Rima also versed in warfare, casting
his eyes around, found the forces of Khara ready for fight.¢
Then stretching his dreadful bow, and swiftly taking out
shafts, (Rima) for compassing the destruction of the entire
body of tho Rikshasas, waxed furiously enraged, And like


* There is a variation in reading here ; the sense, however, is the same.

+ The cominentator says the yawning was in consequence of the soldiers
having during the conflict indulged in liquor.—T.

$ Another text —The holder of pinada.—T.


ARANYAKANDAM. | sh


unto the flaming fire at the universa! dissolution, he. growing
wroth, was incapable of being looked at, And seeing him
filled with energy, the sylvan deities were extremely pained.*
And the aspect of the enraged Rama appeared like that of the
holder of Pintka, intent upon destroying Daksha’s sacrifice.
Furnished with bows and ornaments and cars and mail hued
like fire, that army of (hose subsisting on ftesh, appeared like
masses of blue clouds at sunrise.


SECTION XxV.


Cosine to the asytum, Khara in company with those
that went before him, saw that slayer of foes, the enraged
Rama, holding his bow. And secing him, Khara possessing
a shrill voice, raising his bow, commanded unto the chat
eer to drive towards Rama,—“Drive on!” At Khara’s
command, the charioteer drove the steeds to where the
mighty-armed Rama stood alone, holding his bow. And
seeing him (Kbara} entered the field, all those rangers of
the night—the counsellors—uttering mighty shouts, environed
him round. And Khara stationed on his car in the midst
of R&kshasas appeared like red bodied one risen in the
midst of the stars. Then in battle Khara, affticting Rama
of incomparable energy with a thousand shafts, uttered a
tremendous roar. Then all the rangers of the night, waxing
exceeding wroth, showered variuus weapons on that terrible
bowmen, the invicible Rama. And wrought up with rage,
the R&kshasas in battle assailed him with iron clubs, and
darts, and prdsas, and swords, and axes. And resembling
clouds (in hue), the exceedingly strong R&kshasas, having
huge bodies, darted towards Kakutstha by means of steeds
and cars. And mounted on elephants resembling mountain-


* Another reading is :—The sylvan deities fied away.
7


563 RAMLPANs.


peaks, numbers of Rikshasas, intent upon slaying Rama
in battle, showered arrows on him, as mighty clouds pour
down showers on the monarch of mountains. And Rima
was hemmed in by all those fierce-looking Rakshasas,
even as in the evening Mahideva is surrounded by his
courtiers, And asthe ocean resisteth the tide of a river,
Raghava by means of arrows resisted the weapons discharged
by the Yatudhinas. As a mighty mountain, assailed by
the thunder-bolt, doth not feel pain, Rama, having his
person pierced by terrible flaming weapons, did not feel
pain. And pierced, and with his person covered with
blood, Rima, the descendant of Raghu, resembled the sun
enveloped in evening clouds, And seeing him single,
surrounded by many thousands, the Gods, Gandharbas,
Siddhas, and supreme saints became sorrowful. Then Rama
getting enraged, bringing his bow to a circle, discharged
sharpened shafts by hundreds and by thousands. And as if
in sport, Rama in the conflict shot irrisistible (shafts)
furnished with Kanka feathers, and decked with gold,
irrisistible, capable of inflicting extreme pain, and resembling
the noose of Death. And sportively discharged by Rama,
those arrows deprived the Rakshasas of their lives, like the
noose forged by death. And piercing the persons of the
Rikshasas, those arrows, soaked in blood, going up to the
sky, appeared with the splendour of flaming fire. And
innumerable shafts, exceedingly fierce, capable of depriving
the Rakshasas of their lives, were let go from the circle of
his bow. And with those R&ma severed bows, in battle by
hundreds and by thousands and flag ends, and shields, and
mail, and many arms with embellished hands, resembling the
trunks of elephants. And the arrows of Rima discharged
from the string pierced and cut off steeds mailed in gold,
yoked unto cars, together with the charioteer ; and elephants
with their tiders ; and horsemen with horses. And slaying
foot-soldiers, he despatched them to the abode of Yama.


- ARANVYARANDAH. 363


”
And cut off with #d/tkas and xdrdchas, and sharp-pointed
vikernas, the rangers of the night uttered dreadful howls of
distress. And like a withered wood afflicted by fire, that
host harassed by the various marrow-piercing* shafts shot by
Rima, did not attain ease. And some beroic rangers of the
night possessed of great strength, waxing furious, threwt at
R&ma prasas, and darts and axes. Thereupon resisting by
means of shafts those weapons of theirs, the mighty-armed
Rama endued with prowess, took their lives in the conflict,
and cut off the heads (of warriors). And having their heads,
and shields and bow-strings, severed, they fell as fall on the
earth trees thrown down by blasts from the wings of
Suparna.~ Those rangers of the night that remained there,
wounded by arrows, and losing heart, fled with speed to
Khara, to seek bis protection. Thereat, encouraging them,
Dushana, taking his bow, ran furiously in high rage against
Rama, like the enraged Destroyer himself. And rallied
again (by Dushana) and, their fear dispelled through their
having found refuge with him, they armed with sd/as, ¢d/as,
and crags, darted against Rama. And bearing in their hands
darts, and clubs, and nooses, those exceedingly strong ones
showered in battle shafts and weapons, And the R&kshasas
discharged vollies of trees and crags. And capable of making
one’s hair stand on end, that battle was dreadful and furious
and now on the side of Rama and now again on that of
the Rikshasas. And waxing exceedingly wroth, they bore
on him hard from all sides. Then finding all directions
entirely covered with R&kshasas, and showers of shafts, that
one gifted with mighty strength, sending up a terrific shout,
fixed (on the bow-string)the exceedingly effulgent Gandharba,
weapon (for discharging it) among the Raksbasas. Then
thousands of shafts went forth from the circle of his bow;


* Another reading is, sharpened.—T.


+ Another reading: remaining before Rima, threw powerful wespons—T.
$ Lit—Ot fair feathers. A name of Garura,


564 RAMAYANA,


and all directions were covered with thronging arrows. And
those Rakshas:s, afflicted with arrrows could not see Rama
how he took out his dread shafts, nor how he discharged
those excellent shafts; théy only saw him drawing his bow.
And the darkness spread by the arrows enveloped the sky
with the sun, And Rama stationed there continued pouring
in shafts And the earth was covered with shafts shot, and
alighting, and alighted simultaneously. And at places were
seen Rakshasas by thousands slain, falling, enfeebled, torn
and riven. And cut off by Rama with arrows, darts and
patticas in that battle the fearful field was scattered heads
with turbans, arms with finger-fences ; torn thighs and arms,
and various ornaments, horses, excellent elephants and cars,
shattered in numbers, chouris, fans, and umbrellas, and
peonons of various descriptions. Bcholding all those stain,
the (remaining) Rakshasas, sore distressed, could not (again)
advance before that captor of hostile capitals Rama.


SECTION Xxvi.


INDING his own forces slaughtered, the. mighty-armed
Dushana speedily ordered five thousand Rakshasas, gifted
with tremendous velocity, difficult -of being’ approached,—
who never turned from the field. And from all sides they
incessantly showered darts and patticas, and scimitars, and
stones, and trees, and shafts. Thereupon by means of shafts
the righteous Raghava resisted that mighty destructive
shower af trees and stones. Resisting that shower, Rama
with his eyes staring, and resembling a bull, flew into: a
yreat rage, for the purpose of slaying the whole body of
R&kshasas.Then influenced by wrath, and flaming in energy
he on all sides covered the army along with Dushana with
arrows. Then the general, Dushana, destroyer of enemies,
getting wroth, opposed Raghava with arrows resembling


ARAN FARANDAM. 565


thunderbolts. Then heroic Réma highly angered, severed
his (Dushana’s) mighty bow with shafts sharp as razors,
and stew his four horses by means of as many shafts. And
having slain the steeds, he (Rama) cut off the head of the
charioteer by means of acrescent shaped weapoa, and
pierced the (R&kshasa Dushana) in the breast with a brace of
shafts, His bow cut off, his steeds together with the
charioteer slain, and himself deprived of his car, he (Dushana)
took a parigha resembling a mountain peak, able to make
one's down stand on end plated with gald, capable of
afflicting celestial hosts, studded with sharp iron sandus,
and graced with the fat of foes ;—of the touch of a thunder-
bolt, able to pierce the persons of enemies. And taking
up in that encounter the pavigha resembling a mighty snake,
that ranger of the night of cruel deeds Dushana, rushed
towards Rama, And as Dushana was rushing forward,
B&ghava by means of a couple of shafts cut off his two arms
with the ornaments. And the huge parigha escaping from
(Dushana’s grasp) fel! forward on the field like the banner
of Sakra. And like a mighty elephant whose husks have
fallen off, Dushana, on his arms having been severed, fell
down to the earth. Seeing Dushana down on the ground,
and slain in battle, all creatures, saying, “well done !” ‘well
done !" paid -homage unto Kakutstha, In the meantime,
three generals, getting wroth, being entrapped in the nonse
of death, rushed against Rama in a body—viz; MahAkapala,
Sthulakshya, and the mighty Pramathi the Rakshasa, Maha-
kapala, upraising a large dart, and Sthulakshya, taking a
pathica, and PeamBthi, an axe. And as soon as Raghava beheld
them advance, he resisted them by means of sharp and keen-
edged shafts, even as one receives guests that have come. And
Raghu's son split Maldkapila’s head,—afflicted Pramathi
with countless shafts, and lodged the eyes of Sthulakshya
with sharp shafts. And they fell down to the earth like mighty


* ‘The text may also mean—able fo rend the cities of foes—T.


566 RAMAYANA.


trees of many boughs. Thereat instantly inflamed with wrath,
Rama by means of five thousand shafts, sent as many thousands
of Dushana’s followers to Yama’s abode. Hearing that Dushana
had been slain, Khara, waxing wroth, commanded his mighty
generals, saying, ‘Fighting with that vile man, Rama, along
with his mighty forces Dushana hath been slain in battle,
together with his followers, Let all the Rakshasas slay him
with weapons of various shapes.” Having said this in wrath,
Khara darted towards Rima. And discharging choice shafts,
Syenagimi Prithugriva, Jajnasatru, Vihangama, Durjaya,
Paraviraksha, Parusha, K&lakamuka, Hemamali, Mabaimali,
Sarpasya, and Rudbirigana,—these twelve generals endued
with mighty prowess accompanied with their forces, proceeded
vehemently against Rama, discharging excellent shafts,
Thereat with shalts resembling fire,and decked with diamonds
and with gold, (R&ma) possessed of energy destroyed the rest
of his (Khara’s) forces. And as the thunderbolt slayeth the
mighty, Asuras, those shafts studded with gold, and like unto
smoking fire, slew those Rakshasas. And in the field Rama
slew an hundred R&kshasa with an hundred Karnis, and a
thousand (again) with a thousand. And, their armour and
ornaments severed, and their bows broken in shivers, those
rangers of the night fell down on the earth, bathed in blood,
And as a spacious dais is covered with Kuga, the entire field
was scattered with the Rakshasas fallen in battle with hair
dishevelled, and covered with blood. And at that time that
fearful forest, with the Rakshasas slaughtered, and with its
clay mired with flesh and blood, resembled hell itself. Four-
teen thousand Rikshasas of dreadful deeds were slain
by Rama single, a human being, fighting, (moreover) on foot.
And the remnant of his (Khara’s) forces were that mighty
car-warrior, Khara himself, and the Rikshasa, Trigira ; and
{on the other side) was that destroyer of foes—-Rima. The
rest of the Rakshasas, gifted with great prowess, terrible,
and difficult of being withstood, were al! slain in battle by


ARAN YARANDAM. 567


the elder brother of Lakshmana. Then seeing that dreadful
army destroyed in terible conflict by the mighty RAma, Khara
ascending a great car, advanced before Rama, like Indra with
the upraised thunder-bolt.


SECTION xxvil.


Ass Khara was advancing before Rama, that leader of the
army named Trigira, approaching him, said, “Du thou
employ me, who am possessed of prowess ; and thyself desist
from this rashness. Behold the mighty-armed Rama brought
down in battle. I swear (unto thee) truly; I touch this
weapon, (to say) that I will slay Rama, who deserves to be
slain by alt the Rakshasas. Either 1 shall prove his death
ia battle, or he shall prove mine. Restraining thy martial
ardour, do thou for a while become a witness. Either, joyed
in consequence of Rama being slain, thou shalt repair unto
Janasthina ; or I being slain,thou shalt enter the field (against
him).” Thus satisfied by Trigira, from his desire to meet
with death, the latter, on being permitted with “Go,”
proceeded towards Rama. And like a hill with three summits,
Trigira rushed towards’ Rima on an effulgent car yoked with
steeds. And as a mighty cloud poura down shower, (Trigira)
discharging vollies of shafts, uttered a roar resembling the
sounds of a wet kettledrum. And seeing that the
Rakshasa Trigira was advancing, R&ghava resisted (his
attack) by discharging sharpened shafts. And that encounter
of those exceedingly powerful ones, Rima and Trigira was
fierce, like unto that between a lion and an elephant. Then
struck on the forehead by a brace of shafts shot by Trigira,
the wrathful Rima enraged, and inflamed with anger, said,
“Ab! such is the strength of the heroic Rakshasas! I have
been wounded in the forehead with shafts resembling flowers.
Do thou also take the arrows shot from my bow.” Saying


568 : RIMAL ANA,


this, “Rama) enraged, and influenced by wrath, wounded
Trigira in the breast with fourteen arrows. And that ener-
getic one by means of four shafts having their joints bent,
brought down his four steeds. And by means of eight arrows
(Rama) laid low the charioteer from the front of the car.
And Rama with a shaft severed his upraised standard. Then
as that ranger of the night was descending from his broken
car, Rama pierced his breast with arrows,—and ‘thereat he
was stupified. Thereupon, that one of immeasurable prowess,
out of anger by means of three shafts possessed of celerily,
brought down Trigira’s three heads. And that ranger of the
night present in the field, affficted by the shafts of Rama,
after his heads had fallen first, fell, vomitting smoking gore.
And the R&kshasas remaining after the rest had been slain,
belonging unto Khara's original forces losing heart, began
to flee like deer terrified at a hunter. And seeing them fly,
Khara waxing wroth, swiftly making them desist, darted
towards Rama, like R&hu darting towards the moon.


SECTION Xxviil.


Sraina Dashana slain in fight along with Trigira, Khara,
witnessing Rama's prowess, was filled with fear. And seeing
that irrisistible R&akshasa host—even Dushana aad Trigira—
slain by the mighty Rama alone, and seeing the great
courage that was made in the army, that Rakshasa, Khara,
was seized with despondency. Then as Namuchi advances
against Vasava, Khara stretching his powerful bow, advanced
against Rama. And Khara hurled at Rama ndrdchas reveling
in blood, resembling infuriated venomous snakes. And
repeatedly twanging his bow, Kbara, mounted on his car,
began to range the field, displaying his weapons through] his


ARAN Y AKANDAM. 569


acquired skill, Aud that mighty car-warrior covered all sides
with his shafts. And seeing this, Rama of a tremendous bow
with shafts incapable of being borne, and rssembling tongues
of flaming fire, entirely enveloped the welkin, even as a cloud
poureth down showers. And with the sharpened shafts shot
by Khara and Rama, the entire firmament on all sides was
thronged. And as each enraged was engaged in coping with
the other, the sua, enveloped in a net-work of shafts, did not
appear. And as a mighty elephant is struck with the goad,
Rima in the conflict attacked (his opponent) with xddckas and
xdrdchas and sharp-poiated oéirna. And as that R&kshasa
sat on his car, bow in hand, all creatures saw him, as if be
were the very Destroyer with the noose in his haud. And at
this time Khara thought that Destroyer of all his forces,
established ia his manliness, the exceedingly powerful Rima
to be overcome with fatigue. And secing that one powerful
like the lion, and gifted with the vigorous gait of the lion,
Rama was not moved, as a lion seeing a pony deer (is not
moved). And then as an insect falls into a flame, Khara
mounting a mighty car, resembling the sun, approached Rima.
And, displaying his lightness of band, Khara severed the bow
of the magnanimous Rima, with the arrow (fixed on it) at the
place where it is grasped. Then taking up seven other
shafts, resplendent like the thunder-bolt of Sakea, Khara,
enraged, sent them into (Rima’s) main-joints, and then
afflicting Rima of unparalleled energy with a thousand shafts,
Khara sent up in that conflict a loud shout, And riven by
the shafts discharged by Khara, Rama’s mail resembling the
sun fell to the ground. And pierced with those arrows, all
over his body, and inflamed with rage, Raghava appeared in
the field, like a smokeless faming fire. Then that destroyer
of foes, Rama, for compassing the end of his enemy, stringed
another mighty bow, sending forth solemn sounds,—the
redoubtable Vaishaava bow that had been conferred on him
by the Maharshi. And uplifting that superior bow, Rama


7a


‘570 RAMAPANA.


rushed against Kbara. Then with shafts having bent knots
and golden feathers, Rima, wrought up with rage, severed in
battle Khara’s standard. Andon that exceedingly graceful
golden standard being hewn down it seemed as if the sun
dropped to the earth at the behest of the celestials, And
thereat Khara, understanding the import of things, fired with
wrath, pierced R&ma’s breast with five arrows, like one
striking an elephant with a goad. And Rama on being
pierced with a good many shafts discharged from Khara’s
how, and having his body bathed in blood, was highly wroth,
Thereupon that foremost of bowmen, and wielder of a mighty
bow, taking six shafts, let them go, after aiming at them. And
with one shalt he pierced Khara’s head, with two his arms ;
and with three arrows headed like half-moon, Rama wounded
Khara in the chest. Then that highly energetic one,influenced
by anger, assailed the Rakshiasa with thirteen ndrdchas
whetted on stone and with one that exceedingly powerful one,
cut the yoke of the car, with four the four steeds, with the
sixth the head of Khara’s charioteer, with three the stout
trivenu of the car, with two the wheel, and with the twelfth,
severing as if in sport Khara’s Low with his hand,* with the
thirteenth, resembling the thunder-bolt pierced Khara in the
encounter. Then with his bow shattered, deprived of his car,
(Khara} having his horses slain as well as his charioteer killed,
taking a mace in his hand leaped to the ground, and stood
there. And the celestials and Maharshis exceedingly rejoiced
assembled in the welkin in a body, and with joined hands
extolled that feat of that mighty car-warrior Rama.


* Another text reads : with the arrow set,


ARAN 4KANDAH. $71


SECTION XXIx,


AAND to Khara deprived of his car standing with a mace
in his hand, that exceedingly energetic one, Rima, preluding
his speech with mildness, spake, “Backed by this mighty
host abounding in elephants and horses and cars, thou hast
done an exceedingly wicked deed, execrated by all the
worlds. Even if one happen to be the lord of the three
worlds, one given to troubling creatures, and who is cruel
and engaged in wicked acts, can not exist. All persons
destroy, like a snake that hath intruded itself, him that doth
cruel deeds, hostile to the interests of every one. People
delightedly behold the end of him that doing an action either
from covetuousness or desire, doth nut like a Br&hmana
swallowing a Karaka, see the consequence thereof, What,
O Ra&kshasa, dost thou gain by slaughtering exceedingly
pious ascetics engaged in righteous acts, living in the forest
of Dandaka? Like unto trees whose roots have been reduced,
cruel persons, execrated of men, who perpetrate iniquitous
acts, do not exist long. And asa tree puts forth blossoms
is season, the doer of sinful deeds, at the hour (of repentance)
inevitably reaps their fruit in the shape of dreadful anguish
(of the spirit). And, O ranger of night, as the effect of
having taken rice mixed with poison, appears without delay,
even so also people readily reap the fruit of their own acts.
O ranger of the night,it is to take the lives of the perpetrators
of dreadful sins, who wish ill unto men, that I the king
have come. To-day the gold-decked arrows discharged by
me, piercing (thy body), shall enter into the earth, cleaving
it, like serpents falling into an aot-hill. Slain in battle, thou
shalt in company with thy army,follow those people practising
Piety, whom thou hast devoured in the Dandaka forest.
To-day let those great saints, who had formerly been slain by
thee, stationed in the sky, behold thee slain {in turn) with my


572 RAMAYANA.


arrows, and inhabiting hell. Do thou strike as thou likest.
And thou that art of an odious race, do thou put forth thy
enerpy. To-day I will bring down thy head, even as a palm
falls to the ground.” Thus addressed by Rama, Khara
enraged and beyond himself with passion,with eyes reddened,
replied, “O son of Dagaratha, why having slain inferior
RBkshasas in battle, dost thou praise thyself without reason ?
Those foremost of men that are puissant and powerful, do
not,inflated with their energy,mouth (their own consequence).
It is the mean-minded Kshatriyas of impure hearts that
magnify themselves among men, even as thou O R&ma,
dost. What hero, when the hour of his death hath
approached, publishes in the field his own lofty fineage and’
sings bis own hymn, As brass wearing the semblance of
gold, displays its own defect on being heated,* with a fire
lit with Kuga,t so thou hast betrayed thy own lightness by
this speech of thine. Thou dost not see me staying here
mace in hand, like a moveless mountain dyed in metals,
bearing mobile and immobile things, I can, mace in hand,
deprive thee and the three worlds to boot clean of your lives,
like the very Destroyer with the noose in his hand, But I
will not parley much with thee as much as I could wish: the
sun is going to set, and our fight shall be interrupted. Four-
teen thousand Rakshaxas have been slaughtered by thee. I
will for their deaths wipe their tears to-day.” Saying this,
Khara, highly enraged, hurled his macet provided with
golden rings at Rama, like unto the blazing thunder-bolt.
Thereat, reducing to ashes trees and shrubs, that mighty
flaming mace, discharged by Khara’s arm, fell before
Rama. And Rima severed in many fragments that mighty
mace, resembling the noose of Death, as ascending the
welkin, it was coming down, Thereupon, like a she-serpent


* ie. becomes dusky, as Ramanuya intelligently remarks.—T.
+ Another reading is, fit mith Austs,
{ Another reading is, slated with gold.”


ARANVAKANDAN. 573


brought down by force of incantations, the mice fell to the
earth shattered and riven.


SECTION xxx.


Cornna off the mace with his shafts, Raghava attached
unto righteousness with a smile said unto Khara these angry
words, “Thou vilest of Rakshasas, this is the utmost of thy
might, which thou hast displayed. Rendered more nerveless
at my hands, in vain dost thou storm. Riven by my shafts,
thy mace, belonging unto thee who art prolix in the matter
of vocabulary, destroying thy confidence, hath saught the
earth, And what thou hadst said,—‘I will wipe the tears
ofthe Rakshasas that have been slain,’ hath also proved
false. As Garura stole ambrosia, will } deprive thee, O
Rakshasa, who art base, of amean disposition and a false
character, of thy life. To-day the earth shall drink the blood
vitiated with foamy bubbles, of thee, having thy throat
severed, and riven by my shafts. Having all thy body
covered with dust, and thy two arms lopped off, thou shalt,
difficult to win, take thy nap, embracing the earth, like a
damsel difficult to win. On thee, disgrace of R&kshasas,
lying down, and being fast asleep, this Dandaka shall be
refuge of those that shall resort to it for shelter. O Rakshasa,
in thy Janasthna, with its (RAkshasas’ slain by my shafts,
ascetics shall fearlessly go about’ in the wood. Toeday
Rakshasas, capable of exciting fear in others, rendered forlorn
and with their friends slain, shall from fear, with their faces
wet with tears, fly (this place}. To-day thy wives whose
husband art thou of such a nature—and who art of alike
lineage (with thyself),—shall experience the sentiment of
Sorrow, and be deprived of their all. Thou of acruel disposi-
tion, thou of ignoble’ soul, thou that art aye a thorn (in the


S74 RAMAYANA,


side) of Br&hmanas, it is for thee that ascetics, frightened and
dispirited, have so long been pouring the clarified butter.”
As Raghava, influenced by anger, said this in the field,
Khara from wrath, with accents rendered harsher, fell to
censuring (Rama), “Thou art wondrous proud ; and thou
art fearless albeit fear is present unto thee. And come
under the sway of death, thou dost not understand what
should be said and what left unspoken. Those persons that
have been fast bound by the noose of death, do not in
consequence of their senses having ceased to perform their
functions, discern what is proper and what improper.’
Saying this unto Rama, that ranger of the night (Khara),
parsing his brows, espied a mighty sd/a hard by, And
looking about him on all sides in the field for a weapon, he
uprooted it, biting his nether lip. And raising up the tree
with his arms, and uttering a roar, that exceedingly powerful
one aiming at Rama discharged it, exclaiming,—“Dead thou
art.” And as it descended, the puissant Rama cut it off by
means yfa multitude of shafts, got into a mighty rage for
the purpose of slaying Khara in battle. Then R4ma pers-
piring, with eyes reddened in wrath, pierced Khara in battle
with a thousand shafts. And blood mixed with froth gushed
by the sides of the shafts, like torrents flowing from fountain
in a hil* stupified in battle by the shafts shot by R&ma, and
maddened by the smell of blood, Khara furiously made for
Rama, And as he (Khara) was rushing on, bathed with blood,
Rama equipped with arms, suddenly summoning his strength
walked backward two or three paces. Then with the view
of bringing about (Khara’s end) Rama took up in the con-
flict an arrow resembling fire or another weapon of
Brahm& himself. And that righteous one shot at Khara,
that (arrow), which had been conferred on him by the
intelligent Maghav&n. And discharged by Rima from his
bent bow, that mighty arrow with the roaring of the thunder-


‘* The text varies slightly in other texts.—T


ARANVUAKANDAAM. 578


bolt fell at Kara's breast. And burning in the fire of the
arrow, Khara fell down on the earth, like the giant Andbaka*
in the forest of Sweta, consumed by Rudra. And thereat
Khara slain fell down like Vritra slain by the thunder-bolt, or
Namuclsi by foam,t or Vala by Indra’s Acanz. After this, the
celestials, assembled with the Charanas, struck with wonder
joyfully sounded kettle-drums and showered blossoms on
Rama. “In over half a moment Rima by means of sharpened
shafts hath slain in mighty encounter fourteen thousand
R&kshasas, wearing shapes at will, headed by Kbara and
Dushana. Ah! mighty is the feat achieved by Rima knowing
self. Ah! this mighty prowess, this mighty firmness, show
like unto those of Vishnu himself.” Saying this all the deities
went to from where they had come. Then the R&jarshis in
company with supreme saints, with Agastya (at their head),
gladly paying homage unto R&ma, said the following words,
is for this that the chastiser of Paka, the great Indra,
Purandra, had paid a vi to the sacred asylum of
Sarabhanga. And the Mabarshis had dexterously brought
thee to this place, for compassing the destruction of those
foes-the wicked R&kshasas. And it is owing to this, that,
Oson of Dagaratha, thou hast performed this mighty deed.
(Now) the Maharshis will carry on their proper pious offices
in the Dandaka,” After this, that hero, Lakshmana, accom-
panied with Sit& came out of the mountain cavern, and
joyfully entered the asylum, Then the victorious and heroic,
Rama, honored by the Maharshis, entered the asylum,
worshipped by Lakshmana. And seeing that destroyer of
foes, and bringer of comfort unto the Maharshis, her husband,


© The Asura Andbaka was slain in the forest of Sweta by Rudra, This is
related in the Puranas, Another reading is Suetarayga yathantaka like. the
Destroyer in the forest of Sweta. Swa, according to the Kurma Purana Uttra
Khands, in the Kalanyara bill, by a kick with his left leg, slew the Destroyer,
engaged in pennances, who had come to kill the Rajarshi Sweta, who was
great votary of Siva.—T.
+ Namuchi was slain by a thunder-bolt laid over with foam —T.


RAMAYANA,


Vaidehi embraced him. And seeing the multitudes of Rakshasaa
slain, Janaka’s daughter, behulding the undeteriorating Rama,
ministered unto him with supreme joy. And with a delight-
ful countenance again embracing that destroyer of foes, who
had been honored by the deligited Maharshis, Janaka’s
daughter became exceedingly happy.


SECTION xxx!


Tren Akampana bestiring himself, speedily issuing out
of Janasthana, spake unto Ravana, “O king, a great many
Ra&kshasas living in Janasthina,have been slain,and Khara also
bath been slain ia battle. I alone have with much difficulty
managed to come here.” Thus addressed, the ten-necked
one, flaming up in energy, with his eyes reddened in wrath,
said this unto Akampana, “Who, having his days numbered,
hath ravaged the dreadful Janasthina? Who shall no more
wend the way of all beings ?, Doing me a bad turn, Maghavan
himself, or Vaigravana, or Yama, or Vishnu, cannot attain
happiness. Iam the destroyer of the Destroyer himself ;
and I burn even very Fire. And I can bring Death itselé
to mortality. [can by my impetus resist the force of the
wind. And when enraged, I can by my energy consume the
Sun and Fire.” Thereat, Akampana, with joined hands, from
fear replied to the ten-necked Ravana, in faltering words,
beseeching courage. Thereat that foremost of Rakshasas,
the ten-necked one, granted him courage. Then inspired
with confidence, Akampana without fear spoke, “There is a
son of Dagaratha, youthful, resembling a lion,* named Rama,
of broad shoulders, and possessed of excellent beauty of long
and mighty-arms. (He) is sable-hued, of high fame, and


* Another reading is Viranga : rupopeta : possessed of handsome person.—T.


AR&AN1 AKAND AM. 377


of matchless prowess and vigor. It is he that in Janasthiaa
hath slain Khara with Dushana” Hearing Akampana's
words, that lord of the R&kshasas, Ravana, breathing like a
mighty serpent, said these words, “Tell me, O Akampana,
hath Rama come to Janasth’na, accompanied with the sover- >
cign of the celestials and the body of the immortals? Again
hearing Rf&vana’s words, Akampana described the strength
and energy of that high souled one. (He) is named R&ma,
and is exceedingly energetic ; the foremost of al! bowmen—
furnished with celestial panoply ; and is possessed of pre-emi-
nent prowess in warfare. Like unto him in strength, of red
eyes, and gifted with a voice like the sound of a kettledrum,
his younger brother, Lakshmana has a countenance resembl-
ing the full-moon, He hath met with him (Rama) as the
wind meeteth with a flame. He is endued with grace, and
is the foremost of monarchs. It is he who hath ravaged
Janasthana, The magnanimous gods did not come there,
No doubts need be entertained on this head, The feathered
shafts, plated with gold near the plumed part, becoming
five-mouthed serpents ate up the Rakshasas. Wherever
oppressed with fear the Rakshasas go, they see Rama
stationed before them. In this way, O sinless one, hath
Janasthana been exterminated by him.” Hearing Akampana’s
words, Ravana said, “I will ge to Janasthdna for slaying
Rama with Lakshmana.” Whien he had said this, Akampana
said, ‘Hear, O king, the true report of Rama’s prowess and
manliness. Enraged, the highly famous Rama cannot by put-
ting forth vigor be checked. And by means of his shafts, he
can make river in full flood turn its course. And he can bring
down from the sky its stars and planets, and that graceful
one can recover the depressed Earth. And that lord can sub-
merge all creatures by riving the continents of the sea, and
with his shafts can resist the onset of the ocean, and the
wind ; and that illustrious one that foremost of persons by
virtue of his vigor, destroying the worlds, can again create


73


578 RAMAYANA,


all creatures, © ten-necked one, forsooth, Rima cannot be
subdued in conflict, either by thee or the world of R&kshasas,
as heaven is incapable of being attained by asinner. I
deem him incapable of being slain by all the Gods and
Asuras together. This alone is the means of slaying. Do
thou heedfully listen to it! He has a wife of sterling worth
in the world, and that slender-wajsted one is known by the
name of Sitd. She is in the full bloom of youth, and hatha
symmetrical person—a jewel among womankind embellish-
ed with jewels. And neither a goddess, nor a Gandharbi,
nor yet an Apsari, nor a Pannagi is equal to her ; and what
is abuman female? Thrashing him, do thou in the mighty
forest, carry away his wife. Without Siti, Rama shall cease
to exist,” Thereupon, the lord of the R&kshasas, Ravana,
happened to relish those words ; and reflecting (a while),
that mighty-armed one addressed Akampana, saying, “Excel-
lent well. I will go there alone, accompanied by my charioteer
only. £ will this very morning with a glad beart bring
Vaidehi to this spacious palace.” Saying this, Ravana de-
parted, lighting up all sides, on a sun-shiny car, yoked with
mules. And coursing the firmament, that mighty car of that
foremost of Rakshasas looked like the Moon among clouds.
And proceeding far, he, approaching the asylum (of Taraka’s
son), presented himself before him. And M@richa entertain-
ed the king with meats and drinks passing human, And
having entertained him personally with a seat and water (to
wash the feet), Maricha spoke these pregnant words, “O
king, O lord of the Rakshasas, is it well with the worlds ¢
Iam filled with fear: f apprehend that all is not right, since
thou hast come hither (alone) in such post-haste speed.”
Thus addressed by M&richa, the highly energetic Ravana,
versed in speech, said, “My child, the guards (of Janasth&na)
have been slain by Rima of untiring energy ; and all Janas-
thina, incapable of being slain, hath (by him) been brought
down in battle. Do thou, therefore, assist’ me in carrying


ARAN Y ARANDAM. 579


away his wife.” Hearing these words of the lord of Rakshasas,
Méricha said, “What enemy-of thine in the guise of a friend,
hath spoken of Siti unto thee ? And,O foremost of monarchs,
who, having been, entertained by thee, doth not bear thee
good will ?* Tell me, who is it that hath told thee, ‘Bring
Sita hither? Who is it that hath set bis heart on severing
the summit of the entire Rakshasa world? He must be thy
enemy that excites thee to this. Of this there is not the least
doubt. He wishes to extract through thy agency the fangs of
a venomous snake. Who (intends) to lead thee astray by
imposing on thee such a deed? Who, O king, hath struck in
the head, thee that wast slumbering in peace? Raghava in
war is like a mad elephant, having an unblemished ancestry
for his trunk, perspiration for his temporat exudation ; and
arms resting well beside him for his tusks, O Ravana, thou
art not competent even to look at him. Thou ought not to
rouse up the sleeping man-lion, that slayer of skilful Rakshasas
resembling deer, with his sport in the field, for his joints and
down ; arrows for his body and sharp scimitar for his teeth.
O Sovereign of the Rikshasas, thou ought not to plunge
thyself into this dreadful, and abyssless ocean, having the how
for its alligators, activity of arms for its shine, arrows for its
billows, and engagement for its waters. Be propitious,O lord
of Lank& | - O foremost of Rakshasas, with a contented heart,
thou hadst better go thy way to Lank&, Do thou ever sport
with thy own wives: Iet Rama in company with his wife,sport
in the woods.” Thus addressed by M&richa, the ten-throated
Riivana desisted, and entered Lank& the best of capitals,

* Another reading ls—ko na nandati ninditi ; who having been insulted by


thee, doth not rejoice (in thy prosperity), and, therefore, in the garb of friend:
ship hath done thee this wrong @T.


580 RAMAYANA,


SECTION xxx.


8 EING fourteen thousands of R&kshasas of dreadful
deeds, together with Dushana, and Khara, and Trigira, slain
in battle by Rama single-handed, that one resembling clouds,
Surpanakt&, again fell to send up mighty sounds, And
witnessing R&ma’s deeds, incapable of being performed by
others, she, extremely agilated, went to Lank&, ruled by
Ravana. And she saw the effulgent Ravana in front of his
palace, surrounded by his counsellors, he Vasava surrounded
by the Maruts ; seated on a supreme golden seat resembling
the sun, and hke unto a flaming fire on a golden dais kept
alive by sacrificial offerings ; unconquerable by high-sowled
saints, celestials, Gantharbas aud all creatures; terrible
like the Destroyer with his mouth wide open; his persons
containing scars* of wounds inflicted by the thunder-bolt
and the lightnings, in the war betwren the gods and Asuras ;
his breast bearing marks of attacks made by Arravata with
the


ds of his tusks j;—having twenty hands, and ten


—wearing elrgant attire; broad-breasted 5 heroic ;
marked with royal signs 5 (in hue) resembling cool lapises ;
embellished in ornaments of burnished gold; having goodly


hands, white teeth, and a hi


se face resembling a hill ;—
even him who in the war of the gods had been assailed an
hundred ways with the descent of Vishnu’s discus; whose
body had boen cut with all the weapons of the celestials ;
{him) who furiously disturbs the deep incapable of being
disturbed ; uproots mountain summits, and tramples over
gode—the destroyer of righteousness, and the vivlater of
the employer of all celestial arms, and the
ices ;—who going to the city of Bhagabati,
* This reminds one of Milton : of Beelzebub, he says,—


- His person
Deep sears of thunder had intrenched—Par. Lost—Book J.


ather's wives ;
disturber of sac


ARANVAKANDA. 581


and vanquishing Vasaki, had carried off Takshaka’s beloved
wife; who, going to Kailaga, and defeating him having for
his vehicle a human being, had carried off the car Pushpaka
coursing everywhere at will; who endued with prowess
had devastated the divine Chaitraratha grove, the tank
(situated there) and the Nandana wood,—as well as the
gardens of the gods; and, who, himself resembling a mountain
summit, had by means of his upraised arms, obstructed the
rising of these repressor of foes the exalted Sun and Moon;
who, possessed of calmness, having formerly for ten thousand
years carried on asceticism in the mighty forest, offered his
own heads unto the self create one; who in conflict fears not
death from either gods or Danavas or Gandharbas,or Pig&chas
or birds of serpents, from none save human beings; who,
possessed of prodigious strength, forcibly takes away the
chirified butter sanctified with mantras from the sacrifical
ground; the destroyer of sacrifices about to be completed ; of
villainous nature; the slaughterer of Br&limanas; of cruel
deeds ; harsh and kindless, and ever bent on doing evil unto
all creatures; and railing furiously at all creatures; the
inspirer of fear in all beings, And the R&kshasi beheld her
exceedingly powerful and cruel brother, wearing gorgeous
apparel and ornaments, and decked in a glorious garland,—
seated, like the Destroyer at the time {of dissolution) ready
(to destroy) ; the exalted chief of Rakshasas; the delight of
the race of Paulastya. Stupified with fear, the Rakshasi,
approaching that destroyer of foes; Ravana, surrounded by
his counsellors, said these words, And transported with fear
and desire, Surpanakh&, given to fearlessly ranging every
where, who had been deformed by that high-souled one,
showing (her mutilation}, addressed these harsh words unto
Ravana of flaming and expansive eyes.


582 RAMAP ANS.


SECTION xxxtt,


—_


Ten the woe begone Surpanakh&, in high wrath spoke
harshly in the midst of the courtiers, unto Ravana, given to
railing loudly against all creatures, “Intoxicated with enjoy-
ments, acting as thou wilt, and without any control whatever,
thou dost not see that 2 dreadful disaster is impending. The
subjects do not esteem a monarch that is given to sensual
enjoyments, is intent upon satisfying his lust and is covetous
like the fire in acemetery. The king that doth not act at
the proper time, finds destruction along with his kingdom
and acts. Even as elephants shun the muddy river, do
people shun from a distance, the ruler that doth not send out
spics, who showeth not himself (unto his subjects), and who
hath lost his independence. Like unto rocks in the sea,
those monarchs that do not administer their dominions, that
-are not dependent, do not prosper. Having incurred the
hostility of the gods, the Danavas and the Gandharbas of
subdued souls and senses, how canst thou, who art fickle,
and hast not employed spies, become the king? And, O
Riakshasa, thou art childish and foolish; and doth not
know what thou shouldst. How canst thou then become
the king? O thou best of conquerers, those kings whose
spies, exchequer and morality are not free, are like the
common herd. It is because kings know distant dangers
through spies, therefore they are styled far-sighted. 1 believe
thou hast no spies, and that thy counsellors are common folks,
since although Janasthina with thy kinsmen is destroyed,
yet thou takest it not to heart. Fourteen thousands of
Rakshasas of dreadful deeds, with Khara and Dushana, have
all been slain by Rima single-handed ; Rama of untiring
energy hath inspired the saints with courage; the Dandakas
have been benefitted ; and Janasth’na hath been harassed.
But thou, covetous and intoxicated and in the power of


ARANVAKANDAM. 583


others, dost not understand that a great danger is over-
hanging (thee). People do not in times of peril assist a
sovereign that is wrathful, stingy, intoxicated, haughty aod
deceitful. Even his own kindred slay a sovereign that sets
immense store by his own self, is of light worth, regards
himself highly, and irascible. They do not serve him ; nor
do they fear when he intimidates them. Such an one is speedi-
ly dethroned ; and reduced to poverty and hecomes like a
straw. Even dry wood may serve a purpose ; or stone, or
dust ; but no purpose is capable of being served by a sovere-
ign that hath been cast off his place. Like a cloth that bath
been worn, like a garland that hath been trodden, a king
that hath been dethroned, although able, is of no conse+
quence, But a king that keeps his wits about him, understands
everything, is of controlled senses, and grateful, and of
virtuous character, endureth for ever. That king is honored
by men, that sleeping with his eyes, is awake as respects
his eye of duty, and (the effects of) whose anger and favor,
are seen (by all). But, thou Ravana, who hast not by means
of spies, acquainted thyself with the slaughter of Rakshasas,
art of evil understanding and bereft of all these virtues,
Given to disgracing others, ignorant of the proper distribu-
tion of time and place,* and never taking care to distinguish
merits and defects, thou, thy kingdom being in danger, wilt
speedily meet with disaster.” On his vices having been thus
celebrated by her (Surpanakha}, that lord of the rangers of
night, Ravana, musing a while, was long plunged in thought,


* The commentator, is silent here, The meaning evidently is, thou dost
not discern the where and when of things.—T.


58% NAHAK ANA,


SECTION XXXIV..


Senna Surpanakh& speak harsh words in the midst of the
courtiers, Ravana, being enraged, asked her, saying, “Who
is Rima? And what is his prowess? And what bis form ?
And what his power? And why hath he entered the forest
of Dandaka, difficult to range? And what Raima’s weapons,
by means of which he hath slain the Rakshasas ? And;Khara
hath been stain in battle, and Dushana and Trigira. Do
thou, O thou of a pleasing person, tell me the truth, And
who hath deformed thee ~” Thus addressed by the lord of
the R&kshasas, the Rakshasi, transported with rage, com-
menced to duly narrate all about Rima. “Rama the son of
Dagaratha is long-armed, of expansive eyes, clad in bark aud
dark deer-skin, and like Kandarpa in grace. And drawing
a bow resembling that of Sakra, decked with golden rings,
he discharges biazing ndrdchas, like unto serpents of virulent
poison, I do not see in the field, Rama drawing his
bow : I only see the host being slaughtered by a shower of
shafts. And as Indra destroys (a field of) goodly crops, by
pouring down hail stones, fourteen thousand Rakshasas of
dreadful prowess, as well as Khara and Dushana were in a
little over a moment slain with sharp shafts by Rima alone
fighting on foot. And he hath reassured the saints, and
after having been deformed, I alone from fear of slaying a
woman, have been let off by the high-souled Rama knowing
sell. His brother is endued with mighty energy, and in
merit, is of equal prowess ; and he is devoted to his brother,
and beareth him regard ; the puissant one is named Laksh-
mana. And wrathful and invincible and victurious, and
powerful, and intelligent and mighty, (he) is Rama's right-
arm—his life ranging externally. And Rama’s virtuously
wedded beloved wife, having expansive eyes, and a face
resembling the full-moon, is ever to the welfare of her lord:


ARAN 4 RANDAH. 585


And that fair-haired, fair-nosed, and fair-thighed illustrious
one possessed of beauty, graceth the forest like a goddess,—
an if a goddess of wealth herself. Of the lustre of burnished
gold, with her finger nails reddish and projecting, and
graceful, that surpassingly lovely wench is named Sita—the
slender waisted daughter of Videha. And neither a goddess,
nor a Gandharbi, nor a Yakshi, nor a Kinnari, had I seen
before on earth, possessed of such beauty. He that shall
have Sit&: for his spouse, and who shall be warmly embraced
by her, shall live longer in the world than the Lord of
celestials himself, That good-natured girl, unparalleled on
earth in loveliness, who can well pride herself on her person,
isa worthy wife for thee ; and thou too art a fit husband foe
her, It is to bring over for thee that one of spacious hips,
and a high and well-developed bust, that I had put forth my
endeavours. But, O mighty-armed one I have been disfigured
by the wicked Lakshmana. As soon as thou hast seen Vaidehi
raving a countenance resembling the full-moou, thou shalt
be afflicted with the shafts of Cupid. If it is thy purpose to
have her for thy wife, at once stretch forth thy right leg, for
attaining success. If, O lord of R&kshasas, thou relishest
my speech, do thou then, O Ravana, without fear, do as I tell
thee. Understanding their incapacity, do thou, O lord of
Rakshasas, for making her thy wife, by force carry away the
frail Sita of a blameless person. Hearing that Rama by
means of straight coursing shafts hath slain the Ra&kshasas
that had gone to Janasthina, and seeing Khara and Dushana,
kitled, do thou ascertaining thy course, adopt it.


586 RAMAL ANA,


SECTION XXxVv.


Hearne those words of Surpanakh&, able to make
one’s hair stand on end, (Ravana) ascertaining his course
after issuing his orders to his councillors, departed. And
proposing to himself that act, weighing its good and evil,
considering his capacity or otherwise, and (finally) determin.
ing his purpose, Ravana with a fixed mind went to the
handsome stable. And going to the stable in disguise, the
lord of the R&kshasas commanded the charioteer, saying,
“Yuke the car.” Thus asked, the charioteer possessed of
ficet vigor, in a trice, yoked an excellent car after his heart.
And ascending the car coursing at will, made of gold and
garnished with spectral faces as well as arrow decked with
gold,—-resembling a mass of clouds, the graceful ruler of the
Rakshasas—younger brother to the Lord of wealth—proceeded
in that noiseless (vehicle), past the lord of rivers and streams.
And with chouris of white hair, and a white umbrella, having
ten-[aces, resembling (in hue) cool lapises, wearing ornaments
of polished gold, possessed of ten mouths, and twenty
arms, clad in elegant apparel,—the foe of the celestials, and
slayer of the foremost ascetics—having huge heads like
unto the monarch of mountains, the lord of the Rikshasas,
mounted on that chariot coursing at will, appeared beautiful
like a mass of clouds in the sky, with cranes, in the midst
of lightning. And that one possessed of prowess beheld
the shore of the sea, containing crags, scattered with trees
bearing fruits and flowers of various kinds by thousands,
bordered all around with pools furnished with cool and
delightful waters, ornamented with spacious asylums having
daises, graced with woods of plantain, beauteous with cocoa-
outs, and blossoming sf/a and palmyra, and famdia, trees,
grateful with supreme saints rigidly restraining their fear,
and with serpents and fowls of fair feathers and Gandharbas


ARANVAKANDAM. 587


and Kinnaras by thousands ; and pleasant with Siddbas and
Charanas, that have controlled their lust ; with those descend-
ants of Brahm3—the Vaikhanas, the M&shas, the Valakhilyas,
and the Marichipas ; swarming with females,divinely beautiful,
dight with gorgeous ornaments and garlands, and Apsaras
skilled in sport, by thousands ; frequented by the wives of the
celestials,and honored by graceful girls; ranged by multitudes
of deities and D&navas, feeding on ambrosia ; abounding with
swans, Kraunchas, and frogs, echoing to (the cries of) cranes;
containing stones resembling the lapis, and mild and cool by
the influence of the ocean. And as he proceeded,the younger
brother of the Lord of wealth, saw on all sides spacious cars
capable of coursing at will, sable,furnished with fair garlands,
and resounding with trumpet notes,—and Gandharbas and
Apsaris. And surveying by thousands woods of sandal
exuding gum at their roots,* and of choice aguru, grateful
tunto the sense of smell ; and woods and groves of excellent
and odorous takkula fruits; blossoms of the Tamfala, and
thickets of black pepper ; heaps of pearts drying on the shore ;
rocks ; the best corals in masses ;t summits of gold and
silver ;¢ charming peltucid rills at places; and cities filled
with corn and wealth, abounding in gems of women, and
thronged with horses, elephants and cars—R&vana on the
shore of the ocean beheld around a level and soft scene,
resembling heaven itse!i—where breezes of delicate feel kept
breathing. And there he sawa fig tree, hued like clouds,
surrounded by ascetics; its branches stretched around an
hundred Yoyanas, and the exceedingly powerful Garura had
ascended one of its boughs, taking an elephant and a huge
tortoise, for the purpose of devouring them. And that best
of birds, the powerful Suparna by his weight suddenly broke


° Niryydsurasamutanam, gen, (sandal), which forms the principal ingredi-
ent im perfumes, containing odorous gums.—T.

+ Another reading is: deaps of conch—T.

$ Some texts read sailam—hills —T.


588 RAwAYANS.


a branch containing full many leaves. And it came to pasa
that Vaikhfnas, M&shas, Valakbilyas, Marichipas, Ayas, and
Dhumras,—saints of the highest order~had assembled there.
Thereat, moved by commisseration (for the ascetics), the
virtuous Garura, taking with promptitude the broken bough
measuring an hundred Yoyanas as well as the elephant and
the tortoise, by one Jeg, at length eating up the animals, and
by means of the bough, exterminating the country of the
Nishdas—that best of birds attained unequalled delight iu
consequence of having rescued the mighty ascetics, Thereat,
attaining double energy by virtue of that delight, that
intelligent one set his heart ov bringing ambrosia. And tearing
off the iron links of the network, and bursting into the
repository of gem,he carried away secreted ambrosia from the
residence of the great Jodra, Kuvera’s younger brother
beheld this fig tree, named Subhadra, graced with the
Maharshi, on which Suparna had left his mark, Theh repair-
ing to the other shore of that lord of rivers, the ocean,
Ravana saw an asylum lying in the forest in a charming and
sacred recess. And there he saw a Rakshasa,named Maricha,
clad in a dark deer-skin, bearing a head of matted locks,
subsisting on restricted fare, And approaching Ravana duly,
the R&kshasa, Maricha, received the king with every
hospitality passing human. And having entertained him
personally with meats and drinks, M&richa addressed him in
weighty words, saying, ‘O lord of the R&kshasas, O king is
it well with thee in Lanka? And what for hast thou again
come hither so speedily ?” Thus addressed by M&richa, that
highly powerful one, skilled in speech, Ravana said.


ARANYAKANDAM. 589


SECTION XXxxvi.


“Oo Maricua, hearken unto me, my child, as I relate
(everything unto thee). I am distressed ; and in this distress
of mine, thou art certainly my great refuge. Thou knowest
Janasthina, where lives my brother Khara, and the mighty-
armed Dushana, and my sister, Surpanakha; as also that
R&kshasa subsisting on (human) flesh, the long armed Trigira,
many other heroic night-rangers besides, of high enthusiasm
in battles—Rakshasas, who had been living there at my
command, troubling in the mighty forest the ascetics carrying
on their pious offices. And fourteen thousands of Rakshasas
of dreadful deeds, heroic, high-spirited, -Rikshasas possessed
of exceeding prowess ; while residing in Janasthfina of late,—
clad in mail and equipped with various weapons, headed by
Khara, met with Rama in the field. Getting enraged, Rama
in conflict without returning any harsh speech, by means of
his shafts shot from bis bow,—hath, a human being, and
fighting on foot, with his flaming arrows slaughtered fourteen
thousand Rakshasas of fierce energy. And Khara hath been
slain in battle, and Dushana also hath been brought down,
And having slain Trigira too, (R&ma) hath rid the Dandaka
of all fear. Having been expelled by bis enraged sire, that
disgrace of Kshatriyas, the weak Rama, living in company
with his wife hath effected the destruction of this army. He
is of a vile character, crabbed, foolish, covetous, of uncon-
trolled senses, bereft of morality, sinful, and ever engaged in
the evil of all creatures,—by whom, violently without hostility
my sister hath been deformed in the forest by having her nose
and ears cut off. Of him will I carry off by force from
Janasthana, bis wife, Siti, resembling the daughter of a
celestial. Be thou my help in it. For certain, O exeedingly
strong one, if thou help me at my side, if my brothers also
back me, J do not think much of all the celestials. Therefore,


590 RAMAPANA,


be thou my help; for, thou art capable, O Raksha: In
prowess in battle, and in indomitableness, there is none like
thee. Thou art a mighty hero commanding resources and
conversant with potentillusory displays. Taking this to my
heart, I have come to thee, O ranger of the night. Do thou
listen as to the business in which by my command thou art to
help me. Becoming a golden deer, marked with silver spots,
do thou range ahout in Rama's asylum in presence of Sit.
Seeing thee helpless, in the shape of a deer,Sit& will say unto
her Jord and Lakshmana also,—“Do ye catch it." And wher
they shall have departed, I shall carry off from the empty
asylum, Sit& without let, like Rahu depriving the Moon of his
splendour. Then when Rama shall be sore afflicted because
of the carrying off of his wife, I shall easily, crowning my
soul with success, safely bear away Sita. Hearing Rima's
words, the face of the high-souled Maricha became blank and
he was seized with apprehension. And licking up his dried
lips, with winkless eyes,(M&richa) as if dead, and exceedingly
distressed, eyed Ravana, steadily. And alarmed because
of Ravana, with his mind depressed, M&richa who welt
knew Rama's prowess in the forest, with joined-hands
in agitation spoke words lending to his own as well as
R&vana’s welfare.


SECTION XXXVI5.
eee


Hearne the words of that sovereign of the R&kshasas,
the highly energetic Maricha, skilled in speech, answered
the Rakshasa chief, saying,“O king, the speaker of soft words
is common, but the speaker and the listener of unwelcome
though beneficial words are rarities. Volatile, and employing
no spies, thou surely dost not understand the exceedingly


ARiNysKANDAM. 595


powerful Raima towering high ‘in virtues, and resembling
the illustrious Indra or Varuna himself. I shall be well, my
child, if R&ma fired with rage, do not render all the world
bereft of Rakshasas ; if Janaka’s daughter bath not sprung
to compass thy destruction, if adreadful disaster do not
befall thee because of Sita, and if having obtained for ber
lord thee that art wilful and wicked, the city of Linka with
thee and the Ra&kshasas do not meet with utter extermination.
The sovereign who is wicked, whimsical and of evil intent
like thee, bringeth about his own destruction as well as that of
his kingdom and relatives. Rama, the enhancer of Kaugalya’s
delight hath not been abandoned by his father, nor is he
devoid of propriety of conduct ; he is not avaricious, wicked
nor the destroyer of Kshatriya race. He does not lack
religious merits or accomplishments, nor is he of 2 harsh
temperament and intent on causing misery unto creatures.
Finding his truthful sire imposed on by Kaikeyi he has
sojourned unto woods. For compassing the welfare of
his father Dagaratha and Kaikeyi he hath entered the
forest of Dandaka. Raima, O my child is not barsh or
foolish ; nor has he not control over his senses, Far from
speaking untruth he does not know false stories even, It doth
not behoye thee therefore to use such improper language
towards him. He is an incarnation of virtue, pious and
truthful, and lord of all men as Basava of all celestials, How
dost thou then wish to carry away by force his Vaidehi, pro-
tected by virtue of her own chastity, like unto the rays of
Sun 7 It doth nat behove thee to enter that fire of Rima who
hath arrows for rays and bow and scimitar for fuel. It doth
not behove thee, O Ravana, to approach R&ma renouncing
thy kingdom, happiness and love of life, who is like unto
death itself and has bow for his widened and flaming mouth,
and arrows for his rays and who is irrepressible, of mighty
prowess, holding hows and arrows and repulsing the forces
of the enemy. Incomparable is his power; daughter of


Janaka is his wife and lives in the forest confiding in the
mighty strength of his bow ; thou shalt not be able to carry
her away. She is the beloved wife of that best of men
having a leonine chest—~and he holds his wife dearer than his
life and is ever attached unto her. And young Sit& beloved
ofthe mighty Rama, and like unto the rays of flaming fire
is ever incapable of being carried away by thee. Of what avail
is this vain attempt O R&kshasa chief? No sooner Rama
shall see you in the battle thou shalt meet with thy end,
Hard it is to attain life, bappiness and kingdom, so it behoveth
thee to act properly, after consulting with thy ministers
headed by Bivishana. judging Rama’s merits and demerits
and ascertaining his and thy own strength and as well as
thy welfare. Methinks thy approaching conflict with the son
of the Kogala chief forebodes no good unto thee ; hear again
therefore O prince of the night-rangers, words Sensible and
lending to thy welfare.


SECTION xxxvill.


—


Once on atime I was engaged in travelling all over the
earth. Ihadin my body, resembling a huge mountain, the
strength of a thousand Nagas, I had parigha in my hands,
crown on my head and golden ear-rings on my ears and my
body was of a dark blue colour like that of acloud. Causing
fright unto the people I used to wander through the forest
of Dandaka and live upon the flesh of the Xzshis. The
pious ascetic Viswamitra being afraid of me went in person
to the king Dagaratha and said, “When I shall remain
absorbed in meditation on the occasion of parva, let Rama
protect me O king, Truly am I afraid of this Méricha.”
Being thus addressed by the ascetic the virtuous-souled king
Dagaratha replied, saying ‘“R&ghava is still under twelve


ARANYAKANDAM, 593


years of age and hath not been well disciplined in military arts.
Bat I have soldiers enough, and if permitted by thee, O thou
best of agcetics, I shall .with my four-fold forces kill thy
enemies, the rangers of the night.” Being thus addressed
that ascetic spoke unto the monarch, saying, “True it is that
thou wert the protector of the celestials in the War and thy
exploits are well known to the world, but no one shall be able
to withstand the Bakshasas but Rama. The highly energetic
Rima, though a boy is sufficiently qualified to defeat the
enemies ; therefore, O Destroyer of foes, let thy soldiery
remain here and let me proceed along with Rama. May God
bless thee.” Saying this the ascetic Visw&mitra being pleased
went to his asylum along with Rama. Afterwards having
been initiated for the sacrifice in the forest of Dandaka Rama
having unstrang his mighty bow came to the ascetic to protect
the sacrifice. He had a gold chain round his neck. a crest
‘on his head and a bow in his hands ; he had a pair of beantiful
eyes, and only one piece of cloth; his countenance was of
green hue and exquisite beaaty and even then mustaches ot
other signs of manhood did not appear on his face. Beautify.
ing the entire forest of Dandaka with his own spleudour
Rama appeared like the newly risen moon, Thereupon f
resembling a cloud and having golden ear locks entered the
asylum being proud of power on account of the boons offered
unto me by Brahm, Seeing me enter he took up his dart
and attached string unto his bow with proper care. Being
under the influence of sheer foolishness I passed by him as a
child and darted towards the sacrificial altar of Viswamitra,
Thereupon he wounded me with a sharpened sword capable
of doing away with the enemies and threw me away into the
ocean situated at a distance of hundred yeyenas. He had
no mind of killing me then and for this he saved my life. I
was thrown however into the deep ocean being hindered by
the velocity of his arrows and having lost ‘my consciousness.
Regaining my sense after a long while I returned to the city


75


so. RAMAYANA,


of Lanka. Myself saved thus, my followers however were all
killed by R&ma of unwearied activity though a mere child and
2 novice in the art of warfare. It is for this that Ido prevent
thee; thou shalt be overwhelmed with calamities and meet
with destruction if dost thou engage thyself in battle with
him. In vain shalt thou bring about the affliction of the
mirthful and sportive R&kshasas ever witnessing social
festivities. And in vain shalt thou for Siti compass the
destruction of the city of Lanka, adorned with diverse jewels
and filled with golden edifices. Pious men living with a
vicious man, meet with destruction for his sins, though they
themselves do not commit any misdeed, like unto fish
(devoured by Garura) living in a lake where snakes dwell.
Thus shalt thou witness that for thy own folly the rangers of
the night, adorned with celestial ornaments and having their
body pasted with sandal, have been killed and brought down
to the earth. And they deprived of shelter have fled away to
different directions, some with their wives and some alone,
having their wives carried away (by the enemies). Thou shalt
further observe that all edifices of Lanka being enveloped
with arrows and flaming fire have been burnt down to ashes,
There is no greater sin on earth than carrying away another's
wife. There are thousand ladies in thy seraglio O king.
Being attached unto thy wives do thou preserve the race of
the Rakshasas, thy own line, thy wished-for life, kingdom,
wealth and dignity. Do not bring about Rama's mischief if
thou dost wish to live happily with thy wives and friends.
Tam thy friend and ask thee again and again to desist
(from thy evil intention) ; if thou dost encroach upon Sith
surely thou shalt along with thy kinsmen go to the abode of
Yama being enfeebled by the arrows of Rima,”


ARANYARANDAM. 595


SECTION xxxix,


I WAS however somehow saved by Rima in that conflict.
Listen what happened afterwards. I was not humbled even
by the danger of my life. Once again I entered the’ forest
of Dandaka accompanied by two R&kshasas assuming the
the shape of deer. 1 bad a flaming tongue, huge teeth,
pointed horns and lived on the flesh of ascetics, Assuming
such a terrible appearance I began to traverse with great
vehemence the 7irtha, Agnihotri and the place of worship ;
eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the ascetics after
killing them I began to hinder all religious services. I had
a most ugly figure and was maddened with drinking bluod,
and all the animals of the forest were exceedingly frightened
at me. While I was thus traversing the forest of Dandaka
throwing obstacles in the way of religious services I saw the
pious ascetic Rama living on restricted fare, the honored
Sita and the mighty Lakshmana, taking recourse to
asceticism, moderate in eating and ever engaged in the
welfare of created beings. Remembering his former enmity
and aggrandisement, I, being extremely wrathful, in my deer
shape and with my pointed horns, darted towards him
with a view to kill him, thinking through my ignorance
the effulgent Rama as none other than an ascetic living in the
forest. Then stringing his huge bow he darted three
sharpened arrows at we, Those three terrible arrows with
bent knots resembling thunder-bolts, killing enemies and
drinking blood and having the motion of Garura and air,
coalescing with each other came before us. Wicked as I am,
1 was fully aware of his prowess, having been frightened
by him en a former occasion, and so I saved myself by
escaping, but those two Rakshasas were killed. O Ravana,
aay how saved from the arrows of Rima and having got
my life back I have adopted the life of an ascetic and


596 RAMEY AMA,


have been carrying on asceticism here being absorbed in
Yoga.

From that very day }see R&ma wearing bark and deer-
skin even in the very trees before me like unto Death with
the noose in his hands. Terrified as } am I always see
thousands of Rama around me. Meseems the entire forest
js inhabited by Rama onty. O king of Rakshasas, ¥ see
Rama even in the quarter where there is no Rama. Seeing
him in my dreams even } look around like one awaken. O
Ravana what more shall } speak unto thee, } am so much
alraid of Rama that sach words as Ratna (jewel), Ratha
(chariot) which begin with the letter Ra impart con-
sternation unto me. I am [ally apprised of the prowess
of that descendant of Raghu; it doth not hehove thee to
enter into conflict with him; he can destroy Vali and
Namuchi. O Ravana, whether thou dost fight with Rama or
not, do not mention him unto me if thou dost wish to see
me. Many persons piows and devoted to asceticism on this
earth have met with destruction for another's misdeeds, And
T shall meet with similar fate for thy sins. O ranger of the
night do whatever thou likest,! shall not follow thee, Truely is
that highly intelligent and effulgent Rama of mighty prowess
like Death himself unto the rangers of night. Though
the wicked Khara of Janasthina hath been slain by him on
Surpanakh2’s account, yet how is he to blame for it ? De thou
truly speak. Thou art my friend ; it is for this and for thy
welfare that I speak this truth unto thee. If thew dost not
follow my words, thyself with all thy kinsmen, shall be slain
in battle by Rama,


ARANVARANDAM. 597


SECTION XL:


As a person desirous of meeting with his end doth not
take medicine, Rivana, the king of night-rangers paid
no heed to the appropriate and sound words of Méricha
skilled in speech, foreboding good unto him. Moreover he
addressed him with the following harsh words. “O Méricha,
what thou hast spoken unto me, shall bear no fruit like unto
seeds sown into a desert-land, I shall not be frightened
thereby to fight with that foolish R&ama—a human being:
of vicious deeds, Surely shall I before thee take away from
that Rima the destroyer uf Khara, his favourite wife, at whose
words he has sojourned into woods renouncing his father
mother, kingdom and friends. I have made this firm
resolution in my mind O Maricha; even Indra, with the
celestials and Ashuras shall not be able to shake it. It would
have been proper for thee to give vent to these expressions
had I but asked thee for advice to ascertain my duty, the
propriety or impropriety of my action, its way or losses. A
wise counsellor who wishes prosperity unto himself should
always communicate unto his master his desire with joined-
hands whenever asked to do so. It is always proper to speak
before monarchs such pleasant and favourable words as are
intended for the welfare of the master and are sanctioned by
the royal etiquette. A respectable king doth not receive
with good grace friendly words even when they are expressed
disrespectfully. Sovereigns of superb prowess assume the
semblance of five deities—Agni, Indra, Moon, Yama, and
Varuna. Powerful kings, O Ranger of the night, assume
haughtiness, power, a placid Jook and contentment and
administer punishment unto the wicked. They are to be
adored and honored therefore on all occasions. Thou art
ignorant of kingly morality and fully absorbed in illusion. It
is for this that thou dost out of thy wickedness of heart


598 RAMAYANA.


address me thy guest with these harsh words. I do not ask
thee, O R&kshasa, about the propriety (of my conduct) or
about my welfare, I did only ask thee for thy help. Listen
what thou shalt have to do at my request in my aid ; assuming
the shape of a deer having golden skin painted with silvery
drops do thou proceed to the asylum of Rama, and ranging
at large before Vaidehi do thou alter captivating her take thy
wished-for way. Vaidehi, being struck with wonder seeing
thee a golden deer capable of illusions, shall request Rama to
get thee soon for her. K&kuthstha issuing out of the asylum,
thou shalt, ata great distance utter such cries as “O Sit&,
O Lakshmana” imitating his (Rima's) voice. Hearing those
cries Lakshmana also, at the behest of Sit&, shall proceed to
Rima. When both Rama and Lakshmana shall go elsewhere
la this way, ! shall to my felicity carry away Vaidehi like
unto the thousand-eyed deity earrying away Sachi. O
R&kshasa, do thou go wherever thou likest after doing this.
I shall confer on thee,O M&richa, half of my kingdom, O
thou of auspicious look, do thou proceed towards the forest
of Dandaka to compass this end of mine ; I shall follow thee
in my chariot. Acquiring Sita without any conflict, after
imposing upon Rama I shall return to Lank& successful along
with thee. I shall kill thee, O Maricha, if thou dost not obey
my behest. I shall compell thee todo this. No body can
attain to prosperity and happiness, actiug against his
aovereign's will, Truly thou shalt risk thy life if thou
approachest Rama, but thou shalt meet with sure destruction
if thou dost act against my will. Consider about it, and do
what thou thinkest proper.


ARANYVARANDAM, 599


. SECTION XtI.


Bane thus commanded by Rfivana like a king to act
against his will M&richa fearlessly addressed the lord of the
R&kshasas with the following bold words, “What person of
impious deeds hath advised thee O ranger of the night thus
inorder to exterminate thee with thy kingdom, counsellors
and children? Who of a vicious heart, O King, doth not feel
himself happy at thy welfare? Who hath pointed out unto
thee the way of thy death under the cover of thy meansy O
Ranger of night surely do thy weak enemies wish to bring
about thy destruction by making thee enter into a conflict
with a powerful man. What little-minded man of eveil intent
bath counselled thee thus? O Ranger of night, really do
they desire that thou dost bring destruction upon thyself by
thy own actions, Thou dost not exterminate thy counsell rs
O Ravana, albeit they are worthy of being destroyed. For
they do not prevent thee entirely from thy evil course. Wise
counsellors do always restrain a king who wends a vicious
track being guided by his impulses and passions; but about
thee they are quite unmindful, though thou shouldst by every
means be brought under restraint. © thou the best of
conquerors, O thou the ranger of night, ministers by the
grace of their sovereign attain virtue, wealth, desire and fame.
But those objects are never attained O Ravana when they
are not in good odour with their sovereign; morcover the
subjects meet with dangers when he is devoid of all qualities,
O thou the best of conquerors, the king is the root of virtue
and fame unto the subjects; he should therefore be always
protected by them. O Ranger of night, proud kings of cruel
temperament, acting against the subjects can never administer
their kingdoms. So do the ministers of cruel counsel meet
with their end like unto a chariot driven into a wild track by
an unskilled chariotecr. Many a pious person, on this earth,


“600 Rimarans,


ever engaged in the performance of religious services, have,
for the folly of other persons, met with destruction along with
their relatives. Verily the subjects, O Ravana, can never
expect to prosper under the regime of hot-natured sovereigns
vacting against their subjects like unto deer under the
protection of a jackal. All the Rakshasas shall surely die, O
R&vana whose lord art thou, foolish, cruel and under the
control of thy passions. 1 shall not be the least sorry if Ido
meet with a sudden accident—what I do deplore. most is that
thou shalt meet in no time with destruction along with thy
soldiery. Compassing my end Rama shall exterminate thee
in no time-and blessed { shall be being killed by an enemy
in the conflict. Surely thou dost know that no sooner shall I
see Ramal shall be done away with; thou shalt carrying
away Sitd meet with thy end along with thy kinsmen. And
if thou dost bring Sit& with me from the asylum, none shall
be saved,—me, thyself, the city of Lank& and the Raksh:
Thou dost not relish my words O ranger of the night though
prevented by me, who wishes thee welfare; those men who
range on the verge of death, well-nigh finishing the term of
' their existence do not receive with good grace the counsels of
friends.


SECTION xin.


Sreaxine these barsh words unto Ravana, Maricha being
afraid of him said, “We shall both go. Surely shall Ibe
deprived of my life by him (Rama) taking up his ecimitar
and having a bow.and arrows in his hands, if { go before
him again. Meeting with his prowess thou shalt never return
with thy life; he is like the noose of Death unto thee though
thou hadst baffled its power. Thou art vicious-souled, what can
I do for thee? Be thou crowned-with success O ranger of the


ARANY AKANDAM. Sor


night, I shall go” The Lord of Rakshasas being pleased
with M&richa's words embraced him warmly and said, “This
is worthy of thy heroism that thou hast addressed thyself to
act after my desire. Thou wert another Rakshasa before
and hast now become true Maricha. Do thou now with me
ascend this chariot coursing in the air, crested with jewels
and driven by asses having faces of a demon. Enchanting
Vaidehi thou shalt wend thy way and away shall I carry the
daughter of the king of Mithila by force (when there shall
be neither Rima nor Lakshmana by her.) Thereupon
T&rakfi’s son assented to Ravana’s words, and both of them
ascending the chariot like unto a heavenly car set out for
the hermitage. And beholding diverse towns, forests,
mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities they reached the forest
of Dandaka and the asylum of Rama, And descending now
from the golden car the lord of Rakshasas together with
M&richa beheld Rama’s asylum. Taking him (M&richa) by
the hand Ravana spake saying, “There stands the asyluin of
Rama surrounded by palm trees. Do thou do that for which
we have come here.” Hearing the words of Rivana, the
R&kshasa Méaricha assuming the wonderful shape of a
(golden) deer began to range at large before Rama's hermit-
age. The points of its horns were like unto (two) excellent
jewels, its countenance was diversified with white and black
colour, its face was like a red lotus, its ears were like unto
two blue lotuses, its neck was little raised, its belly was like
a Saphire, its sides were like unto Madhuka flowers, its
colour was like that of a filament of a lotus, its hoops were
like unto Baidurjas (a gem of a dark colour) ; of lean thighs ;
of firm joints; its tail having the diversified colour of a
rainbow was upraised. It was of. a pleasant and cool hue
and crested with various jewels.

And in notime the R&kshasa assumed the shape of a
beautiful deer. To tempt Vaidebi that ranger of the night,
assuming a beautiful countenance painted with diverse

76


bo2 RAMAYANA,


metals, illumining the beautiful forest and Rama's asylum
with its beauty, and ranging at large on the green field and
living on grass, began to proceed. That one of lively
presence having its body painted with hundreds of silver
drops and living on twigs of trees began to range in the
forest. Sometimes walking into the plantain house, some-
times walking around the forest of Karaikdé, sometimes
coming within the compass of Sit&’s vision, that best of
deer having its back painted with gold begin to range
slowly around the hermitage. It began to walk at pleasure
near Rama's asylum. Somctimes going, sometimes stopping,
at one time running very swiftly and receding the next
moment, that best of deer began to range at large. Some
times playing around, sometimes lying on earth and some-
times following the deer-herd having come within the
thresbhold of the asylum and then followed again by them
that Rakshasa assuming the form of a deer came back
to see SitS. He then began to range at large in the
beautiful forest (extending far and wide}. Seeing him other
forest-deer came {by him) and smelling him fled away into
different quarters. That Rakshasa, though expert in killing
deer, did not eat them up, though touching, inorder to hide
his real self. In the meantime Vaidehi, of auspicious looks
whose eyes inebriate like wine, being engaged in plucking
flowers, was going sometimes to the Karnikté grove and
sometimes to the mangoe grove. That best of women, ever
inured to living in the forest and possessed of a graceful
countenance, walking and plucking flowers, saw that
jewelled deer, having its body deversified with pearls and
diamonds. It l:ad beautiful teeth and lips and had its down
resembling silver. She began to behold with affection and
with her eyes expanded with surprise. That illusive deer
seeing Rima’s wife began to move around as if lighting up
that forest (with the fire of its beauty). Beholding that deer
ornamented with diverse jewels, and the like. of which she


ARANYAKANDAM. 603,


had never seen before, the daughter of Janaka was struck
with immense wonder.


SECTION xu,


‘Benowowe that deer with its sides painted with gold
and silver, while collecting flowers, Sita, having blameless
limbs and beautiful hips and having the color of her body
like that of pure gold became immensely pleased and called
aloud her husband and Lakshmana with scimitars in their
hands, “Do thou come soon, do thou come soon, O son
of the worshipful Sire, along with thy younger brother”
—having called (her husband) again and again in this strain
she continued beholding that deer. Being thus called by
the daughter of the king of Videha those two best of men
Rama and Lakshmana, casting their looks around beheld
that deer, Seeing him Laksbmana, struck with fear, said
“Methinks, this deer is the Rakshasa Marich. This vicious
Maricha, O Rama, assuming the shape of a deer oftentimes
kills at pleasure the kings who come here a-hunting. He
is cognizant of iSlusions, by virtue of which he has assumed
this shape, O best of men; its countenance is perfectly fine
like the abode of Gandharbas and resplendent like the Sun;
there is no such jewelled deer on earth. O Raghava, O Lord
of earth, there is no doubt that this is nothing but illusion.”
When Lakshmana spake thus Sita with a pure smile being
under the influence of enchantment contradicted him, and
being pleased said “O son of the worshipful Sire, this deer
hath attracted my mind, get it for me, pray, O thou of mighty
arms ; it shall be an object of sport for us. Many a beautiful
deer range at large in the vicinity of our hermitage such as
Chamara, Srimara, Rik, Prishata, Bdnara, and Kinnara.
They are all very beautiful and of mighty strength; but O


04 KAMAVANA.


Prince, I have never seen before the like of this deer. In
energy, strength and beauty it stands above all deer. Its
entire body is diversified with various colors, nay, it is a jewel
itself. It moves before me, beautifying the forest with
its resplendance, like unto Moon himself. Ah! what beauty,
what beantiful a lustre, how musical a voice, this wonderful
deer of variegated countenance, hath indeed captivated
my heart! If canst thou get by this deer alive, O what
wonder, what surprise! When shall we regain our kingdom
after the expiry of the term of our banishment, this deer
shall beautify the interior of ovr palace. O Lord, truly
shall this celestial deer create surprise in Bharata, yourself,
me and my mothers-in-taw. O best of men, if canst thou
not get hold of it alive its skin shall also look very beautiful
(lous). Spreading on Kuga the skin of this golden deer
when killed do I wish to invoke the Almighty. It looks
(no doubt) unseemly and terrible and smacks of wilfulness
on the part of a wife to command her busband in this way,
but I am sunk in surprise seeing the countenance of the
deer.” Rama's heart was struck with surprise behold-
ing that wonderlul deer having its down resembling
gol, horns resembling exquisitely fine diamonds, color
like that of the newly risen Sun, and resplendance like
that of the orbit of the planets. Being enchanted by
ite beauty and spurred on by Siti’s words, Raghava
pleased, spake unto his younger brother saying “Behold, O
Lakshmana, it has immensely excited Vaidehi’s desire. Ou
account of its exquisite beauty it shall lose its life to-day,
It has its equal no where on the earth—neither in the
celestial garden nor in the Chaittraratha forest. The hairs of
its body being arranged in regular and contrary courses and
being painted with golden drops do indeed look very beauti-
ful. Do thou see, while expanding its mouth, its tongue
comes out resembling flaming fire like unto a thunder-bolt
reaying the mass of clouds. Its face is like a glass made of


ARAN + aKaNDaM. 605


he best blue saphire, its belly resembling a conch and pearl,
and it is very difficult to ascertain its shapes, Beholding it
who is there (on earth) whose heart is not enamoured ? Its
beauty resembles the rays of gold and is variegated with
diverse hues of jewels. Whose heart is not enveloped with
surprise beholding such a celestial beauty.O Lakshmana?
Princes, with bows in their hands, while a-hunting in a deep
forest destroy deer either for flesh or for sport. Moreover
while engaged in sporting they collect many a jewel and
various metals as gold and silver, in the woods. There is
not the least doubt that these wild riches filling up their
coffers are comparatively far better (than the wealth acquired
by other sources) like unto the objects of enjoyment, enjoyed
at their fancy by the people inhabiting the celestial region. |
The object which persons desirous of acquiring wealth follow
without any discretion in their actions, is the true definition
of wealth given by the political economists. Vaidehi of
slender waist desireth to sit with me on the exquisitely fine
golden skin of this gem of adeer, meseems no deer skin is
so comfortable to touch as this—neither the skin of Kéda/r,
Priaki, Prabeni nor of Aébtkt. Truly handsome is this deer
and the one that rangeth in the welkin, indeed these two
deer only are celestial—the one that rangeth in the sky*
(Mrigashir’) and this that rangeth on earth. And if ithe a
Rakshasa’s illusion as thou sayest, O Lakshmana, then it
must be killed by me. This cruel vicious-souled M&richa
made away with many eminent ascetics, while travelling in
the forest ; and this Rakshasa assuming the shape of an
ilusive deer destroyed many kings—mighty archers while
a-hunting in this forest ; it is for this that this deer must be
killed. Formerly this Bésdprt entering into the womb of
twice-born ones used to come out reaving them like unto


* This refers to Mrigashird, the fifth lunar constellation which resembles
a deer—T.


+ The name of an Asur devoured by Agastya.—T.


606 RAMAYANA,


the embryo of a mule. Once ona time this Batipi approached
the eminent saint Agastya and was devoured by him. After
the Srédha ceremony had been over, finding that Bat&pi
desirous of assuming the shape of a Rakshasa the great saint
Agastya said smiling “Being blinded with thy prowess O
Bat&pi, thou hast destroyed many eminent twice-born ones
on this earth and for this that I do digest thee. Truly that
Rakshasa, O Lakshmana, who wisheth to surpass one like
me who hath controlled his senses and is ever engaged in
pious offices shall meet with his end like unto this Batapi.
Therefore this Maricha approaching me shall be killed by
me like nnto Batfpi devoured by Agastya. Do thou
therefore vigilantly protect Vaidehi with mail and armours
on, It is our prime duty, O descendant of Raghu, to protect
Janaki, shall either kill this deer or shall get hold of it.
Look, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi is extremely anxious to get
the skin of this deer, I shall therefore proceed at once, O son
ot Sumitra, to catch this deer. The skin of this deer is the
best of its kind ; for certain shall it lose its life to-day. As
long as Ido not kill this deer, O Lakshmana, do thou with
SitR remain with vigilance in this asylum. I shall in no
time come back with its skin after killing it with one arrow.
Do thou stay here, O Lakshmana, with Janaki in constant
fear and vigilance, along with the mighty Yatayu, intelligent
and ever engaged in pious offices.


SECTION XLIV.


Havinc thus directed his brother, the highly energetic
son of Raghu equipped himself with his gold-hilted scimitar.
And girting himself with his bow bent at three places, which
served him as an omament,—as well as a couple of quivers,


ARANVAKANDAM. 607


that one of fierce energy sallied out. Seeing that foremost
of monarchs approach, that best of beasts from fear
disappeared; and then again showed himself. Thereat
gitt with the bow and sword, (Rama) rushed where the deer
was; and beheld him ilumining all before him with his
beauty,—and bow in hand (Rama beheld) him in that vast
forest, darting away after gazing at him,—and sometimes
seeming to have got beyond arrow range, and at others
“tempting Rama (by his vicinity). And sometimes influenced
by fear and bewildered, (the deer) seemed to course the
welkin ; and in the forest now he became visible and
now vanished from sight. And like the autumnal lunar disc
enveloped by indented clouds, he momentarily showed
himself, and anon discovered himself at a distance. And
Miricha wearing the shape of a deer, showing himself and
disappearing from sight, drew Raghava a long way from
the hermitage. Thereat Rama, cagerly anxious to secure
the deer, being foiled by the deer, and in consequence
growing enraged, wearied out, rested under a shadow, on a
sward. And that ranger of the night, wearing the form of
a deer, maddening R&ma, discovered himself (again) at a
distance surrounded by (other) deer. And Rama desirous
of taking (the beast), seeing him again, set off at speed. At
the very moment the deer disappeared from fear; and again
showed himself at a distance behind a tree. And seeing him,
the exceedingly energetic and strong Raghava, determined
to slay him, growing wroth, taking out a Maming shaft,
resembling the rays of the sun, powerfully drew his bow, and
firmly setting the shaft, and aiming it at the deer, let go
the blazing and burning weapon forged by Brahm§, resem-
bling a flaming serpent. And that best of arrows, like unto
a thunder-bolt, deeply pierced the breast of M&richa, wearing
the shape of adeer. Thereat bounding up high as a palmyra
palm, that one whose saws had almost run out, uttered
terrible sounds, lying on the earth. And while on the point


608 RAMAYANA.


of death, Maricha renounced his counterfeit shape. And
remembering the words of Ravana, the Raksbasa reflected,
“By what means can Sit& send away Lakshmana, and Ravana
carry off Siti staying in solitude?” And pierced to the
marrow by that peerless shaft, M&richa, renouncing his deer
form, resumed his Rakshasas lineaments ; and giving up his
life attaining a buge person, considering the time had come
(for availing himself of the advice tendered by Ravana),
began to cry with the voice of Raghava, “Ah Sita! Ah
Lakshmana!” And seeing that grim-visaged R&kshasa
lying low on the ground, with his person bathed in bloud,
and rolling hither and thither, Rama proceeded towards the
asylum, thinking of Siti and revolving within himself
Laksimana's words, While returning he thought aside
“Lakshmana said before that this was Miricha’s illusion !”
His words have been verified now. Truly have I killed
Miricha. Maricha has given up his ghost exclaiming aloud
Ab! Siti, Ah! Lukshmana. I do not know what shall Sith
do hearing the cry? And what shall the mighty-armed
Lakshmana do?” White pondering thus the hairs of the
virtuous souled Rama stood on their end. Killing that
Rakshasa assuming the shape of a deer and hearing his
terrible cry Rama was overwhelmed with fear arising out of
sorrow. Thereupon killing a deer and taking its flesh he
hastened towards Janasthana,


SECTION XLV.


Hearne that cry in the forest resembling her husband's
voice Sité spake unto Lakshmana saying, “Do thou go and
learn what has befallen Raighava. He is crying aloud in
pitiable accents ; hearing them my life and soul are incapable
of remaining any longer in their proper places. It behoveth


ARAN} AKANDAM, boy


thee to'save tho brother why is crying aloud in the forest;
do thou immediately repair hence to save him, who is ia
need of thy help. He hath been over-powered by the
Rakshasas like unto a bullock brought under the power ofa
lion.” Remembering the behest of Rama, Lakshmana did
not go, though accosted thus by Sité. Extremely mortified,
the daughter of Janaka spake unto him saying, “O Son of
Sumitr&, thou art an enemy unto R&ma, in the garb of a
brother. Thou dost not proceed for the relief of thy brother
who hath been reduced to such a plight. Dost thou desice,for
me, O Lakshmana, Rama's destructiony Truely being under
the influence of lust fur me thou dost not follow Raghava!
For this thou dost welcome Rama's disaster; thou hast no
affection for him. For this it is that thou dost sit here
without anxiety not seeing the highly effulgent (Rama).
Rama, following whom thou hast repaired unto this forest,
being in danger, of what avail is life unto me?” Vaidehi
speaking thus being influenced by sorrow, and with tears in
her eyes, like unto a deer, Lakshmana spake unto her saying,
“O Vaidehi, celestials, Danavas, Gandharbas, R&kshasas,
Asuras, or Pannagas, there is none who can defeat thy
husband. There is not the least doubt in this. Worshipful
madam Celestials, D&navas, Gandharbas, Ra&ksliasas,
Pig&chas, men, Kinnaras, animals or birds, there is none
among them, who can withstand RAaghava, who equals the
lord of celestials in warfare. In fact there is none who can
do away with Rama in battle. It doth not behove thee
therefore to accost me thus. Nor do I dare leave thee here
alone in this forest without Rama. Even the mighty heroes,
as the Lord of celestials, cannot subdue his prowess with all
their strength. Even the Almighty Himself, with the
celestials and the three worlds, cannot defeat him. Do thou
therefore renounce grief and console thyself. Sooner shail
thy husband return killing the best of deer. It is not his
voice nor one sent by any deity. It is but an illusion of that
77 7


610 RAMAYANA.


R&kshasa (M&richa). O Vaidebi, thou hast been Ieft unto my
charge by the high-souled (R&ma)—I therefore do not dare
leave thee behind, O thou the jewel of a damsel. We have
made these night-rangers our enemies. For compassing the
destruction of Khara, O worshipful one, and devastating
Janasthana, Rakshasas oftentimes use improper words
unto us in this extensive forest. O Vaidehi, to create
mischief unto the pious is the only amusement of these
R&kshasas—thou shouldst not therefore be anxious for this.”
Being thus addressed by him her eyes were reddened with
ire, and she spake these harsh words unto the trathful
Lakshmana saying “O crue! one! O thou the destroyer of thy
line} it is a disgrace unto thee that thou wishest to protect
me (killing Rama). Methinks, this mighty disaster of Rama
is welcome unto thee, or else why shouldst thou seeing this,
speak thus, O-Lakshmana. It is not a wonder that an evil
desire lurks in thee who art a hypocrite and a cruel-hearted
enemy. Verily art thou a monster of wickedness, that
Rama repairing unto woods, thou hast, being lustful for me,
followed him alone. Or hast thou been engaged by Bharata
te act thusp But thy or Bharata’s intention shall not be
satisfied, O Saumitri. How shall I desire another man after
serving the lotus-eyed Rima of dark-blue hue as my husband ?
J shall renounce my life before thee, therefore, O Lakshmana ;
without Rama I shall not maintain my being for a moment
on this earth.” Hearing these brazen words of Sit&,
capable of making one’s down stand on end, the self-con-
trolled Lakshmana with joined hands spake unto her saying,
“Thou art a very Goddess unto me, I therefore dare not
answer thee. What thou hast spoken, O Maithili, is nothing
surprising for females. Such is the nature of womankind
on this earth, Women by nature are crooked, fickle, devoid
of religious knowledge. and bring about difference between
father and sons. O Vaidehi, O daughter of Janaka, truly am I
incapable of putting up with these words of thine. They have


ARANFAKANDAM. 61


pierced through both of my ears like a heated Ndrdcha. How-
ever the deities ranging in this woodland are my witnesses—
may they hear thee. Ispoke what was fair and have been
thus addressed by thee with these harsh words. Ido always
obey my superior’s commands, Fie on thee! Thy des-
truction is near at hand that thou dost suspect me, being
influenced by this womanish nature. I shall go where
Kakuthstha is, may good betide thee, O thou the best of
damsels ! May the deities of the forest protect thee, O thou
of expansive eyes! Many abad omen appear before me.
May I see thee again when I shall come back with Rama.”
Being thus accosted by Lakshmana the daughter of Janaka
ceplied weeping and being bathed in tears. “Without Rama,
O Lakshmana, I shall drink virulent poison, enter fire or dive
into the Godaveri. I shall destory this body either by
hanging or by falling down from the top of a high object. [
shall never be able to touch another man but Rama.” Speak-
ing thus unto Lakshmana, Sita, being enveloped with grief,
weeping, struck her belly* with her hands. Seeing the
daughter of Janaka of expansive eyes weep thus in pitiable
accents, Lakshmana losing his attention began to console
her. Afterwards the pure-hearted Lakshmana, having control
over his senses, saluting Sitd with clasped palms and bend-
ing low a little proceeded where Rima was, casting again’
and again his glance upon her as he went.


* Properly it shouldbe “struck her breast.” But it has a special signi-
ficance hare, i, ¢-—she would not be satisfied until her belly be filled with all
the Rakshasas—T.


t1z RAMAL ANA.


SECTION xivi,


Havine been addressed with those harsh words the
younger brother of Raghava, enraged, proceeded at once,
being anxious to see Rima. Thereupon the ten-necked one,
availing of this opportunity came before Vaidehi assuming
the semblance of a mendicant. Wearing a soft silken cloth,
with a lock of hair on his head with an umbrella and shoes
and having on his left shoulder a rod and Kamandalu, the
highly powerful one assuming the appearance of a wandering
devotee carrying three long bamboo staves appeared before
Vaidehi in the forest when there was none of the brothers by
her. He saw there the young and pious daughter of the king
Tike unto an evening void of both sun and moon and as
the highly terrible Rahu eyes Rohini forsaken by Moon.
Seeing that terrible one the doer of evil deeds, the trees of
Janasthana did not move nor the wind did blow. Seeing
him eye Sit with his blood-red eyes, the fast streaming
river Godavari even slackened its course out of fear. In the
mean time the Ten-necked Ravana, enquiring about Rama's
weuk points appeared before Vaidehi in the guise of a
mendicant. Like unto Sani approaching chifra, that impious
one, assuming the appearance of a pious man like a well
covered with grass, approached Vaidehi who was bewailing
her husband, And seeing that pious spouse of Rima—Vaidehi,
Ravana stood before her. Her lips and teeth were extremely
fine, her face resembled the full moon and her eyes were
like lotus-petals. She hada yellow silken cloth on and
sat in the thatched cottage, overwhelmed with grief and
bathed in tears, And that ranger of the night with a pleased
heart approached Vaidehi. Seeing her that Lord of Rakshasas
was pierced with the shafts of passion. And speaking highly
of her, surpassing in beauty the three worlds and resembling
hy the excellence of her own person the very goddess


ARANYARANDAM. 613,


of wealth herself Ravana uttering the name of God spake
unto her saying, “O thou having the color of gold and silver,
Othou wearing silken cloth, O thou appearing like a lotus
wearing a garland of lotus-petals, O thou of beautiful
countenance! Art thou Bashfulness, Beauty, Fame, Wealth,
Apsara, Dignity or Rati herself who is ranging at will in this
forest ¢ All thy teeth are equal having their tops like unto
the buds of Kunda flower, beautiful and yellow. Thy eyes
are expansive, clear, of bloody hue, and having black pupils.
Thy hip is fleshy and spacious. Thy thighs are like those of
elephants, round, fleshy and perfectly strong. Thy nipples
are bulky, pointed, highly captivating like cold palm fruits,
beautiful and ornamented with diverse jewels. O thou of
beautiful smile! O thou of beautiful teeth! O thou of,
beautiful eyes! O fine damsel, thou dost carry away my heart
like unto a river carrying away its banks by its stream. The
lock of thy hair is exquisitely fine, thy breast very close and
thy waist is so thin that they may be got round even by
fingers. There is none so beautiful like thee—a Goddess, a
Gandharbhi, a Yakshi or a Kinnari. I had never seen before
on this earth a damsel so beautiful as thou. This thy beauty
the best on earth, thy youth, thy grace and thy abode in the
forest do agitate my mind. So it is well for thee to come
(with me); it doth not behove thee to remain here. This is
the abode of terrible R&kshasas wearing shapes at will.
Picturesque palaces, prospcrous cities and sweet-smelling
gardens are worthy of thy abode. © thou of dark-blue eyes,
fine is thy garland, fine is the smell of thy person and fine is
thy apparel—methinks fine is thy husband too. O thou of
pure smile! whom dost thou belong to ?—Rudras, Marutas,
or Vasus—Meseems, O fine damsel thou art a very goddess.
No one comes here--the Gandharbas, the celestials or
Kinnaras ; this is an abode of the Rakshasa ; how dost thou
come here? Art thou not afraid of these mon keys, lions,


ligers, wolves, bears, herons and hyenas? Alone in this


614 RAMAYANA.


forest, art thou not afraid of these terrible elephants of fierce
motion and maddened with the exuding of their temporal
juicey Who art thou? Whose wife? What for dost thou
range alone in this forest of Dandaka frequented by terrible
Rakshasas?” Thus addressed was Vaidehi by the vicious-
souled Ravana. Seeing him come under the guise of a
twice-bern one, Maithili worshipped him with diverse articles
necessary for serving a guest. Offering him a seat first and
afterwards inviting him to wash his feet she said unto that
one of placid look “cooked rice is ready.” Seeing Ravana
approach with Kamandalu and wearing a red cloth under
the guise of a Brahmana, Maithili could cot pass by him any
way, and considering him a twice-born one by vaious signs
invited him as if a Brahmana saying, "O Brihmana, do thou
sit on this seat facing the right ; do thou take this water (to
wash thy feet,; do thou enjoy these well-cooked eatables
growing in the forest and intended for thee.” Janaki the
wife of Lord of men inviting him thus, Ravana, casting a
look upon her, addressed himself for his own destruction, to
carry her away, She was anxiously expecting the return of
Rima who had gone a-hunting with Lakshmana; she looked
around and beheld but on all sides the spacious yellow forest-
land—there was neither Rama nor Lakshmana.


ARANVAKANDAM. 615


SECTION xtviie


Beie thus addressed by Ravana under the guise of a
mendicant, desirous of carrying her away, Vaidehi thought
within herself—“This person is my guest and a Brahmana ; he
may curse me if 1 do not speak to him.” Thinking this
fora moment Siti said “May good betide thee! 1 am the
daughter of the high-souled Janaka, the king of Mithila, the
beloved Queen of Rama and my name is Sita, Dwelling in
the palace of Ikshakus for twelve years, I enjoyed many
things passing human and had all my desires satisfied. On the
thirteenth year king (Dagaratha) counselled with his ministers
about the installation of Rama. Accordingly cverything
necessary for the installation being made ready, Kaikeyi, one
of my mothers-in-law, begged of her husband a boon. Bring-
ing my father-in-law under control by means of her virtuous
deeds, K&ikeyi begged, of that truthful, best of monarchs,
two boons namely the exile of my husband into woods and
the installation of Bharata, and said “I shall never eat,
drink or sleep and (if Rama be installed) I shall end my
life” Kaikeyi speaking thus, that lord of earth, my
father-in-law begged her to accept diverse riches; but
Kaikeyi did not agree. Then the highly effulgont Rima,
my husband was twenty-five years old, and myself was
eighteen only counting from my birth. My husband is
known all over the world under the name of Rama. He is
truthful, good-natured, of pure character, ever engaged in
the welfare of all created beings, of mighty-arms and expan-
sive eyes. Qur father the king Dagaratha was entirely
under the control of passions, and hence for the satisfaction
of Kaikeyi did not install Rama. When Rama came to his
father for being installed Kaikeyi spoke unto my husband the
following cruel words, “Do thou hear, O Raghava, how I
have been ordered by thy Sire. This kingdom, rid of thorns


016 MAMATANA.


is to be conferred on Bharata, and thou shalt have to sojourn
into the woods for years nine and five. Do thou therefore
repair unto forest, O Kakuthstha and save thy Sire from
untruth.” Whereto Rama fearlessly replied ‘So be it !’ Hear.
ing her words my husband of firm vows acted accordingly. He
always maketh gifts and taketh none. He always speaketh
truth and never telleth an untruth, This is his best observ-
ance,Q Brihmana. His half-brother named Lakshmana is
of mighty prowess. That best of men is Rama’s help
and the destroyer of foes in battle. That brother of his
named Lakshmana is of firm resolution and given to
asceticism. With a bow in hand he hath followed (Rama)
flying as an exile unto the woods along with me. Thus that
one (Rama) of firm resolution and ever engaged in pious
offices wearing matted hairs and assuming the semblance of
an ascetic hath entered this forest of Dandaka along with
myself and his younger brother. O thou the best of twice-
born ones, we three being deprived of our kingdom by
Kaikeyi have been living in this dense forest by virtue of
our effulgence. Do thou take heart for a moment and live
here, [Instantly shall my husband return with good many
wild fruits and roots and with sufficient meat after killing
many adeer, hog and Gosamp. Truly do thou relate unto
me thy name, Gofra and leneage. O thou twice-born one,
why dost thou range alone in this forest of Dandaka 9” Sit&
the wife of Rima speaking thus, the mighty Lord of
Rakshasas—Ravana replied with these harsh words—‘O
Sita | am that Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, whom fear tle
celestials, Asuras and human beings. O thou of blameless
beauty, seeing thee of golden hue and wearing silk cloth
Ido not relish my own wives. Ihave brought many a
beautiful damsel from various quarters, do thou become my
foremost Queen amongst them. That great city in the midst
ofthe ocean, Lanka, encircled on all sides by the sea and
situated on the summit of a hill, is my capital. There shalt


ARANYARANDAN. 617


thou with me, O Sitd, walk in gardens, and thus thou shalt
no more long for living in the forest. If thou dost become
my wife, O Sith, five thousand maid-servants decorated with
divers oraaments shall serve thee." That blameless daughter
of Janaka, being thus addressed by Ravana, was highly
enraged, and, passing by him, replied, “I am a dependant of
Rama, who is incapable of being shaken, like unto a mighty
mountain, incapable of being agitated, like unto a vast ocean,
and resembling Mahendra in effulgence. I am a dependant
of that great and truthful Rama who is gifted with auspicious
marks and like unto a fig tree. {am dependant of that lion
among men, Rama, of mighty-arms, of a spacious breast and
treading like a lion. 1am a dependant of that son of a king,
Rama, of mighty-arms,having control over his passions, whose
face resembles the full moon and whose fame hath spread far
and wide over the earth, Why dost thou being a tiger wish
for a she-lion ? Thou shalt not be able to touch me like unto
the rays of the sun. Q thou wretched R&kshasa, when thou
hast desired to steal away Raghava’s beloved spouse, surely
dost thou see these trees (before thee) as made of gold. Dost
thou wish to uproot the teeth from the mouth of a Hon, that
enemy of deer, or from that of a serpent ? Dost thou wish to
clasp with thy hands the Mandara hill, or dost thou wish to
walk in peace after drinking poison ? Dost thou wish to rub
thy eyes with pins and lick a razor with thy tongue? Thou
dost wish to swim ascross an ocean, having a rock tied unto
thy neck. Thou dost wish to get at the Sun and Moon, to
bind a faming fire with a piece of cloth and walk through
iron-spikes, as thou hast wished to come by the worthy spouse
of Rama. Mighty is the difference between Rama and thee,
like unto that between a lion and a jackal, a sea and a rivulet,
nectar and gruel, gold and iron, sandal and mud, an elephant
and a cat, a crow and Garura, a peacock and a madgie (an
acquatic bird), or a duck and a vulture. Even if thou dost
steal me, that mighty archer Rima, gifted with the prowess of


78


18 RAMEY ANA.


the lord of celestials, living, surely shall I die, like unto a gnat
sucking clarified butter.” Addressing those words unto that
wicked ranger of the night, that innocent (Sit&) shook like a
plantain tree shaken by the wind. Thereupon Ravana, like
‘anto Death in prowess,trembling, began to relate unto her with
a view to frighten (her) his race, power, name and actions.


SECTION XLVIII


Airter Siti had spoken these harsh words, Ravana,
enraged, with a frown, replied, “O thou of a beautiful
countenance, I am the step-brother of the Lord of wealth and
my name is the mighty Ten-necked Ravana. May good
betide thee! Like unto people fearing Death, the celestials,
Gandharbas, Pisachas, Pannagas and Serpents fly in
diverse directions being frightened by me. I have subdued
by my prowess, my step-brother, the Lord of wealth in a
conflict, quarrelling with him for some reason. Thereat, that
one carried by men, renouncing out of my fear this wealthy
abode of Lank&, hath been living on that Lord of mountains,
Kailaga. O thou auspicious one, by virtue of my prowess 1
have taken away that beautiful chariot of his called Puspaka.
Ascending that chariot thou shalt travel by the etherial
route. QO Maithili, when { am excited with ire, Indra.
and other celestials at the mere sight of my countenance fly
away in divers directions out of fear. Wherever I live,
the Wind bloweth cautiously and the Sun (of piercing rays)
out of fear for me appeareth in the welkin like the Moon.
What shall I say more ? Wherever I live, even the leaves of
the trees do not flutter and the currents of the rivers are
stopped. Beyond the ocean stands my beautiful capital


ARANYAKANDAM. 619


Lank& like unto Indra’s Amaravati, (the capital of the Lord
of celestials),guarded on all sides by the terrible night-rangers
and encircled by yellow walls, That beautiful city hath
gate-ways of ornamented and jewelled arches and golden
apartments. It is filled with elephants, horses and chariots,
always resounds with the sounds of bugles, and is beautified
with gardens having divers trees of wished for fruits. O Sita,
© thou the daughter of a king, in this city shalt thou dwell
with me. O large-minded damsel, thou shalt never think of
earthly women. © thou of an exquisite countenance,
enjoying these many things passing human, thou shalt not
any more think of Rama—a human being of brief existence.
Placing his beloved son on the throne, king Dagaratha hath
sent away his eldest son of weak prowess into the woods,
O thou of expansive eyes, what shalt thou do with that
wretched ascetic Rama who hath been deprived of his
kingdom? I am the lord of the whole world of Rakshasas ;
being pierced by the shafts of Kama have I come by thee,
It doth not behove thee therefore to pass by me. O timid
damsel, truly shalt thou repent afterwards if thou dost
distegard me, like unto Urvashee kicking Purarava. Raima
is a human being and is not even equal to a finger of mine
in battle. By thy good luck have { come unto thee—do thou
give thyself up unto me, O thou of a beautiful countenance.”
Being thus addressed by him, Vaidelii exceedingly wroth and
with blood-red eyes spoke unto that Lord of Rakshasas in the
lonely forest these bo!d words. “How dost thou wish to
perpetrate such an impious deed after introducing as thy
brother that highly worshipful Kuvera adored by all the
deities. O Ravana, surely shall all the Rakshasas meet with
death, who have such a stupid, harsh and lustful person like
thee for their king. One can breathe on this earth carrying
away Indra’s wife, Sachi—but stealing me, the wife of Rima,
no body shall be able to live in peace. O Rakshasa, it might
be possible for one to live on this earth treating contemptuous-


b20 - RAMAPANA.


ly the wife of the holder of thunder-bolt,but insulting me none
shall escape the hands of Death even if he drinketh nectar.


SECTION XLIX.


Fh enrina those words of Sit& the highly powerful
Ten-necked one striking his hands together, increased his
body too high. Thereupon, that one skilled in speech again
spake unto Maithili, “Methinks thou hast run mad. Hast
thou not heard of my valour and prowess ? Stationing myself
in the welkin I can with my hands raise up the earth. I
can drink up the waters of the ocean. And engaged in
conflict I can destroy Death itself. With my sharpened
shafts I can pierce the Sun and cut asunder the earth. Thou
art mad with thy beauty. Do thou look upon me, who am
capable of illusions.” When he had spoken thus, his yellow
eyes became blood-red with rage and assumed the semblance
of flaming fire. Thereat Ravana, the younger brother of
the Lord of wealth, changing his placid countenance, instantly
assumed his own terrible shape resembling that of Yama.
Highly exercised with ire, that ranger of the night became
of ten countenances and twenty arms; his eyes were
bloody and he appeared beautiful like unto blue clouds, being
dressed in gold-bued apparel. Leaving aside the semblance
of a mendicant, that lord of R&kshasas, Rivana, increasing
in bulk, assumed his own shape. And wearing a blood-red
cloth he stood there fixing his look upon that jewel of a
damsel—Maithili, Thereupon R&vana spake unto Maithili
like unto the rays of the sun, having a head of black hair and
wearing apparel and ornaments, saying, “O thou fine
dameel, if thou dost wish to have a husband known all over


ARANYVARANDAHM. fat


the world, do thou surrender thyself unto me. J am a
worthy ‘husband for thee. Do thou serve me for ever, thy
praiseworthy husband. O fine lady, I shall never do what
thou dost not tike. Renouncing thy attachment for a man,
do thou place thy love in me. © foolish girl, worthy of
being adored by the learned, for what quality art thou
attached unto Rama of a limited life. who hath been deprived
of his kingdom and heath his desire frustrated, and who of
an evil intent, hath, at the words of his wife, renouncing his
kingdom and kinsmen, been living in this forest—the abode
of voracious animals.” Speaking thus unto Maithili, sweet-
speeched and worthy of being sweetly addressed, that
highly wicked Rakshasa, Ravana, being exercised with
lust, approached towards Sit& and got ‘hold of her, like
unto Budha holding Rohini in the sky. With his left hand
he held her, having eyes like unto lotus-petals, by
the hair, and with his right hand got hold of her thighs.
Seeing Ravana of sharpened teeth, and mighty arms,
résembling the summit of a mountain and like unto Death
himself, the deities of the forest became highly terrified and
fled in different directions. Instantly appeared there the
celestial car of Ravana, decked in gold, drawn by asses and
making a terrible sound. Thereupon, that one emmiting
terrible accents, remonstrated with Vaidehi in harsh words
and clasping her ascended the car. The virtuous Sit&, being
thus caught by Ravana, began to cry aloud, addressing Rama,
who bad gone away to a distant forest. R&vana, racked
with lust, rose high up with her like unto the wife of a
Pannaga, though she tried her best (lo get rid of him), for
she was not in the least attached unto him. Being thus
carried away by the ethereal track by that Lord of Rikshasas,
Sita began to cry aloud, like one mad, distressed and of
deranged senses. “Ah! mighty Lakshmana, ever ministering
unto the satisfaction of thy superiors, dost thou not know
that 1 have been stolen away by a Raikshasa assuming


622 RAMAYANS.


shapes at willy O Raghava, for virtue hast thou renounced
thy life, happiness and wealth,—dost thou not see that 1 have
been carried away by one of mighty iniquity? © thou the
subduer of foes, thou dost always control the rebellious,—why
dost thou not punish such a vicious Rakshasa? The vicious
do not instantaneously meet with the fruits of their actions ;
as for corn to ripen requires the assistance of time. For this
iniquitous deed, which thou hast perpetrated, availing of the
time and losing thy sense, thou shalt meet with a mighty
disaster from Rama, bringing about thy end. Ah! being the
virtuous wife of the virtuous and far-famed Rama, I have been
stolen away. Now hath the desire of Kaikeyi and other
telations been fulfilled. 1 invoke this Janasth&na and these
flowery Karnik&s to tell Rima that Ravana hath stolen away
Sita. Linvoke thee, O Godavari, having swans and cranes
sporting in thy stream, to tell Rima that Ravana hath stolen
away Sith. 1 salute and invoke the deities that live in this
forest of many trees to tell my husband of my being stolen
away (by Ravana). Ido seek the refuge of all deer, birds
and other animals that live in this forest, and may they all
communicate unto Rima the news of his dear spouse being
carried away, and tell him that Sita, losing her control,
hath been stolen away by Ravana. Even if I am taken away
by Yama, and if the mighty-armed Rima is apprised of it,
surely shall he bring me hack by the display of his prowess.”
Racked with sorrow that one of expansive eyes, while thus
bewailing in piteous accents, she espied Yatayu, the king of
vultures, seated on atree. Thereat the daughter of Janaka,
brought under the control of Ravana and terrified, began to
cry and utter those piteous words,—"O worshipful YatByu, do
thou see that this vicious lord of Rakshasas hath ruthlessly
carried me away like one having no husband. Thou wilt
not be able to withstand this mighty, wicked and cruel
night-ranger weating emblems of conquest and having a
scimitar in his hand. Do thou relate unto Rima and to


ARANVAKANDAM. 623


Lakshmana everything about my being carried away from the
beginning to the end.


SECTION LL,


“Hlearine these words Yat&yu, who lay burried in a deep
slumber, awoke and beheld both R&vana and Janaki. Thereat
the lord of birds resting on the tree, having a big sharp beak
like unto the summit of a hill, addressed these soft words
unto Ravana, “O brother Ten-necked one, I am coversant
with Puranas, of truthful vows and abide by religion.
It doth not behove thee to perpetrate such an iniquitous
deed before me. I am Yatdyu, the mighty lord of vultures.
Dagaratha’s son Rama is the lord of all men like unto
Mahendra and Varuna. He is ever engaged in the welfare
of alimen. This exquisitely beautiful and far-famed Sitd
whom thou art about to stedl away, is the married wile of
that lord of men. And how dost thou thyself being a
monarch and engaged in the royal office of maintaining
subjects, carry away by stealth another's wife? O thou of
mighty prowess, thou shouldst specially protect the wives of
kings, Do thou therefore control thy base inclination of
oppressing another's wife. A hero doth never perform what
bringeth calumny upon himself, It becometh every individual
to save another’s wife from the touch of a second man like
unto his own wife. Qson of Paulastya, at the instance of
the king mild subjects perform many an action conducing
to virtue, wealth and desire, though not mentioned in the
Séstras. The king is the virtue, the king is the desire and
the king is the prime jewel of all subjects. Virtue, desire or
sin—every thing ariseth from the king. © thou the best of
Rikshasas, thou art vicious and unsteady; how hast thou
come by riches like unto a sinner attaining to the abode of


624 RAMAYANA,


celestials 2. A vicious person can never relinquish his sinful
habits—virtue doth never reside in the abodes of impious
persons.

The mighty and the virtuous-souled R&ma hath committed
nothing wrong in thy city or thy dominions. Why dost
thou thea commit wrong by him? Khara of Janasthina
is highly wicked and if Raima of blameless actions hath
killed him on Surpanakha’s account how is he to blame ?
Why dost thou then carry away the wife of that lord of men ?
Do thou soon leave off Vaidehi. Like unto Indra burning
down Vitrasura, Rima, looking with his terrible eyes like
flaming fire, shall reduce thee to ashes. Dost thou not
understand that thou hast tied with cloth a virulent serpent ?
Dost thou not see that thou hast placed around thy neck the
noose of death ? It is always proper to carry such a weight
as doth not exhaust (him who carries); it is always proper
to take such a food as doth not cause illness. Who
engageth himself in such an action as doth not confer virtue,
fame or glory, but bringeth about physical affliction only ?
O Ravana, 1 am sixty thousand years old and have been
administering regularly my ancestral kingdom. Old though I
am, thou shalt not be able to carry away with safety Janaki
in my presence, young, accoutered in mails as thou art with
bow and arrows in thy hands and ascending a car. As it is
not easy to destroy, by the reasonings of Logic, Vedas and
Sruties containing eternal and immutable truths, so thoa shalt
not be able to carry away Vaidehi by force before me. If thou
art a hero do thou fight. Or do thou wait for a moment,
O Rf&vana, thou shalt also embrace the earth like unto
Khara. Soon shall Rama clad in bark destroy thee in the
baftle field, who hadst many a time and oft destroyed in
conffict the celestials and Danavas. These two princes
Rima and Lakshmana are at a distance, what shall I do
now? O vile being, undoubtedly shalt thou, terrified, be
destroyed by them. Myself drawing my breath thou shalt


ARAN AKANDAN. 635


not be able to carry away this beloved queen of Rama, the
pure-natured Sit& having eyes resembling lotuses. It is my
duty to do good unto the bigh-souled Rama and Dagaratha
even at the sacrifice of my life. Do thou stand,O Ten-necked
one, Behold for a moment. O Ravana, I shall throw thee
headiong from this car, like unto a fruit from its stalk. O
ranger of the night, even to my utmost might I will rendee
thee hospitality in encounter.


SECTION LU.


Wane Yatiyu, the king of birds, spake thus, Ravana,
the lord of Rakshasas, wearing pendants made of pure gold,
having his eyes reddened with ire, darted towards him,
Thereupon they began a terrible conflict in the welkin, like
unto clouds driven by wind. There occurred a mighty conflict
between Yatdyu, the lord of vultures, and Ravana, the lord of
Rakshasas, like unto two Afalyavén* hills supplied with
wings. Thereat Ravana began to shower continually
terrible and sharpened pikes, iron arrows and Vikarnis
upon the mighty lord of vultures. Yatayu, the king of birds,
began to withstand in conflict the arrows and weapons
darted by Ravana, and wounded Ravana’s persone with his
feet supplied with sharpened talons. Thereupon, to destroy
Dis enemy, that mighty hero, the Ten-necked Ravana, being
exercised with ire, took up ten terrible arrows like unto
the sceptre of Death, and stretching the bow to the full he
shot those straight-coursing sharpened shafts at Yat&yu,
the king of birds. Bubolding Janaki with tears in her eyes
in that Rakshaea’s car, Yatdyu, the king of birds, disregarding
those arrows, darted towards Ravana, and with his feet


* A mountainous range described as one of the smaller mountains of India
proper, lying eastward of mount Meru.—T.


79


broke asunder his bow with the arrows, adorned with pearls
‘aud diamonds. Thereat Ravana, almost beside himself with
wrath, taking up another bow, began to shower arrows by
hundreds and thousands. Being covered with those arrows,
the lord of birds appeared like a bird lying in his nest.
Pushing away these arrows by the wind of his wings, he
again snapped that mighty bow with his feet, and with
a stroke of his wings shattered Ravana’s flaming shield like
unto burning fire. Thereupon, moving away with the wind
of his wings Ravana’s blazing cuirass resembling flaming
fire, Yatayu, in that conflict made away with his fleet-coursing
asses having the faces of demons. Next crumbling
into pieces with his impetus the mighty chariot of Ravana,
coursing at will, flaming like fire, having steps studded
with jews|s, and a wooden pole, and throwing down the
umbrella and chowris like unto the full moon along with the
Rakshasas engaged in carrying them,the effulgent and mighty
lord of birds shattered the head of the charioteer with
the strokes of his beak. Having his bow snapped and
deprived of his car, horses and charioteer, Ravana fell down
to the earth, taking Vaidehi on his lap. Beholding
Révana fallen on the ground and of broken conveyance, all
creatures praised the king of vultures again and again and
worshipped him.

Thereupon, finding the lord of birds worn out on account
of his old age, Ravanana, highly encouraged, again rose high
up in the welkin, taking Maithili with him. He had all his
weapons broken in the conflict, and had but his dagger feft
to him. Beholding him proceed thus pleased, taking the
daughter of Janaka on his lap,—all his weapons having been
lost, with his sword alone left,—the mighty and powerful lord
of vultures, Yat&yu, rose up and, darting towards Ravana,
resisted him aad said,—"O Ravana of feeble sense, it is for
the destruction of the whole line of Rakshasas that thou
catriest away this spouse of Rama, having arrows like


ARANVaKaNDAM. 627


unto thunderbolts. Like one thirsty drinking water, thou
dost address thyself to drinking poison along with thy friends,
courtiers, four-fold forces, servants and relatives. Foolish
Persons unaware of the fruit of their actions, meet in a short
time with their own destruction,<~so shalt thou very soon
meet with thy own end. Thou hast been bound up by the
noose of Death ; and, proceeding whither, shalt thou save
thyself, like unto fish eating up baits with hooks for their
own destruction ?O Ravana, it is beyond thy power to
defeat the Kakutsthas. They shall not forgive thee for this
thy encroachment upon their asylum. What hath been per
petrated by thee, coward, is blamed by all, and is the way
taken recourse to by thieves and not by heroes. Do thou
fight, O Ravana, if thou art a hero, or wait fora moment and
thou shalt lie down on the earth like unto thy brother Khara.
Truly hast thou for thy own destruction engaged thyself in
these impious acts, which are perpetrated by men on the eve
of their death, What person doth that which leadeth solely
into sin ? Neither the lord of celestials nor the self-create
Deity doth engage in such an action.” Addressing these
moral words, the mighty Yatiyu swooped on the back of that
Ten-necked R&kshasa. Like unto the rider of a mad ele-
phant, the lord of vultures began to tear Ravana with his
sharpened claws, and that one having for his weapons his
beak, talons, and wings, began to rive Ravana’s back
with his beak aod claws, and to uproot his hair, Being
thus afflicted again and again by the king of vultures, the
R&kshasa shook, with his lips quivering in anger, Beside him-
self with anger, Ravana, holding Janaki fast by her left flank,
struck YatSiyu with his palms. Yat&yu, the subduer of foes,
bearing the strokes, tore into pieces his ten jeft arms with
his beak. His arms cut off, instantly sprang up as many
others, like unto serpents issuing out of ant-hills, being
exercised with the pangs of poison. The mighty Ten-necked
one, leaving aside Sitf, out of anger bore down Yatdyu with


625 RAMAYANA,


his fists and feet. Thereupon arose a mighty conflict be-
tween the lord of vultures and the lord of R&kshasas of
incomparable prowess. Yatayu addressing himself to dis-
playing his prowess for the bencfit of Rama, Ravana taking
out his dagger, cut off his two wings, two legs and two sides.
The ranger of the night of cruel deeds having sundered his
wings, the king of vultures approaching wellnigh the verge
of death, fel! down on the earth. Beholding him fallen on
the ground with his person bathed in blood, Siti became
exceedingly aggrieved and darted towards him like unto a
friend. The lord of Lank& beheld Yatayu, fallen on the
ground, resembling sable clouds, having a yellow breast and
of exceeding prowess,—like unto an extinguished forest-fire.
Then Sita the daughter of Junaka, having a moon-like coun-
tenance began lamenting, clasping with her hands Yatayu,
crushed and fallen on the ground by the vebemence of
Ravana’s prowess.


SECTION ut


Benowoine the king of vultures slain by Ravana, that
one possessed of a face fair as the moon, striken with grief,
broke out into lamentations, saying, ‘Throbbings of the
eyes or other parts of the body, dreams, seeing birds or
hearing Weir voices, are found lo augur happiness or misery
to men. And, O Rama, although birds and beasts are
scampering away before thee on my account, thou under-
standest not the mighty mishap that has befallen thee. O
Rama, this bird, who, moved by kindness, had come to rescue
me, owing to my (ill) luck, lies slain on the ground. O
Kakutstha, O Lakshmana, save me!” Thus did that best of
females, afflicted with fear, bewail; and those near (her)
heard her lamentations. Thereat, that lord of the Rakshasas,


ARANYARANDAM. 62g


Ravana, darted towards Vaidehi, who, with a faded wreath
for her ornament, was bewailing in forlorn guise. Exclaim-
ing repeatedly, “Leave off !’ “Leave off,” the lord of the
Rakshasas got at her, as she was clasping a mighty tree as
if it were a creeper. And as she, bereft of the company of
Rama in the wilderness, was wailing, saying, “O Rama,”
“OQ Rama,” that one resembling the Destroyer himself, with
the view -of compassing his own end, seized her by her hair.
On Vaidehi being thus outraged, this entire world consisting
of mobile and immobile objects, had its nature altered, A
dense darkness enveloped (everything). And the air did not
not breathe there; and the sun grew dim. Espying with his
divine vision that Sita was overcome, that Deity, the graceful
Great-father exclaimed, “Our work is accomplished.” And
seeing Sita overpowered, the supreme saints inhabiting
the Dandaka forest, concluding the destruction of Ravana
to be as good as accomplished without much ado, became
at once delighted and aggrieved. As she went on weeping
with “O Rama,” “O Lakshmana,” Ravana—lord of Rakshasas
—taking her, coursed through the sky. And then the king's
daughter hued like molten gold, clad in a yellow silken
cloth, looked exceedingly beautiful like unto lightning. And
on her yellow cloth streaming up, Ravana looked surpassingly
graceful like a hill aflame with fire, And coppery fragrant
lotus-leaves belonging to the eminently auspicious Vaidehi
showered upon Ravana. And her gold-glowing silken cloth,
flying in the air, appeared like clouds coloured by the sunken
sun. And her blameless countenance on Ravana’s lap in
the sky did not appear heauteous without RAma,—like a lotus
without its stalk ; it appeared like the moon risen tearing
away dark clouds. And in the aerial regions her counten-
ance on Ravana’s lap furnished with a fair forehead and
graceful hair glowing like the inferior of a lotus, without
scars, graced with white, shining, stainless teeth, baving
excellent eyes,—lovely like the moon, having a shapely nose,


630 z RAMAYANA,


a rubeous upper lip,—wearing the splendour of gold in the
sky,—that captivating countenance of hers in consequence of
her weeping, and of being stained with teats, as also owing
to the violence it had undergone at the hands of the lord
of Rakshasas,—did not appear beautiful without Rima; like
the moon risen during the day. And furnished with the hue
of gold, Mithila's daughter beside the dark-bodied lord of
the Rukshasas, looked like a golden girth round a sable
elephant. And Janaka’s daughter, yellow-hued like lotus,
having the lustre of gold—and adorned with shining
orraments, coming in contact with Ravana, appeared like
lightning embosomed among clouds. And in consequence
of Vaidehi’s ornaments sending sounds, the lord of Rakshasas
resembled an entirely dark rumbling: cloud. And as Sit&
was being borne away, showers of blossoms, falling off from
her head, were scattered all around on the earth beneath.
And that blossomy shower all around, drawa up by the
vehemence of the ten-headed Ravana, again alighted beside
him. And the showers of blossoms scattered around
Vaigravana's younger brother, looked like rows of burning
stars round the foremost of mountains.* And the bangles
studded with gems, loosened from Vaidehi's feet, fell on the’
earth, like the lightning circle.t Of hue like the light red of
tender twigs, Vaidehi set off the dark-bodied lord of
R&kshasas, as does a golden cover an elephant. Vaigravana’s
younger brother carried away Sita, who, like a mighty
_meteor, filled the heavens with her splendour. And like
stars of exhausted religious merit dropping down from the
sky, her fiery ornaments began to fall to the earth with
sounds. And the chain of the splendour of the moon, removed
from Vaidehi's breast, falling down, shone like the Ganga
dropping from the sky, The trees filled with various fowls,
with their tops waving because of the wind blowing on high


* Someru—T
+ Instead of On the earth—some texts have [bangles] smeet-sounding.—T.


ARANYARANDAM. 631


and swaying them, seemed to say, “No fear,” [unto Sita]
And the pools with their lotuses faded and their fishes
agitated, seemed to sorrow for the desponding daughter of
Mithila as for their friend. And following Sit&'s shadow,
lions, and tigers, and other beasts and birds, rushed from al}
sides in wrath. And the mountains, with their faces washed
with water-falla representing tears, and their summits resem-
bling uplifted arms, seemed to Iament for Sité, she was.
being carried away. And beholding Vaidehi carried away,
the glorious Sun, oppressed with sadness, had his rays
dimmed and his disc darkened. “Virtue is not; and where
is truth? And there is neither sincerity nor kindness,—in a
case in which Ravana is catrying away Rama's Vaidebi ;”
thus did all creatures lament in numbers. And the young of
deer, afflicted with fear, wept with woe-begone faces, And
the sylvan deities, looking up now and again with eyes
betokening fear, had their persons all in a tremble, For
compassing his own destruction, the Ten headed one carried
away the intelligent Vaidehi, bewailing bitterly, Sit’, who
had come by such misfortune, sweet-voiced, crying, “O
Lakshmana,” “O Rima,” and casting glances on the ground
many a time and oft,—the ends of her hair waving and her
tilaka wiped out, Then oppressed with the load of fear, Sit
of luminous smiles,—Mithila’s daughter, bereft of her friends
~-riot behoiding either Rama or Lakshmana, became pale of
countenance,


SECTION Lit


Seunc him fly up into the air, Janaka’s daughter,
Maithili, became aggrieved and exceedingly agitated, and
gteat was the fear that possessed her. Her eyes expressing
tage, weeping and fright, Sita,as she was being carried away,


638 RAMAT ANA.


weeping Piteously, spoke to the grim-eyed lord of the
Rakshasas, saying, “Dost thou not, O base wretch, O
Ravana, feel shame on account of this act—thou, who,
knowing that I was alone, fliest away, carrying me? Coward
that thou art, thou it was, who, desirous of carrying me off,
by the shape of a deer, hadst, by thy [powers off illusion
taken away my lord, And he also that endeavoured to
rescue me, bas been slain by thee—the ancient king of
vultures, who was the friend of my father-in-law. Great,
forsooth, is found to be thy might, thou vilest of Rakshasas ;
in that thou hast carried me off by simply declaring thy name,
but hast not won me in war. Why dost thou not, O execrable
one, take shame unto thyself, having perpetrated such a
heinous act—baving carried off another's wife in the absence
of her husband ? ‘This fell and foul act of thine fraught with
unrighteousness, heroic persons shall bruit about the world,
Fie on thy heroism and thy truth,—of which thou didst speak
at that time ; and fie also on this character of thine, calculat-
ed to sully thy line in this world. What can 1 do (unto
thee), as thou proceedest with speed? But stay thou for a
moment; and thou shalt not return with life. Shouldst
thou come within the range of the vision of those sons of
the king, thou couldst not, although thou shouldst happen
to be accompanied with thy army, live fora moment. Even
as a bird cannot bear the touch of a flaming fire in a forest,
thou canst never bear the touch of their arrows, Effecting
thy own welfare, do thou, O Ravana, leave me. If thou do
not let me go, my husband along with his brother would
strive for thy destruction. As intent upon sensual enjoyment,
thou endeavourest to ravish me, this very endeavour of
thine, O mean wight, shall come to naught. Not beholding
my lord resembling a celestial, I cannot, come under the
sway of my enemy, bear te live lung. As one dwelling on
earth perceives objects in their reversed relations at the
time of one’s death, so thou dost not perceive what is for thy


ARAN YARANDAM. 633


good or profit. Those moribund do not relish what would
do them good. Isee thee with the noose of Death wound
round thy neck. As, O ranger of night, thou art not affect-
ed with fear, albeit the situation is one calculated to raise
one’s apprehensions, it is clear that thou wilt see the golden
trees, the dreadful river Vaitarani flowing with blood, the
terrible wood, O Ravana, rife with leaves in the shape of
swords, and a sharp Salmali containing blossoms of shining
gold, having lapises for its leaves, and bearing iron thorns.
But, O shameless one, like a person that hath drunk poison,
having done this wrong unto that high-souled one, thou
wilt not be able to save thyself, O Ravana, thou art fast
fettered in the noose of Death. Having done this foul turn
unto that high-souled one, repairing whither, shalt thou obtain
respite ? Shall not that strong and heroic Raghava, skilled
in all weapons, who without his brother, in the twinkling
of an eye, in battle slew fourteen thousand Rakshasas, slay
thee, who carriest away his beloved wife?” Thus and in
other ways, Videha's daughter, lying on the lap of Ravana,
overwhelmed with fear and grief, indulged in piteous lament-
ations. And the wicked (Ravana) with a shaking frame
carried away the daughter of the king extremely distressed,
speaking much, and speaking piteously, uttering lament.
ations, and putting forth endeavours (to free herself).


SECTION LIV.


a


Coarriep away (by Ravana), Vaidehi, not finding any
defender, saw five principal monkeys stationed on the top
of ahill. Thereat, that lady of expansive eyes and surpass-
ing charms, in the hope that they might convey the intelli-
gence unto R&ma, flung off in their midst her gold-gleaming
silken sheet, and elegant ornaments. But the Ten-headed


80


034 RAMAPANA.


one owing to hurry did not observe the throwing of the
cloth along with the ornaments. Those foremost of monkeys
having tawny eyes observed with winkless eyes the large-
eyed Sit& as she was giving way to grief. And the lord of
Rakshasas, passing beyond Pamp4, directed his course
towards the city of Lanka, taking Mithilé’s daughter along
with him, indulging in lamentations, Experiencing the
height of delight, Ravana ravished her, taking her, on his lap,
like a sharp-toothed serpent of virulent poison. And speedily,
like an arrow shot from a bow, he, coursing the welkin,
left behind woods and streams and mountains and pieces
of water. And coming to the abode of Varuna, that refuge
of rivers, the exhaustless ocean—the home of whales and
alligators, he crossed over it. In consequence of the
carrying away of Vaidehi, Varuna’s abode, from grief, had
all its waves stilled and its fishes and mighty snakes inert.—
And the Charanas uttered in the heavens these words,
“O Ten-headed one, this is thy end.” Thus did the Siddhas
then say, And taking Sita on his lap, representing his -
own Death,—who endeavuured (to liberate herself), Ravana
entered the city or Lank&. And entering the city of Lanka,
vast, with all its highways well-arranged, and with people
thronging its gates, he entered his own inner apartment.
Then Ravana set Sita there, having eyes with dark outer
corners, oxercised with grief and dole ; as if Maya had set
his own Asura illusion (in his own palace). Then the
Ten-headed one spoke unto some female friends of terrible
visages, “Let no man or woman behold Sit& without my
permission. And I command that, should she ask for pearls,
or rubies, or gold, or apparel, or ornaments, the same should
be rendered unto her. She that, whether knowingly
or unknowingly should say anything unpleasant to
Vaidehi, would hold her life cheap.” Having said this
unto the Rakshasis, the puissant lord of the Rakshasas,
went out of the inner apartment, and thought within


ARANPAKANDAM, 635


himself as to what was to be done (next). And he saw eight
flesh-eating Rakshasas of wondrous prowess. And seeing
them, the exceedingly powerful (Ravana), blinded by the
bestowal of the boon, after extolling their strength and
heroism, addressed them, saying, “Equipped with various
weapons, do ye speedily take yourself to Janasth&na,—that
field of carnage—which ere this contained the abode of
Khara; and casting off fear at a distance, do ye sojourn in
vacant Janasthana with all its Rakshasas slain (by Rama). A
great many troops endued with exceeding prowess, who had
been posted in Janasthana, have, along with Dushana and
Khara, been slain by the shafts of Rama. Hence unprecedent-
ed is my wrath, towering above my patience ; and great and
fierce also is the hostility I have conceived against Rima.
1 wish to avenge myself on my mighty enemy. Sleep find
Inone without slaying my foe in fight. Slaying that slayer
of Khara and Dushana, Rama, I shall attain delight like unto
that attained by a pauper on gaining riches. Staying in
Janasthana, ye shall gather true information touching Rama
asto what he is about. Repair all ye rangers of the night
carefully, and strive yourselves always for slaying Rima. I
have been well acquainted with your strength in many a field,
and it is for this that I set ye in Janasthana.” Hearing these
agreeable and weighty words of Ravana, those Rakshasas,
bowing down unto Ravana, left Lanka, and in a body invisibly
proceeded in the direction of Janasthana. Having obtained
Mithila’s daughter, Ravana experienced great joy in establish-
ing her (in his own house} ; and having created high hostility
with Rama, Ravana through blindness rejoiced greatly.


636 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LV.


LLavine commissioned those eight terrible and mighty
Rakshasas, Ravana, in consequence of perversion of sense,
considered himself as crowned with success. And brooding
over Vaidehi, he, sore pierced by the shafts of Kama, hastily
entered hie charming mansion, with the intention of seeing
Sité. And entering that apartment, Ravana—tord of
Rakshasas—saw the distressed Sita in the midst of the
Rakshasas, with a tearful countenanze, oppressed with a load
of grief, like unto a bark sinking in the ocean through
the violence of the winds; tike unto a doe separated from
the herd of deer, and surrounded by dogs. Coming to Sita
disconsolate in consequence of stress of sorrow, remaining
with her head beat dowa, that ranger of the night, the lord
of the Rakshasas, forcibly shewed unto her that mansion
resembling the mansion of the celestials, thick with palaces
and lordly piles, fobabited by thousands of females;
containing birds of various kinds; furnished with various
gems; with beautiful pillars of ivory gold and crystal
and silver, studded with diamonds and tapises. Ravana in
company with Sita ascended the beautiful golden stairs,
resounding with the sounds of kettle-drums and embellished
with ornaments of burnished gold. And those lofty edifices
had excellent stindows made of ivory and silver, and covered
with golden nets. The ground all over was decorated with
ambrosia and gems, The Ten-headed one in his own mansion
shewed unto Maithili Jarge tanks and pools covered with
various hinds of flowers, (All this) Ravana shewed unto
Silk overmastered by sorrow. And alter having shewed
unto Vaidehi the whole of that goodliest of mansions, that
wicked one, with the intention of tempting Sit&, spoke unto
her, saying “O Sita, leaving out old men and boys, f am
the lord of thirty-two doffs of night-rangers of terrible deeds,
‘And a thousand come forward whenever required for any


ARANVAKAND3 AM. * 637


service.—If such is my sovereignty, all this is established in
thee, O large-eyed lady, as well a3 my life. Thou art dearer
unto me than life. O Sita, be thou the mistress of those
numerous excellent women who are my wives. Dear, be thou
my wife, This is for thy good. Why shouldst thou act other-
wise? Do thou relish my speech. Do thou bend thy mind
towards me. ‘It behoves thee to favour me, who am burning
(in the heat of desire). This Lanka measuring an hundred
Yoyanas girt round by the ocean, is incapable of being
harassed by the celestials themselves headed by Indra.
Neither among the celestials nor Yakshas nor Gandharbas
nor Serpents, find J any one that can match me in prowess.
What wilt thou do with Rima a buman being of short life,
poor, of small prowess, practising mendicancy ? O Sits, bend
thy mind unto me. Iam a fit husband for thee. O timid one,
youth is uncertain. Sport with me here. And, O thou of a
handsome countenance, do not wish for the sight of Raghava.
O Sit&, what power hath he to come hither even in thought ?
None can fetter the exceedingly fleet wind in the sky, or hold
the bright flame of a burning fire. O beauteous one, in these
three worlds I find no one that can by his might carry thee
away, who art protected by my arms. Do thou govern at
Lanka this extensive kingdom. The like of me and celestials
and all that are mobile and immobile shall be thy servants.
Laving thy limbs with water, do thou gratify me. The evil
that thou hadst done, hath been expiated by thy life in the
forest: now do thou reap the fruit of thy good deeds. Here
are garlands furnished with divine fragrance, and, O
Maithili, superb ornaments. Enjoy thou all these along with
me. © thou of shapely bips, the car called Pushpaka,
resembling the sun, which (formerly) belonged to my brother
Vaigravana, was through my prowess won by ine in fight.
And vast and beautiful is that car furnished with the speed of
the mind. Do thou, O Sitd, at thy pleasure sport on it along
with me. Thy face stainless and lovely to look at resembling


638 RAMAYANA.


the lotus, doth not, O thou of a comely countenance, O
magnificent damsel, appear beautiful in consequence of thy
being exercised with grief.” When Ravana had spoken thus,
that best of females Sita muffling up her moon-like counte-
nance with the ends of her cloth, began to shed gentle tears.
Thereat the heroic ranger of the night, Ravana said unto Sita,
distressed, sunk in thought, and deprived of her splendour
through anxiety,“O Vaidehi, banish bashfulness, which stands
in the way of one’s duty. The yearning I feel alter thee is in
consonance with what the sages prescribe, These tender feet
of thine I press upon my heads. Do thou speedily shew thy
favour unto me. Iam thy slave (ever) obedient unlo thee.
Let not these words of mine spoken by me under the wither-
ing influence of love prove fruitless. Ravana hath never
bowed his head to any female.” Having said this, the
Ten-hended one, come under the subjection of the Destroyer,
looked upon Maithili, Janaka’s daughter (as his own) saying,
“She is mine.”


SECTION evi.


Havine been thus addressed, Vaidehi unaffected by
fear, although exercised with grief, placing a blade of grass
between herself and Ravana, answered, him, saying, “There
was a king named Dagaratha, the bridge of righteousness,
like unto a mountain, ever bearing regard towards the truth
and renowned among men, whose son is Raghava. He is
named Rama and is righteous-souled and celebrated over the
three worlds. He is long-armed, of expansive eyes—like
unto a celestial—he is my busband. Born in the race of the
Ikshw8kus, le hath the shoulders of a lion and is possessed
of exceeding effulgencethe same that along with his


ARANYAKANDAM. 639


brother, Lakshmana, shall take thy life. If thou hadst
wronged me forcibly in his presence, thou wouldst have lain
in battle in Janasthdna even as Khara. All ‘the mighty
Rikshasas of grim visages, whom thou hast extolled (before
me), shall be deprived of their venom before R&ma, as
serpents are before Suparna. The shafts decorated with
gold shot by the bow-string of Raghava, shall pierce their
bodies, as the waves of the Gang& (beat against) her banks.
Although, O Ravana, thou mayst be incapable of being slain
either by the gods or the Asuras, yet having roused the
high hostility of Raghava, thou wilt not be able to liberate
thy life. The strong R&ghava will compass the end of what
Yemains of thy life. Like the life of a beast tied to the
sacrificial stake, thy own is incapable of being reclaimed.
Should Rama look at thee with eyes aglow with anger, thon,
OQ R&kshasa, wouldst be consumed even as Manmatha was by
Rudra. He who is able to bring down the Moon or destroy
him, and to drink up the ocean dry, will surely liberate Sitd
from here. Thy days are numbered, and auspiciousness
hath bidden thee adieu. Thou art shorn of strength, and
thy senses have been dulled. And it is owing to thee that
Lank& shall be subject to widowhood. That thou by force
hast for naught carried me away from the side of my husband
this sinful act can never conduce to thy felicity. That
exceedingly effulgent lord of mine along with my husband’s
younger brother, summoning up their energy, is fearlessly
dwelling in the vacant Dandaka. By means of an arrowy
shower in conflict, he will take thy prowess and strength, thy
hauteur and wickedness out of thy person. When urged by
the Destroyer, the destruction of creatures is perceptible,
then, coming under the sway of the Destroyer, men become
careless in their actions. Having outraged me, thou, O
worst of Rakshasas, thy time come; for compassing thy own
destruction as well as that of the Rakshasas and those dwell-
ing in thy inner apartment. A Chandala cannot tread the,


640 RaMAVANA,


dais reared in the midst of a sacrifice beauteous with ladles,
and vessels, and sanctified by the twice-born ones. So I,
ously wedded wife of that one, ever intent on virtue,
and (always) firm in my vows, is incapable, thou vilest of
Rakshasas, of being touched by thee, a sinner. How can
the female that hath always sported with her mate amidst
lotuses, cast her eyes on a shag staying among rushes. Do
thou either bind or destroy this body deprived of sensation.
This body will I not protect, nor yet this life, O Ravana ;
and I shall not be able to bring blame on myself in this
world.” Having said these harsh words in wrath, Videha’s
daughter, Janaki, did not there again say anything unto
Ravana. Hearing Sit&’s words, harsh and calculated to
make one’s down stand on end, Ravana answered her in
words tending to excite one’s apprehension, “Hear, O
Maithili, my words. O damsel if, O thou of sweet smiles,
within this thou do not turn thyself unto me, the cooks
shall cut thee off in pieces to serve my morning meal.”
Having herself spoken thus, R&vana,—challenger of foes—
growing exceedingly wroth, addressed the R&kshasis in
these words, "Ye drightful Rakshasis terrible to behold,
subsisting on flesh and gore, do ye at once crush her pride.”
As soon as he had said this, those frightful and terrible
Ra&kshasis with joined hands encircled Maithili. Then the
gtim-visaged king Ravana, as if riving the earth by his
tread, proceeding a pace or two, said, “Do ye take Maithili
to the wood of Asoka. There surrounding her, do ye secretly
guard her; and there (sometimes) by storming, and (at
others) by means of soft speech, do ye all strive to bring
Mithila’s daughter, like a wild female elephant, under your
away.’ Thus commanded by Ravana, those R&kshasis
taking Maithili along with them, went to the Asoka wood,
abounding with trees granting every desire, and filled with
various kinds of fruits and flowers ; and frequented by fowls
fraught with juices at all seasons. And as adoe comes


ARANYVAKANDAM. i bar


under the subjection of tigresses, Janaka's daughter, Maithili,
her frame worked up with grief, came under the sway of the
Rikshasis. And like a female deer fast bound by a trap,
Janaka’s timid daughter Maithili, agitated by tho mighty
grief, did not attain respite. And greatly up-braided by the
fierce eyes (of the Rakshasis), Maithili did not know repose ;
and, afflicted with grief and fear,she, remembering her beloved
lord along with Lakshmana swooned away.


The passage included within the brackets are want-
ing in some texts :— ;


Sita having entered Lanka, the Great father ad-
dressed the gratified Devendra of an hundred sacrifices,
“For bringing about the weal of the three worlds, and
the woe of the R&kshasas, Sit& hath been taken into
Lanka by the wicked-minded, Ravana. Devoted unto her
husband, the exalted lady always brought up in happiness,
not seeing her husband, and seeing (on the other hand)
environed by numbers of Rakshasis—is hungering alter the
sight of her lord. The city of Lank jis situated on the shores
of the lord of rivers and streams. How can Rama get a
knowledge of that blameless one, staying there? Bronding
over the various ills she hath undergone, that exceedingly rare
damsel is passing her days. Surely she will resign her exist-
ence. Great is the doubt that hath arisen as to Sitf putting
a period to her existence. Having thyself from here, do thou
see the fair-faced Sita. Having entered the city of Lanka,
offer excellent clarified butter.” Thus addressed by the
reverend chastiser of Paka, Devendra in company with
sleep, approached the city ruled by Ravana. He then

81


642 RAMAPANA.


addressed sleep, saying, “Go thou ; and stupify the Rakshasas.’
Thus accosted by Maghavat, that goddess, exceedingly
delighted, for securing success to the work of the celestials
covered the Rakshasas with stupor. In the meanwhile,
that god, the thousand-tyed lord of Sachi went to (Sita)
staying in the woods, and spoke unto her these words,
“T am the sovereign of the celestials, Good betide thee !
I am here, O thou of luminous smiles! For securing
success unto the work of the magnanimous R4ghava, 1 will
lend my aid unto thee. Do not, O daughter of Janaka,
grieve. Through my grace, he shall along with his forces
cross over the ocean. And, O excellent wench, I have by
my supernal power, slupified the R&kshasis. And, O Sita,
for Uhis reason, I along with steep, taking these rice,—rice
boited in clarified butter, have, O Vaidehi, come unto thee.
If thou partake of these from my hand, thou shalt never, O
beauteous one, be afflicted either with hunger or thirst, O
thou of thighs resembling raméhd@ (trunks), for years.”
Thus addressed, Sit&, alarmed, said, “HowcanI know thee
for Devendra, Sachi’s husband, staying here ? By the side
of Rama and Lakshmana, I had beheld the signs of the
celestials, If, O Devendra, thou art thyself the sovereign
of the celestials, show those unto me.” Hearing Siti’s
words, the lord of Sachi did accordingly. He did not touch
the earth with his feet, and his eyes remained winkless. He
bloomed in youth, and the blossoms did not fade on his
attire. Thereupon knowing him for Vasava, Sita was over-
joyed. And weeping, she spoke regarding Raghava, “By
luck it is that [had heard of that mighty-armed one along
with his brother. As is my father in-law, the king, as is
the master of MithilA, so art thou (unto me), thou whom I
behold to-day ; my husband hath now found a protector
And by thy command, O Devendra, will I partake of
this pdyasa cooked with milk, which hath been offered
unto me, and which shall enhance (the prosperity) of our


ARANYARANDAM, 643


race”’ Thereupon taking the pdyasa from Indra’s hands,
that Maithili of luminous smiles (mentally) offered it unto
her husband as well as Lakshmana. “If my mighty lord live
along with his brother, let this through my reverence for
them, bo theirs.” She then partook of the pdéyasa herself.
Hav.eg thus eaten it, that one of excellent countenance,
had her hunger and rising sorrow removed ; and attaining
amental tendency from Indra, Janaki grew glad with
reference to the K&kutsthas. And Sakra also for bringing
about the success of Raghava’s work, with a pleased mind,
went tothe abode of celestials. And greeting Siti again
and again, that high-souled celestial, in company with sleep
went back to his own abode.”’)


SECTION Lvit,


Kiuuwe the R&kshasa, Ma@richa assuming shapes at will
and ranging in the shape of a deer, Rima wended speedily
his way, And as he hurried himself, eager to behold Maithili,
jackals began to howl hideously at his back. Hearing their
harsh cries, capable of making one's hair stand on end,
Rama struck with fear at the voices of the jackals, hecame
filled with alarm. “Ah! I consider this as inauspicious—
that these jackals are crying. Escaping being devoured by
the Rakshasas, may fair fortune befall Vaidehi ! If Laksh-
mana should have heard the cries which M&richa, knowing
my voice, and fixing on the means of harming me, uttered
in the form of a deer, Saumitri, hearing that voice, leaving
Mithila’s daughter and commissioned by herself, must have-
come near me. Surely, the Rakshasas in a body are desirous
of slaying Siti. Becoming a golden deer, Maricha, having

alluredme far, transformed himselfinto a Ra kshasa, as soon


644 RAMAYANA,


as he had been struck with my shafts ; and exclaimed, ‘Ah

Lakshmana, slain aml’ It is doubtless, we having left
(Sita), whether all is well with her. I having raised the
hostility of the Rakshasas for the sake of Janasthina ; and
many and dreadful are the omens I see (around me)."
Thus reflecting as he heard the howlings of the jackals, the
self-possessed R&ma with hasty steps returned to the asylum.
R&aghava went back to Janasthana, alarmed in consequence
of bis having been drawn away by the R&kshasa in the
form of adeer. And birds and beasts approached that
high-souled one distressed and depressed in spirit ; and
staying on his left set up frightful cries. As he was
witnessing the exceedingly dreadful signs, Raghava saw
Lakshmana coming with a lacklustre (countenance); and
Lakshmana came up to Rama. And depressed in spirit,
he was rondred still more sad by that one who, afflicted
with depression shared his sorrow. And, seeing that
(Lakshmana) had come, leaving Sit& in that solitary wood
frequented by Rakshasas, his brother fell to reprimanding
him, And taking Lakshmana’s left band, the son of Raghu
in extreme distress sweetly spake these rough words, “Alas !
Lakshmana, thou hast committed a censurable act ; leaving
Sita, O mild one, thou hast come hither. 1s it well with
her? I make no doubt, O hero, but that Janaka’s daughter
hath either been slain or devoured by Rakshasas ranging.
the forest. And, considering the many omens that take
place before me, O Lakshmana, Ido not know whether we
shall light upon welfare of Janaka’s daughter Sité being
alive, O best of men. And as these multitudes of beasts
and these jackals are crying frightfully in the flaming direc-
tion,* 1 do not know, O thou of mighty strength, whether it
is well with that daughter of the king. This Rakshasa, who,
wearing the shape of a deer, and, alluring me, had drawn me
far, hath in some sort been slain by me with much ado;


* é¢, The quarter presided over by the sun, ois,, the East—T.


ARANVARANDAM. 645


and he became a Rakshasa at the time of his death. Yet
my mind is poor and cheerless; and my left eye throbs.
Doubtless, O Lakshmana, Sita is not,—she is either carried
away, or dead, or is wandering on the way.


SECTION Lvill.


Sceine Lakshmana cast down, cheerless, and come with-
out Vaidehi, the righteous son of Dagaratha, asked him,
saying, Where, O Lakshmana is that Vaidehi, who hath
followed me unto the Dandaka forest, and leaving whom thou
hast come hither? Where is that one of a slender waist,
who is my help in trouble, deprived of my kingdom,
dispirited, and running about the Dandakas ? Without whom,
O hero, I cannot live for a moment—where is that help
of my life, Sit8, resembling the daughter of acelestial ? O
Lakshmana, without Janaka’s daughter (hued) like burning
gold, I covet not the sovereignty of the celestials or the
earth, Liveth Vaidehi, dearer unto me than life ? Shall this
exile of mine be of no avail ? O Sumitra’s son, on my dying
for Sit& and thy returning (to the city), shall Kaikeyi have
her desire, and attain felicity; and shall KaugalyS,—ber
son dead, and herself wearing the guise of a female
mendicant, humbly wait upon Kaikeyi when she shall have
succeeded in obtaining the kingdom for her son? If Vaidehi
live, I will then return to the asylum ; but O Lakshmana, if
that one of excellent character should happen to be dead,
Iwill also renounce my life. If, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi
ever preluding her speech with a smile should not speak to
me when [ arrive at the asylum, I shall give up my life.
Do thou tell me, O Lakshmana, whether Videha’s daughter
liveth or not ; or whether, in consequence of thy acting heed-
lessly, that forlorn wench hath been devoured by Rakshasas,


646 RAMATANA,


Of atender frame, anda mere girl, Vaidehi, never having
experienced unhappiness being cast down, surely weepeth
for my separation. When that exceedingly wicked Rakshasa
cried, “Lakshmana” at the top of his voice, wast thou
also seized with fear ? And I apprehend that voice resem-
bling mine was heard by Vaidehi; and, despatched by her
from fear, thou mayst have come hither swiftly to see* me.
Thou bast every way acted unwisely in having left Sita
alone in the wood. By this thou hast afforded opportunity
to the cruel R&kshasas to repair the mischief (I have done
them). The Rakshasas subsist
because of Khara having been slain ; and now, without doubt,
those terrible ones have slain Sita, Alas ! absolutely sunk
am Tin perit, O destroyer of fors. What shull I do now? [
fear such an event was appointed for me.” Thus thinking
of Sit&, paragon among women, R&ghava hastily went
to Janasthina in company with Lakshmana. Taking to
task his yonger brother of distressed visage, Rama, afflicted
with hunger and thirst, and dejected in spirits, sighing heavily
with a countenance turned pale, entered the asylum and
found it vacant. And entering his own asylum, that hero
went to the play-grounds (of Sita) und remembering the
sporting ground (of Sita) in that abode, he was filled with
grief and his down stood on end.


on flesh are aggrieved


SECTION Ltx,


"Tuen coming out of the hermitage, Raghu’s descendant,
Ruma, alter awhile, from grief, spake these words to the
son of Sumitra, “When confiding myself in thee, I had leit
Maithili with thee in the wood, why then didst thou go out,
leaving her behind? O Lakshmana, directly Isaw thee


* Some texts—fo rescue me.—T.


ARANYAKANDAM. 647


approach, renouncing Maithili, my mind, apprehending great
wrong, became really aggrieved. O Lakshmana, seeing thee
coming at-a distance, renouncing her, my left eye and arm
as well as my heart keep throbbing.” Thus accosted,
Lakshmana having auspicious signs, afflicted with great grief,
said unto the aggrieved R&ma, “I have not come hither, of
my own accord, renouncing Sit& ; but Ihave come to thee
having been urged thereto by herself with rudeness. The
cries of “O Lakshmana, save me,” as if uttered by the
master, came to the ears of Maithili. Hearing those
distressful accents, Maithili from affection (for thee), break-
ing out into lamentations, and overwhelmed with fear, spoke
unto me, “Off,” “off.” On being repeatedly urged, with
“Go,” [answered Maithili in these words, tending to inspire
her confidence, ‘I do not see such a Rakshasa, as can excite
his fear. Do thou desist. These cries do not come from him;
but must have been uttered by some one else. How can he
that can rescue the celestials themselves, utter, O Sit&, such
blame-worthy and base word as—save (me)? Some one
for some purpose, assuming my brother’s voice, is crying—
O Lakshmana, save me. O beauteous lady, these words, Save
me—must have been uttered by some Rakshasa from fear.
Thou shouldst not act like a mean woman. Do not be over-
whelmed ; and banish thy anxiety. There breathes no person,
nor yet shall there be born any one in these three worlds who
in the field shall vanquish Raghava in fight. Raghava is
incapable of being beaten in battle by the very gods headed
by Indra’ Thus addressed (by me) Vaidehi, deprived of her
sense, shedding tears, spake unto me these cruel words,
‘Thou cherishest the vile idea that on thy brother perishing,
thou shalt come by me; but me thou shalt never have. As
thou dost not go to him albeit he is crying loudly (for help),
thou followest R&ma in consonance with a hint from Bharata.
A foe going about in disguise, thou followest Rama for my
sake, prying into Raghava’s draw-backs ; and is it for this that


648 RAMAFANA,


thou dost not go (to him)?” Thus accosted by Vaidehi, I, with
eyes reddened in wrath, and my nether lip swollen in ire,
rushed out of the asylum.’ When Saumitri had spoken thus,
Rama transported by grief, said unto Lakshmana, “O gentle
one, thou hast done wrong in having come out hither without
ber. Although thou knewest (full well) that I was able ta
withstand the R&kshasas, yet didst thou sally out at the
angry words of Mithila’s daughter. Iam not pleased with
thee that hearing her barsh speech spoken in wrath, thor
hast come hither, leaving Vaidehi behind. Thou hast every
way done wrong in not acting out my mandate in consequence
of being urged by Sit&, and under the influence of indignation
That Rakshasa lieth low, being wounded by my shafts—that
had drawn me away from the asylum wearing the from of a
deer. }hithim stretching my bow slightly and fixing the
shaft on it; when, renouncing his deer-form he became a
Rakshasa wearing a bracelet and began to emit distressful
shrieks. Wounded by my shaft, he, assuming my voice, and
in accents capable of being heard from far, uttered those
dreadful words fraught with dole, hearing which, thou bast
come hither, renouncing Mithila’s daughter.”


SECTION Lx.


Rima went on, his feet failed him, his left eye begar
to beat, and a trembling came over his frame. Seeing
again and again all these signs, he continually kept on askin;
(Lakshmana), “Is it well with Siti?” Eager to behok
Sit4, he proceeded fast ; but finding the abode empty, he wa
filled with anxiety. And proceeding with swiftness, throw
ing about his limbs, Raghu’s son began to survey all aroun:


ARANY 4 KANDAM. 649


the hut. Hethen found it empty of Sitf, like unto a tank
in evil plight and bereft of lotuses—during the winter. And
seeing the cottage empty, with its trees as if sorrowing, and
its flowers faded, and its beasts and birds sunk in gloom,—
shorn of grace, wora out, forsaken by the sylvan deities,
strewn with deer-skins and Kuga, and twists of Kasa, he
wept again and again—‘Hath the timid one been carried off,


or is she dead, or hath any one eaten her up, or hath she
vanished (from the earth), or hath she gone to the wood, or
hath she gone to cull flowers and fruits, or hath she gone to
the pool for procuring water, or hath she repaired to the
river ?” Although he searched his beloved one carofully,
yet he failed to find her out in the wood-land. And that
graceful one with his eyes reddened with grief, seemed like
amaniac. And he rushed from tree to tree, and hewailing
geing sunk in an occean of grief traversed all the rivers and
mountains. “O Kadamba, hast thou seen where is that one
fond of Kadamba groves ? If knowest thon this do thou tell
wo of Sit having an auspicious countenance. O Bilya, tell
ne pray, if thou hast seen her, wearing silken cloth, resembl-
ng cool leaves and having breast like unto Bilya fruits. Or,
> Aryund, she was very fond of thee, tell me if tiveth
hat daughter of Janaka of slender frame. This Aakuva
tmoweth for certain about Maithilee having thighs like unto
Cakuva, Yon stands beautifully that Banaspati being en-
eloped with creepers, flowers and leaves and filled with the
um of Vramaras. Surely doth this Z:/aka know about her
tho was fond of her. O Asoka, who doth remove sorrows,
othou make good thy name by making me, who am exer-
ised with grief, see instantly ny beloved (spouse). O Tdla,

thou hast any pity on medo thou tell me whether thou
ast beheld that fair damsel having breast resembling ripe
‘dla fruits. Do thou tell me without fear, Jambhu, if
wou hast seen my dear one resembling in hue the river
mbhu. O Karntkar, thou appearest very beautiful with this


82


650 RAMAYANA,


blossoming flowers, tell me if thou hast seen my dear
devoted wife who was fond of thee.” Thus the highly famous
Rama asking about Sitd, nearing the various trees such as
mangoe, Nipa, Mah&sala, Panaca, Kurava, Pomegranate,
Vakula, Pumnaga, Sandal and Ketaka began to traverse the
forest like a maniac. Again addressed he the diverse
animals—"O deer, knowest thou for certain about Janaki
having the eyes of a doe; is she engaged in play with the
does ? Oclephant, methinks thou dost know about the
daughter of Janaka having thighs resembling thy trunk ;
pray tell me if thou hast beheld ber. © tiger, fearlessly do
thou relate unto me if thou hast seen my beloved Maithilee,
having a countenance resembling Moon. O dear! O thou
having eyes like unto lotuses! why dost thou fly away ?
Surely have Iseen thee. Why dost thou not address me
hiding thyself behind the tree? Wait, wait, O thou fair
damsel, thou hast no compassion for me ! Never hadst thou
mock me before in this way! Why dost thou neglect me
now ? O exquisitely fair damsel, truly have J found thee out
from this thy yellow silken cloth. I have seen thee flying away.
Stand if thou hast any love for me. Or, O thou having a sweet.
smile, thou art not she; truly thou hast been killed or else
thou wouldst not have neglected me at this time of dire
affliction, True it is that she hath been devoured in my absence
by the Rakshasas living on flesh having torn into pieces her
limbs. Truly hath her face, resembling the full-moon, having
beautiful teeth a fine nose and white Kundalas, become of
pale countenance being brought under the possession of the
Rakshasas. Her neck had the hue of sandal and was adorned
with necklace—that beautiful tender neck was eaten up by
the Rakshasas, my beloved wife wailing. Her arms were
tender like leaves and adorned with various ornaments ; truly
have the Rakshasas eaten them up, shaken as they were, by
throwing them here and there. Alas ! did J leave her alone
only to be devoured by the Rakshasas ? And she hath been


ARAN ARANDAM. 651


eaten up like one weak and helpless albeit she has many
friends, O Lakshmana, O thou of mighty-arms, hast thou
seen where my dear wife is? Odear! O Sita! where hast
thou gone?” Bewailing again and again in this strain Rama
bégan to range the forest. Sometimes leaping, sometimes
walking in an uncertain direction, again and again he looked
like one void of sense. And again intent on searching Sit& he
furiously engaged in traversing the rivers,mountains,fountaina
and the woods. He could not wait patiently anywhere.
Entering a vast forest he searched every nook and corner for
Maithili; his desire was not satisfied and he again engaged
with great labour in the finding out of his dear spouse.


SECTION LXI.


‘Benoroine the hermitage and cottage desolate and the
seats strewn here and there, R&ma the son of Dagaratha
looked around. And finding Sita nowhere he raised up his
beautiful arm and broke out into lamentations saying, "O
Lakshmana where is Sita? Where has she gone hence? O
Saumitri, who bath carried away my dear one or who hath
devoured her? O Sité, if wishest thou to mock me, hiding
thyself behind the tree, enough—enough it is—console me
who am exercised with grief, O pleasant Sita, without thee
these faithful little deer have engaged in meditation being
bathed in tears. Without Sit& I shall not breathe, O Laksh-
mana, A mighly grief hath overtaken me in consequence of
her being carried away. My father the monarch shall surely
behold me in the next world and ask me ‘I engaged
thee in the observance of a vow; without fulfilling that, why
bast thou come here? © shame on thee! For certain shall
uy father address me with these words relating to my
passionate, false and base conduct. All my desires have now


652 RAMAYANA,


been baffled and } have lest ail control over myself and have
been exercised with grief. O fine damsel, O thou of slender
waist, where dost thou repair leaviig me behind like unto
fame renouncing a person of vicious nature? Without thee
Ishall renounce my own life.” Being desirous of seeing
Sita, Rama afflicted with grief began to bewail in this strain,
but did not behold the daughter of Janaka. Being sunk in
grief on SitZ’s account he became worn out like unto an
elephant fallen in mud. Thereat for his well being, Laksh-
mana spoke unto him saying, “O thou of mighty intellect—
do nat grieve. Do thou put forth thy endeavours along with
me. There is that high hill, O hero, containing many a
cave. Maithili who is fond of ranging the forest and ever
delighteth in beholding the fowery woods, must have entered
therein or have gone to the watering-place blooming with
flowerets and lotuses. She has gone to the river abounding
in fish and Banjulas or Nas hidden berself somewhere in
the forest to frighten us and to know, O best of men, how
we can search her vut. O thou of great beauty, let us soon
engage in quest of her, O Kakotstha, if thinkest thou
that she is somewhere in this forest, we shall leave no
quarter untried. Do thou not grieve.” After Lakslimana had
spoken thus out of fraternal affection,Rama, with a composed
heart, set out along with him in quest of Sita. And search-
ing every nook and corner of the mountains, rivers, ponds,
table-lands, hills and summits they found Sita nowhere. And
searching thus all the mountains Rama spake unto Lakshmana
saying,Bebold not J the auspicious Vaidehi on this mountain,
© Saumitri.” Ranging the entire forest of Dandaka,
Lakshmana, sore distressed, spake unto his brother of flaming
energy, saying, “Surely shalt thou come by Maithili the
daughter of Janaka like onto the mighty-armed Vishnu
obtaining this earth after having bound Vali.” Being thus
addressed by the heroic Lakshmana,Raghava, greatly afflicted
with sorrow, replied in piteous accents—"O thou of mighty


ARANYARANDAM. 653


intellect I have searched every nook of this forest,‘this pool
abounding in blown fotuses, and this mountain containing
many a cave and fountain ; but nowhere have I seen Vaidehi
dearer than my life. Thus bewailing R&ma, racked with
“sorrow consequent on Sita being carried away, became poorly
aud afflicted with grief and swooned away for sometime. He
lost his sense and his whole frame was worked with grief.
Being greatly anxious and breathless he sighed hot and fast
and began to lament. And sobbing again and again the
lotus-eyed Rama bewailed with his voice choked with the
vapour of grief, exclaiming “Ah Sita!” Thereat his dear
brother Lakshmana, aggrieved, consoled him with joined
hands. But passing by the words dropping from Lakshmana’s
lips Rama again and again bewailed not beholding his dear
Sita.


SECTION LXxt


Nor behotding Sit the virtuous-souled Rama, of mighty
arms, having eyes resembling lotuses, beside himself with
grief, lamented (in many a way). Pierced with the shafts of
Manmatha, Raghava, as if beholding Sita though he actually
did not see her, uttered the following piteous accents—-"O my
dear, thou delightest greatly in lowers. Covering thy own
person with Asoka twigs thou art increasing my grief. Thy
thighs are like unto the trunks of plantain trees and thou
hast hidden thyself behind the plantain grove. But I per-
Cieve thee, O fair one, thou art incapable of keeping thyself
hidden. © auspicious one, thou hast entered smiling the
Karnikar grove. No more wijh thy pastime, O dear one,
leading to my death. *Moreover it is not proper to sport in
this way ina hermitage. {know it full well, O my dear,
that thou art by nature fond of pastimes. But O thou of


654 RAMAT ANA,


expansive eyes, this cottage lieth desolate, do thou come here.
Evident it is that Sit& hath either been devoured by the
Rakshasas or cartied away by them, and therefore she doth
pot approach: me, O Lakshmama, who am thus bewailing.
These deer, O Laksh nana, with tearful eyes have been as if
declaring that Sit& hath been devoured by the night-rangers.
Ochaste one, O thou of exquisitely fine hue, O worshipful
madam, whither hast thou repaired? O Sit&, truly hath
the desire of Kaikeyi been fulfilled to-day. I came out with
Sita and shall return home without her. How shall I enter
again that inner apartment void of Sita q Surely shall the
people blame me as being cruel and destitute of energy.
That I have no prowess hath already been manifested in the
destruction of Sita. When the king Janaka shall come to
me after my return home from exile, to ask me of my welfare
how shall I meet him 7 And surely shall he be overwhelmed
with grief on his daughter's account when he shall find me
without Sit&. Blessed is my father since he is in heaven now.
I shall not repair to that city protected by Bharata. Without
her even the heaven itself appears to meas desolate. Do
thou therefore repair to the city of Ayodhya leaving me in
this forest. By no means shall I breathe without her. Embrace
ing him warmly do thou tell Bharata, as instructed by me—
‘Rama hath given thee permission to administer this kingdom.’
As ordered by me do thou with proper respect salute all my
mothers Kaugalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra and protect them
all with great care and respectful compliments. O destroyer
of foes, do thou relate at length unto my mother the story
of Sita’s destruction.” Rama bewailing thus, being over-
whelmed with grief on account of his separation from Sit&
having a head of fine hair, Lakshmana became of pale
countenance and was greatly distressed at heart.


ARANYAKANDAM. % 655


SECTION tx!


Tiaar son of a king, stricken as he was with grief conse-
quent upon separation from his dear one, was again over-
whelmed witha terrible grief after causing sorrow unto his
brother. Sunk in the abyss of grief, Rama, sighing hot and
weeping piteously, spoke unto Lakshmana who was equally
aggrieved, words worthy of being said on that occasion.
“Methinks there is none other on this earth like me, the
perpetrator of vicious crimes, My heart or soul is not
riven though crushed again and again without respite
with a multitude of doleful events. Surely did I perpetrate
many a vicious deed in my previous birth, the fruit of
which I do now suffer and in consequence whereof misfortune
after misfortune hath befallen me. Coming within the compass
of my remembrance, the loss of my kingdom, the death of my
father, the separation of my mother and other kinsmen
culminates my grief. Repairing unto woods, O Lakshmana,
in Sit®’s company my grief was assuaged, nay I did not suffer
physical aMliction even. Without Sit& these sorrows have
gtown anew like unto fire flaming again by means of furl.
Truly my wife, timid as she is, hath been carried away by a
R&kshasa by the etherial track. Alas! doubtless it is, that
one of pleasant accents, wept piteously out of fear many a
time and oft. For certain my dear wife's breast round and
sprinkled as it was with red sandal paste, was bathed in
blood (while devoured by the Rakshasas)—but there is no
death for me. That countenance the beauty of which was
enhanced by a head of curly hair and which used to emit
forth tender, soft and clear accents, hath become pale, being
taken possession of By the Ra&kshasas like unto the Moon
almost devoured by R&hu. Surely have the Rakshasas
subsisting on gore drunk her bload in the sky tearing off the


656 - RAMAL ANA,


neck of my dear one ever devoted to pious observances,
Surely did that one of beautifully expansive eyes cry aloud
poorly like unto a hind when she was drawn hither and
thither by the R&kshasas encircling her in the forest in my
absence, O Lakshmana, sitting at the foot of this hill with
me that large-hearted, pious Sita, of smiling countenance,
used to address thee un many atopic. This is God&vari the
best of rivers, my dear wife took delight in her—has she gone
there ?—But she never goes there alone. Or has Janaki
having eyes resembling lotus-petals hath gone to bring
lotuses ? But how is that possible, she never goes without
me to bring lotuses. Hath she entered at her pleasure this
forest filled with many flowery trees and diverse birds? But
that is not possible too—she is timid and feareth much to
enter alone in this forest. O Aditya, knowest thou the pious
and vicious actions of men ; bearest thou testimony to the
truth and untruth of their actions—do thou tell me, pray, who
am striken with grief, whither hath my dear one repaired, or
whether hath she been killed? O Air, there is nothing on
earth which is not within the compass of thy vision, do thow
telate unto me whether Sit& preserving the fame of my
ancestry, hath been killed or carried away or if she waiteth
on the way.” After Rama had bewailed thus being beside
himself with grief, Saumitri, ever treading the right patNi and
not of poorly mind spoke words worthy of being said on that
occasion.—"Do thou take heart renouncing thy grief and
engage with energy in quest of Sila. Persons of high energy
are never exhausted on the earth even in the face of arduous
works.” The highly powerful Lakshmana having spoken
thus being afflicted with grief, Rama, the best of Raghu's
descendants, did not consider that worth pondering over.
Renouncing patience he again indulged in excessive grief.


ARANYAKANDAH. 637


SECTION LxIV.


eee


"Rana striken with grief spake unto Lakshmana the
following piteous words saying, “O Lakshmana, do thou
speedily repuir to the river Godavari and learn if Sita hath
gone there to fetch lotuses.” Being thus addressed by Rama,
the quick-paced Lakshmana went to the pleasant stream
Godaveri. Reconnoitering fall well the river containing
many a watering-place Lakshmana spake unto Rima saying,
“Searched have I all the watering-places but have found
her nowhere-—anon I cried aloud but she did not hear.
I cannot trace whither hath Vaidehi of slender waist
repaired ever assuaging our mental affliction.” Hearing
Lakshmana’s words, Rama, aggrieved and overwhelmed with
sorrow repaired in person to the river Godavari. Arriving
there cried he “Where is Siti?’ Neither did the
world of creatures nor the river Godavari apprise Rama
of Sita’s being carried away by the Lord of R&kshasas
worthy of being slain. Thinking of the terrible figure and
monstrous actions of that vicious sonled Ravana, that river
did not dare relate unto him anything about Sit&, albeit
appointed by the creatures to relate the story concerning her
and accosted by R&ma in piteous accents. Being thus
disappointed by the river in bebolding Sit8, Rima racked
with her separation spake unto Lakshmana saying, “O thou
of auspicious looks, this river Godavari doth give no reply.
But, O Lakshmana, returning without her what shall 1 say
unto Janaka and Vaidehi's mother ? Where hath that Vaidehi
gone who used to assuage my grief who had been deprived
of kingdom and living in this forest on wild fruits
and vegetables? Nights’ shall appear too long unto me,
keeping late hours being deprived of my kinsmen and
relatives and not beholding Vaidehi. { can range this


83


658 RAMAYANA,


Mandakini, this Janasthana and this Prasrabana hill if I can
find Sita there. Behold, O hero, the high deer have been
casting their looks again and again at men; methinks from
their gestures, they intend speaking something unto me.”
Beholding them, Raghava, the best of men, locked at them
and said in accents choked with vapour—“Where is Sita ?”
Being thus addressed by that Lord of men the deer rose up
all on a sudden and looked up to the sky facing the
south and proceeded to the direction by which Maithili
had been carried away. And moving by that way these deer
eyed the Lerd of men and again and again fixed their
looks upon that way and earth and passed along emitting
cries which was marked by Lakshmana. He marked with
attention their movements and cries and spake unto his elder
brother like one aggrieved saying—"Being accosted by thee
with—Where is Sith?’ these deer have stood up all on
a sudden and have been pointing to the south and earth—
Jet us therefore proceed in this direction—it may be that
we shall either meet with that worshipful madam or find
some momentos concerning her.’ Thereat Kakutstha, gifted
with supreme beauty, proceeded towards the south being
followed by Lakshmana and casting his look upon the earth.
While proceeding thus, conversing with each other the two
brothers beheld some flowers scattered on the high-way.
Belholding a collection of flowers scattered on earth,RAma,
exceedingly sorry, spake unto Lakshmana in piteous accents
saying, ‘O Lakshmana,I have come to know that these are the
flowers of the forest | gave Vaidehi; with these she decorated
her hair, Me-thinks the sun, the air and the famed
earth have preserved them for my well-being.” Having
spoken these words unto Lakshmana, the best of men, the
virtuous-souled Rima, of mighty-arms, addressed the moun-
tain in front of him containing many fountains, saying—"O
thou the best of mountains, hast thou beheld in this picture-
sque forest-land, that exquisitely fine damsel racked with


ARANFARKANDAM. _ 659


my, separation 9” Exceedingly wroth he accosted the
mountain like unto a lion addressing a little deer, saying
“Show me my graceful Sita hued like gold before I crush
down thy summits.” Being thus addressed by R&ma on
Maithili’s account the mountain did not show him Sit.
Again addressed him Rama—“Thou shalt by the fire of my
arrows, be reduced to ashes—thy twigs and leaves shall be
totally destroyed and no one sliall resort to thee. O
Lakshmana, I shall dry up this river Godavari if it telleth me
not about Sita having a moon-like countenance.” Rama,
exceedingly wroth, cast his looks around as if desiring to
burn everything with his eyes and beheld footprints of the
Rakshasas on the earth as well as those of Siti moving
wildly hither and thither, terrified and desirous to see Rama,
while pursued by the Rakshasas. Beholding these footmarks,
the snapped bow, the quiver and the chariot broken into many
pieces, Rama, terrified spake unto his dear brother, ‘Behold
9, Lakshmana, the remnants of Vaidehi’s golden ornaments,
strewn hither and thither, and diverse garlands. Behold O
Saumitri, the earth covered with drops of blood resembling
zolden drops. Methinks, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi hath been
devoured by the Rakshasas assuming shapes at will, having
sundered her in pieces. O Saumitri, there took place a terrible
sonflict between the Rakshusas, fighting with each other on
3ila's account.” O gentle one, whose is this snapped bow
ying onthe breast of the earth adorned and crested with
pearls and diamonds ? O brother, this belongs either to the
selestials or to the Rakshasas. Whose is this golden armour
ying shattered on earth, resembling the newly risen sun, in
‘olor and adorned with sapphire? Whose is this umbrella
ying broken on earth, containing a hundred rod and
idorned with celestial garlands ¢ In whose conflict have these
errible asses, of large ptoportions, having faces of demon
ind with breast plates, been killed ?. Whose is this shattered
war-car lying upset on the ground and broken flag resembling:


660 RAMBYANA,


in Justre the burning gold? Whose are these terrible
arrows feathered in gold, measuring four-huodred fingers,
lying without blades on earth ? Behold, O Lakshmana, these
two quivers have been totally spoiled though filled with arrows,
Whose cherioteer is this who hath been killed with reins
lash in hands? These foot-marks must be some
Rakshasa's. J made these R&kshasas my fatal enemies,
assuming shapes at will and of crooked hearts. Poor Sith
must have been either dead, carried away by them or devoured.
Virtue did not save her from being carried away in this
mighty forest. O Lakshmana, while virtue did not protect
Janaki being devoured or taken away by stealth, what person
else gifted with heavenly power, on this earth shall bring
about my well-being ? For this it is that people through
ignorance disregard the ever kind Almighty—the lord of crea-
tures and the best of the celestials. Truly shall the celestials
regard me as one devoid of prowess, who am mild-tempered,
kind, ever engaged in the welfare of the humanity, and have
controlled alt my senses. Observe, O Lakshmana, obtaining
me as the stay these accomplishments have been turned
into so many blemishes. Truly shall my prowess manifest
itself to-day overshadowing all my other accomplishments
for the destruction of the Rakshasas and all created
beings like unto the rising of the Sun casting the Moon into
shade on the day of dissolution. None shall enjoy felicity,
O Lakshmana,—Yakshas, Gandharbas, Pigachas, Rakshasas,
Kinnaras, or human beings. ‘To-day shall the welkin be
filled up with my arrows. Motionless shall I make all the
animals inhabiting the three worlds. 1 shall arrest the move-
ment of the planets and overshadow the Moon. Stopping
the course of the wind and destroying the rays of the Sun
and fire I shall envelope the earth with darkness, crush down
the summits of the mountains, dry up the pools, blow up the
creepers, demolish the Ocean and erradicate the trees. If
the celestials do not give me back my Sita [ shall bring


and


ARANYARKANDAM. 665


about the dissolution of the three worlds which would else
have been wrought by time. O son of SumitrS, instantly
shall the celestials headed by Indra, meet with my prowess,
if they do not give back my Siti, ever advancing my
welfare. None shall be able to range the welkin. Behold
O Lakshmana, being perpetually crushed down by my
arrows shot off my bow, the world shall be disturbed and
dislodged and the animals and birds ‘shall be confused and
destroyed. Stretching the bow to my ears I shall make the
world, for Sita’s sake, void of Prsdchas and R&kshasas with
my arrows incapable of being withstood by created beings.
To-day shall the celestials behold the power of my arrows
coursing a long distance shot through my ire. Three
worlds destroyed on account of my wrath,  celestials,
Danavas, Pigachas or RAkshasas,—none shall be saved. The
dwellings of the celestials, Asuras, Yakshas and Rakshasas
shall fall down sundered by my arrows into diverse pieces.
1 shall dislodge the whole world by my arrows. If the
celestials do not give me back my Vaidehi dead or carried
away or as she was before, I shall destroy the whole
world mobile or immobile and disturb all with my arrows
until [see her.” Having spoken thus, Rama, with his eyes
reddened with ire and lips swollen, tying fast his bark and
deer-skin, braided his matted Jocks. Having done this, being
exceedingly wroth he looked like Rudra about to destroy
Tripura. Thereat taking his bow from Lakshmana and
holding it fast, the effulgent Rama, the conqueror of foes,
fixed flaming arrows to it like so many serpents and said
being exercised with ire like unto fire on the eve of disso-
lution —"O Lakshmana none shall be able to withstand
me, who am inflamed with rage, as debility consequent
on old age, death, time, duty are inca pable of being averted
from their destined ends*by the animals. I shall bring about
a mighty revolution in the world containing the celestials
Gandharbas, human beings, Pannagas and the mountains, if *


66a" RAMAYANA,


do not get back, in her pristine beauty, my Sita, the daughter
of the King of Mithila”


SECTION LXV.


Rama highty aggrieved on account of Sita’s being carried
away, addressing himself to destroy the world like unto the
fire of dissolution and casting his look. sighing again and
again, upon the stringed bow like unto Maladev desirous
of burning down the whole world at the time of dissolution,
Lakshmana, having his countenance dried up, beholding his
rage not seen before, began with folded hands—‘Ere this’
thou hadst been gentle, self-controlted and engaged in the
welfare of all beings. It doth not behove thee now to
renounce thy natural temper being influenced by ire. Ever
manifested itself in thee, glory par excellence like unto
splendour in the Moon, lustre in the Sun, motion in the wind
and forgivencss in the Earth. It becometh thee not to de-
vastate the whole world for the crime of an individual being.
Methinks for certain, this shattered car must be the property
of an individual person, not of many. But I do not know
whose is this car with yokes and dresses and what for it
hath been shattered? Behold, O thou the son of a King,
this terrible spot bathed in biood and raked with hoofs and
wheels. Surely here took place a conflict. © thou the fore-
most of those skilled in speech, it appeareth from these signs
that this skrimish did take place with one, not with two,
Here are not to be seen the foot-marks of a large army. It
therefore doth not behove thee to destroy the whole world
for one's individual offence. Kings, gentle and mild by
nalure, do always administer punishment,proportionate to the
amount of offence. Thou art always the stay and the best
refuge of ali animals. Who shatl think well, O Raghava, of


ARAN1IAKANDAM. 663


the destruction of thy wife? The celestials, D&navas,
Gandharbas, rivers, seas, and mountains—none can act un-
friendly by thee as the learned priests cannot act improperly
towards those initiated by them. It is thy duty, O king, with
bow in hand to search out the person who hath carried away
Sita, along with me and the devotees. Explore shall we, with
great care,the seas,the forest,the mountaius, the fearful caves,
the pools and the abodes of the celestials and Gandharbas
until we find out the person who hath.carried away thy wife.
If the celestials do not return thee peacefully thy wile, O
Lord of Kogala, thou shalt adopt measures, befitting the
occasion. Thou shalt then uproot the whole world, O lord of
men, with thy gold-feathered arrows resembling the thunder-
bolt of Mahendra, if thou dost not come by thy wife by
resorting to good conduct, self-control, lowliness and polity.”


SECTION Lxvi,


Rama bewailing thus like one helpless being stricken with
grief, overwhelmed with sorrow and losing control over him-
self, Lakshmana touched his feet and consoling him instantly
began :—'By constant asceticism and manifold pious observ-
ances king Dagaratha obtained thee like unto the celestials
obtaining ambrosia, As I have heard from Bharata, king
Dagaratha died for thy separation, attached as he was unto
thee for thy accomplishments. O Ka&kutstha, if dost thou
not bear patiently this impending peril what little-minded
Person else shall bear it ?, Compose thyself, O thou best of
men. Peril overtaketh everybudy like unto fire but vanisheth
in no time. This is the nature of men. Yayati, the son of
king Nabusha, though attained to the state of celestials, was
however thrown down for aa iniquitous deed. The hundred


664 RAMAPANA.


sous, that had been born unto our ancestral priest Vasishtha,
were all killed in one day. O lord of Kogaia, even Vasumati,
the mother of the world, adored of all beings, meeteth with
misery consequent upon earth-quake. Even the mighty Sun
and Moon witness eclipse who are the eyes of the world and
the very images of virtue and in whom the whole world is
stationed. O thou best of men, what of insignificant beings
cased in this frail body, even the mighty creatures and
celestials are subject to the influence of destiny. I have
heard, O best of men, even the celestials headed by Indra
are subject to happiness or misery. So it doth not
behove thee to bewail thus. O descendant of Raghu, it
becometh thee not to lament like an ordinary person even if
Janaki is dead or hath been carried away. O R&ma, persons,
highly experienced and ascertaining right or wrong without
being moved, do not lament even in the face of mighty perils.
O thou best of men, do thou, after due consideration,
ascertain what is proper or improper; persons of thy vast
wisdom are cognizant of the right or wrong by dint of
their understanding. Without proper exercise, actions, of
wuknown merit and uncertain issue do not bear fruits, O
hero, many a time and oft ere this, thou hadst given me the
self-same counsel. Who is capable of counselling thee who
art the very preceptor of the gods? O thou of great intellect
even the celestials cannot measure thy mental acumen,
Greatly benumbed is thy wisdom with the slumber of grief,
and I am to rouse it. © thou the best of Ikshwakus, do thou
engage in the destruction of thy foes considering well thy
celestial and human prowess. O thou best of men, what
necessity hast thou to destroy the whole world? Do thou
rescue Sit& after finding out thy vicious enemy.”


ARANVAKANDAM. 665


SECTION txvu.


Acree Lakshmana had spoken these highly sound and
pleasant words, Rama, ever taking to what is sound, accepted
them. Therewpon that one, of mighty-arms, slaking his
flaming ire and reclining himself upon his beatiful bow,
addressed Lakshmana, saying, “Do thou ponder over, G
brother, where shall we repair, what shall we do and by what
means shall we come by Sila?” Whereto Lakshmana replied
saying unto the highly aggrieved Rama, “It is proper for
thee to search this Janasthina filled wilh a mullitude of
Rakshasas and covered with diverse lrees and creepers. Here
are many strongholds in the midst of mountains, clefts of
rocks, many caves and numerous cavities filled with various
animals. Many ate the abodes here belonging to the
Kinnaras and Gandharbas. Do thou, along with me, search
all these places. Great men, of thy calibre, do remain un-
agitated even in the midst of difficulties like unto mountains
never shaken by the velocity of the wind.” Hearing these
words, Rama, enraged, fixing sharp and terrible arrows to his
bow, began to range the forest with Lakshmana. Thereupon
he beheld,fallen on ground,having his person bathed in blood,
the king of birds—Yatayu, resembling a mountain-peak, and
spake unto Laksbmana, saying, “It is clear and beyond all
doubt that Vaidehi hath been devoured by this Rakshasa, as-
suming the shape of a vulture and ranging the forest. This
R&kshasa hath been reposing at ease after devouring that
one of expansive eyes ; I shall kill him with terrible straight.
coursing atrows, having flaming points.” Fixing sharpened
shafts to his bow, Rama, enraged, darted towards the vulture,
as -if moving the sea-girt earth. Vomitting frothy bloud
Yatlyu, the king of vullures, spoke unto Rama, the son of
Dagaratha, saying, “O thou of long life, that goddess, whom


666 RAMAYANA,


thou hast been searching in this vast forest like unte
Oshadhi, and my life have been carried away by Ravana. I
saw her, O Raghava, carried away stealthily by the powerful
Ravana, in thy absence as well as that of Lakshmana, Myself,
nearing Sit&, for her rescue,O Lord, Ravana was thrown down
on earth by me in conflict having his car and unbrella shatler-
ed. This is his snapped bow and these are his broken shalts.
And this is his war-car, O R&ma, shattered in fight. This
is his charioteer lying on earth being killed by the velocity
of my wings. Having sundered my wings with his dagger,
who had been exhausted, Ravana taking Sit, rose high up
in the welkin. It behoveth thee not to kill me who had been
wounded before by the Rakshasa.” Hearing from him
pleasant words relating to Sita, Rama, leaving aside, instant-
ly, his mighty bow, embraced him, and rolling on earth
having lost self-control through grief, began to lament with
Lakshmana, Though highly composed by nature, he was
overwhelmed with doubled grief. Aud beholding Yatayu,
sigh again and again and breathing with difficulty in a helpless
plight, Rama,highly aggrieved,spake unto Lakslimana saying,
“T have lost my kingdom and have been living in this forest.
My Sit& bath been carried awny and this bird hath been
killed (on my account)—This misfortune of mine can burn
evon the very fire. If for assuaging my grief I do enter the
mighty ocean, verily shall that misfortune dry up even that
lord of rivers. There is none so unfortunate as I, throughout
‘this earth, mobile or immobile, and it is for this bad luck
that Ihave confronted this mighty disaster. This mighty
king of vultures is our father’s friend and he lieth on earth
killed through the evil turn of my fortune.” Uttering these
aud various other words, Raghava, along with Lakshmana
touched his body manifesting his paternal affection. Em-
bracing the king of vultures, bathed in blood, having its
wings cut off, Raghava, fell on the ground, exclaiming ‘where
hath Maithili gone like unto my life ?*


ARAN ARANDA. 667


SECTION Lxviil-
rte


Benotoine Yat&yu fallen on the ground by the terrible
Rakshasa, RAma spoke unto Lakshmana, having compassion
for all, saying “Verily for my service this bird hath breathed
its last, being killed by the R&kshasa. O Lakshmana, its
voice hath been enfeebled, its vision weakened and its life,
greatly exhausted, licth in a very little proportion in its
body. May good betide thee, O YatAyu ; if thou art capable
of speaking again, do thou relate how Sit hath been carried
away and thou hast been killed. Why hath Ravana taken
away by stealth the worshipful Janakiy What offence did
{commit by him that he hath carried away my dear one?
O thou best of birds, how looked the moon-like, pleasant
countenance of Sit& at the time of her being carried away ?
What did she speak then ? What is the prowess, appearance
and action of that R&kshasay Where doth he live,
U reverend Sir ? Pray tell me, I do ask thee.” Beholding
Rama, lament like one helpless, the virtuous-souled Yatayu
spake in faltering accents—"Sité hath been carried away
by Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, creating a mighty illusion
producing wind and showers, O darling, myself being worn
out that night-ranger, having sundered my wings, fled away
with Sit& to the southerly direction. O Raghava, my life is
about to expire, my oye-sight hath grown of mistaken
perception, I see trees before me made of gold baving hair
resembling Ushira.* Ravana hath taken away Sita at a
moment when a person regains soon his Jost property. O
Kakuthstha, this moment is called Vindya,t which Ravana


* Andropogon muricatum—(Lat). The root of a fragrant grass. This
alludes ta a terrible vision which is generally seen by a person on the eve of
death—a golden tree having hair—T.

+ This refers to Fatdyu's astrological knowledge. Vindya is derived from
the root Vid—to gain, Thus this moment is favourable to the loser and un-


668 ’ RAMAPANSA,


hath not been able to perceive. (At this moment) the person
who taketh away (a thing) is soon destroyed like unto a fish
devouring a hook. Do not therefore entertain the least doubt
about thy coming by Janaki. Destroyin, him at the hoad
of the battle thou shalt soon sport with Vadehi.” ‘Ihere:
upon flesh and gore began to come out of the mouth of
Yat&yu, the king of vultures, not loosing his sense even
while treading the verge of death. Thereupon the king of
birds gave up his dear life uttering only.—"Ravana is the son
of Vishrav and brother to Vaishravana (the lord of wealth).”
Rama again and again addressed him with joined palms say-
ing, “Do thou speak ! Do thou speak.” And instantly Yatayu's
vital spark rose up in the sky, leaving his bodily frame. There-
upon the king of vultures fell down on the carth by
stretching forth his legs, bedy and head on the ground.
Beholding the vulture dead, of huge proportions, resembling
alill and having red eyes, Rama, aggrieved, spoke pite-
ously unto Saumitri, saying—"Living happily, for years,
in this forest of Dandaka inhabited by the Rakshasas, Yatayu
hath, at last, given up his life. He lived for a Jong time, of
an uplifted person, and hath now laid low on the earth,
None can withstand the course of destiny. Observe, O
Lakshmana, this vulture for my benefaction, hath been killed
by the powerful Ravana in his attempt to rescue Siti. For
me, hath this lord of birds, breathed his last, renouncing his
large ancestral kingdom. fn every status of animal creation,
the heroic, the righteous aud the honest, affording refuge
unto all, are to be found, even amongst the birds. I do not
feel so much affliction, O hero, for Sita's ravishment as I
do for this vulture, who hath been killed for me. Like unto
the highly famous, effulgent king Dagaratha, this King of
birds is worthy of being adored and worshipped by me.
O Saumitri, do thou bring fuels ; I shail produce fire there-


favourable to the taker. Hence Ravana carrying away Sita at this moment
shall meet with destruction. —T.


ARANVARANDAM, 669


with and burn the dead body of this king of birds who hath
been killed on my account. Placing on a funeral pile, I shall
cremate, O Saumitri, the dead body of this king of birds
who hath been destroyed by the grim-visaged R&kshasas.
Being consecrated and consmanded by me, do thou, O highly
powerful king of birds, attain to that excellent state of
existence, which is reached by persons ever performing pious
observances, by Aditagnis* by heroes who are not afraid
of entering a battle-field and by persons who confer grants of
land.” Saying this the virtuous-souled Rama, afflicted with
sorrow, burned the body of the king of birds, placing it on
the funeral pile, like unto his own kinsman. Entering the
forest with Saumitri, Rama gifted with prowess, killed plump
high deer and stretched forth grass and twigs for offering
oblation to that bird. Taking off the flesh of those high deer
and clustering it, Rama, of great renown, offered it to the
vultures in that pleasant forest-land, abounding in green
grass, Thereupon for his speedy arrival at the abode’ of
celestials, Rama recited those Mantras which ‘are being
uttered by the twice-born ones. Afterwards repairing to the
river Gadaveri the two princes offered water unto that kingly
vulture. And offering water unto him according to the
prescribed rites of the Sastvas, those two descendants of
Raghu, after bathing, performed the Udakat ceremony for
that king of vultures, Having been killed in battle for an
arduous but glorious work, that king of vultures, consecrated
by the ascetic-like Raima, attained to an excellent state.
Having performed the Udaka ceremony for that best of birds
and considering him in the light of a father they went away
and entered the forest in quest of Sita like unto the two best
of celestials—Visnu and Vasava.


* A Brdhmana who has preserved a sacred Bre kept alive perpetually ina


family, &c.—from ahita—placed, agni—fire.—T.
+ Presentation of water specially to the manes a3 @ religious or obsequal
rite. —T,


670 RAMAYANA,


SECTION Lxix.


Havine offered him the gift of water, those two descen-
dants of Raghu wended their way in that forest in quest of
Sita and proceeded towards the south west.* Then turning to
the south, with bow and arrows in hand, they reached a track
not wended by the people. It was a ghastly, impenctrable
forest, covered on all sides with groves, trees and creepers.
Proceeding by the southerly direction, those two mighty
ones, passed hastily by that terrible, dreary forest. There-
upon, the highly effulgent descendants of Raghu entered the
dense forest of Krauncha, situated at a distance of six miles
from Yanasthdna. It was a dense forest like unto a collec.
tion of clouds, as if smiling on all sides blooming with
charming flowers of diverse hues and frequented by various
animals and birds, Waiting for sometime here and there
they, exercised with Sita’s ravishment, explored the entire
forest in quest of Vaidehi. Proceeding three Krosas towards
the East and passing by the forest of Krauncha the two
brothers described on their way the asylum of M&tanga.
Having seen that dreary forest frequented by various
animals and birds and covered with diverse trees and dense
groves, the two sons of Dagaratha beheld a cave in the
mountain, deep as the region under the earth and ever
enveloped with darkness. Arriving there they espied hard
by a grim-visaged Rakshasi, having a formidable figure,
ever causing fright unto persons of feeble courage, loathe+
some, terrible looking, having a huge belly, sharpened teeth,
ahigh person and rough skin, devouring voracious animals
and looking fearful with dishevelled hair. Beholding
there the two brothers, R&ma and Lakshmana, she neared
the heroes and saying, ‘come, we shall sport’ assailed


* In this Sloka west is mentioned and in the next one there is reference
to their turning to the south and hence west here refers to south-west.-T,


ARINYARANDAM, 671


Lakshmana who had been going before his brother. And
embracing him she spake unto Saumitri the following
words :—"My name is Ayomukhee ;
thee that thou hast become my beloved one, O my ford. Do
thou sport with me, for ever, O hero, in these mountainous
strongholds and on the banks of the rivers.” Thereat, exer-
cised with ire, Lakshmana, the subduer of foes, uplifting his
dagger, chopped off her nose, ears and breast. Having her
nose and ears cut off, that terrible-looking Rakshasi, emitting
“earful cries, fled away whence she had come. On her depar-
ture, proceeding quickly, the two brothers, Rama and Laksh-
mana, the conquerors of foes, reached a dense forest. There-
apon the highly effulgent aud truthful Lakshmana, possessing
a pure character, spake, with folded hands, unto his brother of
Jaming energy—My left arm is throbbing, my mind is filled
with anxiety and I perceive before me many a bad omen. Do
hou put on thy habiliments, O worshipful one, and act by
what I say for thy well-being. Methinks from these bad
omens some calamity shail soon befall us, O Rama, this
lerrible bird Banchulaka is emiting fearful cries as if
announcing our victory in the conflict.’ Thereupon while
they began to explore the entire forest with their prowess


is a great gain to


there arose a terribe sound as if breaking down the wood.
The forest was enveloped on all sides with a mighty wind
and everywhere was audible a roar filling the wood-land.
With a view to ascertain whence the sound proceeded,
Rama, with a dagger in hand, along with his yonger brother,
espied a Rakshasha of huge proportions, having big thighs.
‘The two brothers behold that Rakshasa stationed before
them, having a huge body, devoid of head and neck and
therefore a headless demon and having its mouth on its
belly. Its hody resembled a huge mountain and was covered
with sharpened down ; its look was terrible like unto sable
could and its roar resembled the muttering whereof. Its
one terrible, expansive eye, seeing all, was on the fore-


672 RAMAL ANA.


head placed on its breast and shone forth like unto the
flaming fire and it had huge yellow eye-lashes. Its mouth
wae greatly widened and covered with rows of huge teeth
and it was again and again licking that terrible mouth. And
stretching forth its two huge arms extending over a yoyana
it was devouring bears, lions and deer. It was catching and
throwiug with its huge hands many an animal, bird and bear.
Hindering the way-fare it was awaiting those two brothers.
And proceeding a Krosa, they espied that fearful, grim-visag-
ed, headless demon, hindering all creatures with its arms,
tertible-looking and appearing like a Aavanda from its very
situation, Thereupon that one, of huge arms, stretching
them forth, got hold of those two descendants of Raghu
crushing them with its strength, Those two highly
powerful brothers, of mighty-arms, with daggers and
bows in their hands, were assailed and got hold of by that
Rikshasa. R&ma was heroic and patient by nature and
consequently was not much afflicted ; but Lakshmana was a
mere boy and impatient by nature and was consequently
greatly afflicted. Being greatly distressed, the younger
brother of Raghava spake unto him, saying “Do thou behold
me, O hero, brought under the hold of this Rakshasa, and
renouncing me only, O Raghava, do thou get thyself off.
And offering me as sacrifice, do thou escape at thy ease.
Methinks for certain, O Kakutstha, thou shalt soon come by
Vaidehi and regain thy anscestral kingdom. But remember
me always, O Rama when thou shalt fiind thyself placed on
the throne.” Being thus addressed by Lakshmana, Rama,
spake unto Saumitri—"Fear not in vain, O here ; persons of
thy prowess are never afflicted (with fear)” Meanwhile the
wicked headless, demon, of huge arms, the foremost of
Da&navas, addressed the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana
—Who are ye two youthful figures having the neck of a
bull and with mighty daggers and bows in your hands ?
Arriving in this fearful place ye have by chance come within


ARAN YAKANDAM. 673


the compass of my vision. Tell me now what have ye to de
here, and what for have ye come? I have been waiting here
being hungry, and ye have come here having daggors and
bows with arrows in your hands like unto two oxen having
sharpened horas, Nearing me quickly, it will be hard for ye
to draw your vital breath.” Hearing those words of the
vicious-souled Kavandha, Rama having his countenance dried
up, bespake Lakshmana,—‘O thou, having truth for thy
prowess, again and again, greater and worse calamities have
been threatening us. We have already met with a dire
disaster teading to our death, consequent on my separation
from my dear one. Mighty is the course of Destiny in all
creatures, O Lakshmana. Do thou O best of men, behold
even thyself and me stricken with calamity. But O
Lakshmana it is not very difficult for destiny to afflict all
creatures. Under the influence of destiny even the mighty
heroes, well habited in armours are distressed like unto a
bridge of sands.” Addressing these words unto Saumitri, the
resolute, powerful and highly famous son of Dagaratha, having
truth for his prowess, composed himself by dint of his own
understanding.


SECTION LXxx.


Benorowe both the brothers, Rama and Lakshaman,
clasping each other with their arms, the headless demon
spake ;—"'O two best of Kshatryas, are ye waiting here
beholding me hungry? O ye having lost your sense, ye have
been chosen by Destiny as my food.” Hearing those words
Lakshmana, sore distressed and determined to display his
valour, addressed Rama with words worthy of being said on
that occasion. “This vile Rakshasa shall seize both of U8;
let us sunder soon its two huge arms with our daggers.


85


674 RAMAYANA,


This grim-visaged Rakshasa, of huge proportions, gifted
only with the strength of arms, defeating all other persons,
hath addressed itself at last'to destroy us. It is odions for
the Kshatryas to make away with those who cannot defend
themselves like unto animals brought for sacrifice."* Hear-
ing their conversation, the Rakshasa, inflamed with rage,
widening its terrible mouth, prepared to devour them
up.t Thereat Rama and Lakshmana, cognizant of time and
place, pleased,t sundered its arms off its shoulders with
their daggers. Rama, stationed on the right side§ cut off in
no time its right arm with his dagger and the heroic
Lakshmana, the left one. Having got its arms dissevered, the
terrible-voiced, Kavandha, of huge arms, roaring like unto
the muttering of clouds and resounding the heaven earth
and all the quarters, fell flat on the ground. Beholding both
its arms cut off, the demon, with its person bathed in blood,
asked them poorly—"Who are ye ?” Being thus accosted by
Kavandha, the mighty Lakshmana, gifted with auspicious
marks, spake unto it, about Kakutstha. “He is a descendant
of the Ikshwakus known on earth by the name of Rama, and
know me as his younger brother, by name—Lakshmana.
Being thwarted by mother (Kaikeyi) in his accession of
kingdom, he, renouncing all, hath fled as an exile unto woods,
and hath, along with me and his spouse, been ranging this
forest. While living in the dense forest the wife of Rama,
effulgent like unto the celestials hath been ravished by a
Rakshasa. Searching her, have we come here. Who art


* The purport is —“Lakshmana wanted to chop off the arms of Kavandha
and not to put an end to its life as it was not capable of fighting, being a
headless demon, And it is not proper for the Kshatryas to destroy those who
cannot fight.—T.

+ This has a special significance here—meaning to get hold of them by
stretching forth its arms,—T.

$ They were pleased because they cut off its arms with ease like unto the
trunk of a plantain tree—T.

It may mean also expert—T.


ARANYAKANDAM. 675


thou ? And what for art thou ranging this forest like unto
a headless demon, having thy thighs broken and thy flaming
face placed on thy breast?” Being thus addressed by
Lakshmana with these goodly words, Kavandha, pleased,
recollecting the words of Indra, bespake him,—"0O two best
of men, ye are welcome! By my good luck it is that I do
behold you. By my good fortune ye have dissevered my
shoulders to-day. Do ye hear, I shall relate truly unte you
how have I, by my haughtiness,come by this unsightly shape.”


SECTION LXX.


*“O MIGHTY-ARMED Rama of greut prowess, formerly my
beauty, beyond conception, was known all over the three
worlds, like unto the beauty of the Sun, the Moon and Indra.
[used to frighten everywhere the ascetics living in the forest
by turning this my beauty into a terrific form, Once
on a time assuming this terrible shape I assailed and
enraged the great ascetic Sthulashira collecting diverse
wild fruits. Thereupon he imprecated curses upon me,
saying, “Do thou retain this ghastly shape haled of all
mankind.” Upon my praying unto that angry ascetic for
my relief from that curse, he said—"Thou shalt regain thy
stalwart and beautiful shape when thou shalt be burot by
Rama in a dense forest having got thy arms disevered hy
lim. O Lakshmana, know me to be the beautiful son of
Danu. Through Indra’s curse iu the battle field I have been
metamorphosed into my present shape. After I had pleased
him with hard austerities, the Grand-Father of the celestials
conferred on me a long life.And therefore I was inflamed with
pride and assailed Indra in a conflict, thioking within me,
‘I have gained a long life—what can Indrado me? There-
upon by his thunder-bolt, having hundred edges, hurled


676 RAMA ANA.


off his hands, my thighs were shattered and my head
thrusted into my body. Myself praying for the close of my
life, he did not despatch me to the abode of Yama. He only
said, “May the words of the Grand-Sire prove true.” Where-
to 1 replied ‘How shall I live long without any food, being
smitten by thee having a thunder-bult in thy hand,and having
my head, thighs and mouth crushed down ? Thereat Indra
made my hands extending over a yoyana and placed my
mouth, having sharpened teeth, on my belly. Thenceforth,
stretching out my Jong arms 1 used to devour all lions,
tigers, wolves and deer ranging the forest. Indra said
to me, ‘Thou shalt attain to heaven when Rama, along with
Lakshmana, shall cut off thy arms in a battle” Acting
under the conviction that Rima, resolved to destroy
my person, shall surely come within the compass of my arms,
1 do always assail with relish, O worshipful one, O thou
best of kings, every animal I meet with in this forest. Thou
art that Rama. May good betide thee, O Raghava. Verily
did the great ascetic speak unto me that none should be
able to assail me but Rams. Being cremated by you, I shall
counse) you best and tell you with whom you should
contract friendship.” Being thus addressed by Danu, the
virtuous-souled Raghava spake before listening Lakshmana,
“My renowned spouse Sit’ was easily ravished by Ravana
after Thad gone out of Janasthdna along with my brother.
J know that R&kshasa’s name only—but do not know his
whereabouts, his figure and his prowess, It behoveth thee
to show proper compassion for us, who have been stricken
with grief, who are helpless, have been ranging this forest
in this way and are ever engaged in the wellbeing of
others.* ©, hero, we shall burn thee after collecting all the


* This Sloka may be rendered in another way :—Do thou continue benifit
ting us by showing proper compassion for us, wiio are siricken with grief
heipless and ranging the forest in this way. We have however adopted hece
the commes.tator Rimanuya’s explanation.—T.


ARAN ARANDA. 677


branches that have been broken down by the elephants and
dried up in time, and digging a big trench, Do thou tell us
who hath carried away Siti ? And where ? If dost thou know
it truly do thou perform us this good service.” Thereat
the Rikshasa, skilled in speech, spake unto Raghava, address-
ing him thus—‘“I am not gifted with divine fore-sight and
therefore do not know where Maithilee is. I shall let you
know of him who shall be able to tell you all about her,
alter I resume my original shape, being burnt (by thee). I
shall furthermore tell thee, O Rama, who knows that
R&kshasa. Without being burnt I am incapable of being
cognizant of that highly powerful Rakshasa who hath carried
away thy Sita. By the influence of curse, I have lost my
fore-sight and by my own improper actions I have been
transformed into this ugly figure. Do thou cremate me
according to the prescribed rites alter throwing me into the
ditch before the sun, with his worn out carriers descends into
the western horizon. Being burnt by thee in the ditch, with
due ceremonials, O descendant of Raghu, I shail mention,
unto thee, one who knows that Rakshasa. O R&ghava, O
fleet-footed hero, do thou contract friendship with him gifted
with good qualities and he shall assist thee. There
is nothing unknown to him, O Raghava in the three worlds.
Formerly for some reasons he had travelled all over them.”


SECTION Uxxil.


FYER Kavandha had spoken thus, the two best of
mer\ Rama and Lakshmana took him to a mountain-cave
and ‘placed on fire. Lakshmana kindled the [funeral pile,
which . was ablaze on all sides. Thereupon the fire
began to burn down slowly the huge and corpulent body of


678 RAMAYANA.


Kavandha \ike unto a lump of clarified butter. Afterwards
the highly powerful demon, shaking the funeral pile, rose
up quickly like a smokeless flame of fire, wearing a clean
cloth and a celestial garland. And the graceful demon,
wearing an unsullied cloth and baving all its limbs crested
with diverse ornaments, rose from the pile high up in the
welkin with a delighted heart. Thereupon mounting on a
famed car, brilliant and drawn by swans* and lighting up all
the quarters with the effulgence of his person, that bighly
powerful one, stationing himself in the heaven, addressed
Rama, saying :—“Do thou hear truly, O Raghava, of the
means by which thou shalt come by Siti. There are six
expedients.t O Rama, by virtue of which kings acquire all
objects, He, in whom misfortune hath culminated, should
seek the company of one such.{ Thou hast, O Rima along
with Lakshmana, met with the culmination of misfortune
and for which thou hast been assailed with such a disaster
as the ravishment of thy spouse. O thou best of my
friends, it behoveth thee, therefore to make friends with such
a person. Or else 1 do not find any means for thy success,
Do thou bear, O Raima, what I relate. There liveth with
four monkeys a heroic, self-controlled monkey by name
Sugriva, on that best of mountains Rishyamuka, situated on
the banks of the lake Pampa, being driven by his enraged
brother Vali, the son of Indra, That mighty, powerful effulgent
lord of monkeys, of immeasurable prowess and truthful vows,
humble, patient, intelligent, great, expert, bold, graceful


* By virtue of the pious observances preformed by him in his previons
existence and for his being burnt by Rama that celestial car appeared
there-—T.

t+ The six expedients are as follow—(1) Sandhi, peace. (2) Vigraha
warfare, (3) Vdna, military expedition against an enemy. (4) Ashana—
halting. (5) Daidhibkava—sowing dissension. (6) Samashraya secking
protection.—T.

{ This is a moral law referring tothe sixth expedient, to be resorted to
by the kings—namely Semashrarya or seeking protection.—T.


ARANYAKRAND AM. 679


and puisgant, hath been banished by his brother, O hero, for
kingdom, Surely he shall be friend and assist thee in thy
search for Sita. Do thou not plunge thy soul in grief. O
thou best of Ikshwakus, none can withstand destiny on this
earth, truly unavoidable is its course. Do thou proceed soon,
Ohero, to Sugriva of mighty prowess, and repairing hence
even to-day do thou contract friendship with him, taking vow
in the presence of flaming fire* that ye shall not envy each
other. Despise not that kingly monkey Sugriva, because he
is grateful, capable of assuming shapes at will, seeking
protection and powerful. Ye too are able to accomplish his
wished-for object. Benefitted by thee or not, he shall engage
in thy service. He was begotten of the Sun unto the wife of
Riksharaja, He hath been roaming the bank of Pamp§ being
in constant fear of Vali after creating enmity with him, Do
thou make friends with that monkey ranging the wood and
and inhabiting the Rishyamuka mountain after placing thy
weapon in the very presence of fire as a witness, because
that best of monkeys knoweth minutely all the abodes of
Rakshasas, living on human flesh. There is no place under
the sun of many rays, O Righava, O slayer of foes, unknown
to him. Exploring, with all his monkeys, the rivers, huge
mountains, strongholds and caves, he shall fearn about thy
spouse. He shall search that exquisitely fine damsel Maithili
in R&vana's abode, bewailing on thy separation ; and to find
her out he shalt despatch, O Raghava, many a monkey of
huge proportions to various quarters. Whether on the
summit of the mount Meru or in the region under the earth,
that lord of monkeys, shall give thee back thy blameless
spouse, killing all the Rikshasas.”

* This refers to the oriental custom of performing every sacred rite in the
Presence of fire as witness. The Hindus regard the fire with sacred reverence


and for this in all their social and religious ceremonials fire plays a very
prominent and sacred part—T.


6 RAMAPANA,


SECTION LXXtlt+


eaiae amet


Havinc pointed out unto Rama the expedient for find-
ing out Sit& the wise Kavandha began with the following
significant words :—This is the way, O Rima, leading to
the mount Rishyamuka, where stand, beautifying the West,
the Fombu,)Priéla,®) Panaca,( Nagrodha4) Plaksha,\@)
Tinduka.) Ashathya\e) Karnikér,<®) Chuta,) Naga,
Tilaka,®) Naktamal,® Neelashok,™)Cadamva.) Karavira,(o)
Agnimukhya\#) Asoka, Raktachandan,@ Péribhadraka)
and many other trees. Ascending those trees or lowering
them by force on earth, do thou proceed living on those fruits
like unto ambrosia. Passing by this forest, O K&kutstha,
thou shalt reach another abounding in trees blooming
with flowers like unto the garden of celestials and Uitarkuru
where in all the months of the year the trees produce fruits
and honey and where all the seasons dwell as in the forest


a—A fruit-tree, the rose apple--Lat. (Eugenia Fambolana).—T.

4—A tree commanly Piyal—Lat. (Buchanania latifolia).—T.

o—The bread fruit of ¥aka tree—Lat. (Artocarpus integrifolia),—T.

~The Indian fig-tree—Z st, (Ficus Indica) —T.

¢—Waved leaf fig-tree—Lat. (Ficus infectoria) —T.

FA sort of ebony—Lat. (Diospyros glutinosa)—T.

eA holy fig-tree—Lat. (Ficus religiosa),—T.

A—The name of a tree commonly Kaniyar—Let. (Pterospermum acerifo-
Hum).

i—The mango—Lat. (Mangifera Indica).—T.

JA small tree—Lat. (Mesua ferrea)—T.

4--A kind of tree commonly Til/a.—T.

A tree—Lat, (Galedupaarborea, Rox}.—T.

m—Biue Asoka—Lat. (Fonesia Asock).—T.

A plant commonly Kadamoa—Lat. (Nauclea Kadamba).—T.

o~A fragrant plant Lat.—(Oleander or Nerism Odorum)—T.

#—The marking nut plant—Lat. (Semecarpius anacardium).—T.

q—Red Sandal—T.

#—The coral tree—Lat. (rythrine fulgens)—T.


ARANYAKANDAM. 68


of Chitraratha® There stand beautifully many a tree
lowered down with the burden of fruits, containing towering
branches, dense as a collection of clouds or a mountain.
Ascending those trees and lowering them, Lakshmana shalt
offer thee, fruits like unto ambrosia, O heroes, ranging from
forest to forest, from high mountains to hillocks, ye shall
get at the lake Pampa, void of gravels and acquatic plants
and hence there is no danger of falling down to the people,
having level watering-places, covered with sands and bloom:
ing with red and white lotuses. There emit forth musical
notes, swans, frogs, cranes and ospreys sporting in the
luke Pampa. They are not filled with terror in view
‘of human beings, inexperienced as they are in the matter of
destruction. O Raghava, do ye fare on those plump birds
like unto a Jump of clarified butter and diverse fishes such as
Rohita,t Chakratunda,t and Nala.§ O Rama, the devoted
Lakshmana, shall offer unto thee, various other best fishes,
devoid of scale and fins, plump, filled with bones, having
destroyed them with shafts and roasted them in fire. And
after thou hadst feasted on them, Lakshmana shall bring
thee water for drinking on a lotus leaf, smelling like a totus,
coming in contact with flowers, delicious, pleasantly cold,
wholesome, void of impurities, transparent like silver and
crystal. And while roaming in the evening he shall point
out unto thee fat monkeys ranging in the wood and lying in
the hollows of mountains. And thon too,Q best of men, shalt
behold those fat monkeys, who had drunk water, roaring
like unto oxen appearing on the banks of a river to drink
water. And rambling in the evening, thou shalt assuage thy
grief beholding the pleasant water of Pampa and blossoming


* The garden of the deity Kuvera. It is derived irom Chitraratha—s
Gandharba in charge of the garden,

+ The Roki fish—Lat. (cyprinus Rokita Ham)—T.

$ Akind of fish resembling a wheel in appearance.—T_

§ A kind of sprat, according to some, a shrimp or prawn.—T,


86


682 RAMAPVANA,


trees. There, O Raghava, the 7i/akas and Naktamalakas,
crested with flowers and full blowa white and red lotuses shall
miligale thy sorrows. There liveth no’ person who wears
garlands of those flowers. Garlands strung with those
flowers never wither away, O Raghava, because the disciples
of the great ascetic Matanga lived there with concentrated
hearts. Drops of perspiration, falling on the earth from
the persons of those ascetics worn out with the burden
of the wild fruits collected by them for their spiritual
guide, have been transformed by virtue of their asceticism
unto these garlands, These garlands do never wither, O
Raghava, because of their origination from those drops of
perspiration, Even at the present day, O Kakutstha, there
liveth an immortal mendicaut woman, by name Savart, who
had waited in attendance upon those departed ones. Be-
holding thee, O Rama, who art adored of all creatures like
unto the Deity Himself, that mendicant woman, ever
engaged in pious observances, shal] attain to the abode of
celestials, O Rama, turning to the western bank of
Pamp§, thou shalt, O Kakutstha, behold the incomparable
and secret asylum of Matanga. Fearing the divine
authority of that great ascetic Matanga, the elephants,
though there are many, dare not cross the threshold of his
asylum, O Raghava, this forest is widely known as Matanga.
wood. Thou shalt sport, O Rama, with a delighted heart
in that forest resembling the celestial garden—Nandana
and filled with various birds. There stands in front of Pampa
the highly inaccessible mount Rishyamuéa, ornamented
with many a blossoming tree and guarded on all sides by
little serpents, That mount is highly munificent. It was
created by Brahma in the days of yore. A person, sleeping
on the summit of that hill and dreaming of an accession
of wealth, really gets at it after the dream is over. A perpe-
trator of iniquitous deeds and engaged in impious observances
ascending that hill, the R&kshasus seize upon him, asleep,


BRANVARANDAM, 683


and bruise him. Thou shalt hear the terrible roar of the
young elephants ranging in the asylum of Matanga,
situated on the banks of Pamp&. Thou shalt furthermore
observe many a quickly moving, infuriated elephant, resembl-
ing clouds in hue and with red temporal juice oozing out of
their héads, roaming here and there sometimes separately
and again in a band. Those mighty elephants, roaming
the forest, return to their woody homes, drinking the pleasant,
pure and sweet smelling water of Pamp&. And do thou
assuage thy grief, beholding there the bears, wolves and
Rurus of a tender countenance like unto sapphire, who
are harmless and never afraid of human beings. There is a
huge cave, O R&ma, in that mountain, covered on all sides
with rocks and where it is very hard to enter At the entrance
of that cave lies a beautiful, wide lake of cool water, hedged
on all sides with trees abounding in fruits. There liveth
with other monkeys the virtuous-souled Sugriva, who
sometimes resideth on the summit of the hill.” Having thus
addressed Rama and Lakshmana, Kavandha, highly power-
ful resembling the sun in effulgence and wearing garlands
appeared beautiful in the sky. Thereupon Rama and
Laksbmana, preparing to proceed spoke unto that great one
stationed in the sky, saying, “Do thou go.” Whereto
Kavandha replied, saying “Do ye proceed to make good
your end” and bidding them adieu, who were well pleased,
departed. Regaining his pristine beauty and shining in
grace and effulgence that Kavandha, who was in the sky,
fixing his looks upon Rama, and pointing out unto him his
way, said ‘Do thou make friends with (Sugriva).”"


68¢ RAMEFANA,


SECTION LXXIV:


Tuerevron R&ma and Lakshmana, sons of a kingly
father, passing along the way, pointed out by Kavandha,
leading to the lake Pampa, proceeded towards the West.
They wending their way desirous of seeing Sugriva, there
came within the compass of their vi


on many trees, grown
on the summits of the mountains, blossoming with flowers
and abounding in fruits tasting sweet like unto honey.
Passing the night on the summit of a hill those two descen-
dants of Raghu arrived at the western bank of Pampa and
espied the pleasant asylum of Saari. Getting at that char-
ming hermitage covered on all sides with trees and casting
their looks around they beheld that femate mendicant—
Savart. No sooner had that one of perfect asceticism
beheld thoxe highly intelligent Rama and Lakshmana than
she rose up with fuided hands and touching their feet offered
them duly water for washing their feet and mouth. There-
upon Rima spake unto that female ascetic, engaged in
religious services, saying, “O thou of sweet accents, hast
thou got all hindrances to asceticism removed y Is thy
asceticism growing stronger every day? O thou having
asceticism for thy wealth, hast thou restricted thy anger
and fare? Hast thou observed the commandments and
attained to mental felicity ? Hast thy attendance upon thy
spiritual guide borne fruits ?” Being thus accosted by Rama
that old Saver, of accomplished asceticism and recognised
by the Sidhas, approaching Rama spake :—"Favoured with
thy presence my asceticism hath attained to its consumma-
tion. Blessed is my birth, fruitful is my service unto my
spiritual guides and accomplished is my asceticism. O best
of men, thou art the foremost of celestials ; worshipping
thee I attain to the abode of deities. O gentle one, O


ARANSARKANDAMN. 685


alayer of foes, O thou that dost confer henors on men,
thyself casting thy auspicious looks upon me, consecrated I,
by thy favour, shalt attain to the imperishable land of
celestials. On thy setting foot on the mount Chttrakuta, the
ascetics whom I served, ascending celestial cars of incom-
parable lustre, departed to heaven. Those great ascetics,
cognizant of virtue, said to me, ‘RAma shall come to thy
holy asylum. Do thou receive with great reverence that
guest together with Lakshmana. On beholding him, thou
shalt attain to that best land of the celestials whence none
returneth.” OQ best of men, 1 was thus Ltold by those great
ascetics, and for thee I have collected various wild fruits grow-
ing on the banks of Pamp&. Being thus addressed by Savart,
the virtuous-souled Raghava spake unto her conversant with
the knowledge of past and future, saying, “I have heard trom
Danu, in truth, about thy divine authority as well as that
of thy spicitual guides. If thou purposest so ! wish to
witness it with my own eyes.” Hearing those accents drop-
ping from Ratna's lips, Sevari showing unto them the vast
forest said, ‘Do thou behold, O Raghava, this forest, crowded
with deer and birds resembling a dense cloud. This forest
is known as M&tanga’s wood. Here in this forest the pure-
souled preceptors sacrificed unto fire their persons conse-
crated by the Manfras as Mantra itself. This is that altar
Pratyaksthali, ascending which my worshipful preceptors
used to offer flowers unto the deities with hands trembling
with toil, Behold, O best of Raghus, this altar of incom-
parable beauty, by virtue of their asceticism, hath been still
shedding its lustre on all the sides. Behold, again, the seven
seas have appeared here in conjunction, at their very thought,
worn out with fasts and therefure incapable of moving on.
Even those barks, which they used to place on these trees
after ablution have not yet been dried up. These flowers,
of blue colour which they offered unto the deities, being
engaged in divine services, have not yet been withered


686 RAMBYANA,


away. Thou hast observed this entire forest and heard every
thing worth hearing. I purpose now to renounce my body
being commanded by thee. I wish to approach those pure-
souled ascetics, whom I used to wait upon, and whom these
asylums belong to. Hearing with Lakshmana the speech of
that pious one, Rima gained an excess of joy and exclaiming,
“Wonderful it is!” again spake unto Savart of keen
austerities,—"'O gentle one, 1 have been worshipped by thee.
Do thou repair at thy ease and pleasure.” Being thus
addressed and ordered by Rima, Savari, wearing matted
locks, rags and the skin of an antelope, surrendered herself
unto fire and rose high up in the welkin like unto blazing
fire, Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed with
celestial garlands, sprinkled with sandal-paste and wearing
celestial cloth she appeared of exqisite grace and lighted up
the quarters like unto lightning. By virtue of her devout
meditation, Savari repaired to that holy region where dwelt
her spirilual preceptors—the pure-hearted ascetics,


SECTION Lxxv.


Avrrer Savari had repaired unto heaven by virtue of her
divine prowess, Rama with his brother Lakshmana began
to ponder over the pious influence of those great ascetics.
Thinking within himself about the divine authority of
those great ones, the virtuous-souled Rima spake unto
Lakshmana, devoted and ever engaged in his well-being —
"Beheld have I, O gentle one, the wondrous asylum of the pure-
souled ascetics filled with diverse birds and tigers rambling
friendly with antelopes. O Lakshmana, we have performed
ablutions in the sacred waters of these seven seas and offered
oblations unto our manes Our misfortunes have ended and
prosperity bath appeared and my mind is now filled with


ARANYAKANDAM. 687


ecstacy of delight. Methinks, O best of men, auspiciousness
shall soon appear unto us; do thou come, therefore, we shall
proceed towards the picturesque lake PampS. Yon appear-
eth in view, at no distance, the mount Rishyamuka. Here
dwells with four monkeys, the virtuous souled Sugriva—
Suryya’s son, in constant fear of Vali, Tam in a hurry to be-
hold Sugriva the best of monkeys, for my business—Sita’s
quest—is entirely at his hands.”Unto the heroic Rama, speak-
ing thus, Saumitri said,—"Let us depart soon, 1 am in haste
too.” Issiing out of Matanga’s asylum, the mighty Rima, lord
of men, repaired with Lakshmana to the luke Pamp&. Exer-
cised with grief, he arrived at the bank of that best of lakes,
beholding (as he passed along), various trees and pools, the
mighty forest covered on all sides with huge trees and flowers
and resounding with the noise of lapwings, peacocks, wood-
peckers and various other birds and rattling of the bamboos.
Beholding, from distance, Pamp& of sweet, cool and pure
water, Rama performed ablution at the Méfanga sara (a
portion of Pamp&) and paced slowly towards the lake.
Thereupon Dagaratha’s son, stricken with grief, bathed in
Pampa covered with lotuses. It was adorned on all sides
with Tilekas, Asokas, Punnagas, Uddalas and Vakulas. It
was a lake girt on all sides with picturesque gardens, having
its waters undulating beautifully and transparent like unto
crystal, and covered all around with soft sands. It was filled
with fish and tortoise, adorned with trees on its banks,
encircled with creepers embracing her like companions and
frequented Gandharbas, Kinnaras, serpents, Yakshas and
Rakshasas. It was covered with trees and creepers of various
kind, of cool water, and enveloped with beauty. It was,
somewhere, of red hue, in contact with water lillies, some-
where white with Aumudas, somewhere blue with blue lotuses
like unto a blanket of diverse hues. It was filled with white
and red loluses and encircled with blossoming mangoe groves
and resounding with the music of the peacocks. Behoiding


688 RAMAPANA,


Pamp4, ornamented like a damsel with 7ilakas, Biujapuras,(a)
fig-trees, Sukladrumas,®) flowery Karavis, blossoming
Punnagas, groves of Mdlati©) and Kunda,(@) Vandhiras,(s
Nichulas(f) Asokas, Saptaparuas,e) Ketakas,(*) Atimuktas,()
and various others trees, Rama the mighty son of Dagaratha
began to lament with Lakshmana. ‘There stands on its bank
the mount Rishyamuka, abounding in various metals and
covered with trees of variegated flowers as mentioned before
(by Kavandha. There dwelleth the famous lord of monkeys,
Sugriva, the heroic son of the great Rikshyaraja. O best of
men, do thou approach the chief of monkeys.” Rama, having
truth for his prowess, again spake unto Lakshmana, saying,
"© Lakshmana, how shall I live without Sita, who have been
deprived of ny kingdom, who am poorly and have Sit for
my life?” Having said this unto Lakshmana, who had
nothing else in vicw, that best of Kaghus, racked with sorrow
and grief and oppressed by Cupid, entered the lake Pamp&
graced with lotuses. Proceeding slowly, observing the forest,
Rama beheld and entered with Lakshmana Pamp&, girt on
all sides with beautiful woods and filled with a multitude of
diverse birds, *


a—Common citrun—Lat, (Citrus-medica).—T.

b~-Lat. (Symplocos racemasa).—T.

¢—Greut-flowered Jasmine—Lat, (Fasminum Grandiflorum).—T.
@—A kind of Jasmine—Lat. (F. Multiflorum)—T.

e—Lat. .emisa Sirisha) —T.
Sokal, ,.. crringtonia Agutangula)—T.
Let. | ilitonia-Scholaris) —T.
h—(Purskanus Odoratissiumus),—T.
i—Lat. (Gacrinera Racemosa)


Enp oF THE ARANYAKANDAN.


THE


RAMAYANA.


‘TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PRosE FROM THE ORIGINAL


Sanskrit OF VALMIEI,


YUDDHA KANDAM.


EDITED AND PUBLISED BY


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.


PRINTED SY
GtrRisH CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Przss, 65/2. Beapon Street,


CALCUTTA.


1893,


All rights reserved.)


YUDDHAKANDAM.


SECTION i.


Hearne the words of Hanumfn rehearsed property,
Rima, exceedingly delighted, said—"‘By Hanuman hath
been performed a very great deed, rare on earth, and one
incapable of being even conceived by any other in the world,
Save Garuda and the Wind-god, and save also Hanuman,
him find I not who crosseth the wide ocean. Entering by
main force the city of Lank&, incapable of being subjugated
by the gods and Danavas and Yakshas, the Gandharbas,
serpents or Rakhas, and well protected by R&vana,—who,
living, cometh out (of it)? And who that is not the compeer
of Hanum&n in strength and prowess, even entereth
into (Lanka), hard to subdue, and carefully guarded by the
Rakshasas ? And having so put forth his strength commensu-
tate with his prowess, Hanuman hath also performed a
great act befitting a servant on behalf of Sugriva.* That
servant who, being entrusted with a hard task,—after having
accomplished it, doeth another work in pursuance of. (the
prescribed business), is the best of men. That servant is
middling, who, deputed to any task,t doth not, albeit
capable, perform any other work which may be dear to the


* Having seen Sita—which was all that he had been commissioned to do
by Sugriva, Hanumén has destroyed Raksbasas and burnt Lanké; and this he
did of himself like a good servant.—T.

t 1s, performing the entrusted work—T.


139


“1106 RAMAPANA,


king. And that servant who, entrusted with any work of
the king, doth not, although competent, heedfully accomplish
the same, hath been called the worst. Anent the order
(which he had received), Hanuman hath done the work
(and more). He hath not been humbled,*—and, further, he
hath pleased Sugriva. And by seeing Vaidehi, (Hanum&n)
hath, while reaping righteousness, saved me, the Raghu
race, and the highly powerful Lakshmana. And this paineth
my mind sore, that I cannot do a like benefit, returning
this dear office of his, Embrace expresseth the all (of the
Deity),t and, finding this occasion, 1 extend my embrace unto
the high-souled Hanuman.” Having said this, Rama, with his
down standing on end in joy, embraced the self-controlled
Hanum&n, who was present alter having finished his specch.
Then reflecting for a while, the best of the Ragtus again
spoke in the presence of Sugriva, lord of monkeys,—
“Complete success hath been attained arent the search of
Sita. But when 1 think of the ocean, my mind is again sunk
in dejection. How can the assembled monkeys go over to
the southern shore of the vasty deep, difficult to cross ?
This tidings thou hast related unto me touching Vadehi;
but what are the monkeys to do next about crossing the sea?”
Having said this unto Hanuman, that slayer of foes, the
mighty-armed Rama, agitated by anxiety, was then plunged in
thought.

* by the Rébshasas—T.

+ The commentator explains this ubscure passage after his own orthodox


fashion, The gist is this. Delight is the cssence of the Deity, and all His in.
ccrnations bedy forth this, Embrace is typical of this cunotion,—T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1107


SECTION tl.


"T'aen the graceful Sugriva spake words" capable of
soothing sorrow, unto Dagaratha’s son, Rama, who was
wrought up with grief,—“Why, O hero, dost thou grieve, like
one that is base ? Let not this be so. Chase away thy grief,
even as an ingrate resigneth amity. Nor, O Raghava, when
the whe eabouts of Sita hath been discovered, and when too
the abode itself of the foe hath been known, do I perceive the
reason of thy sorrow. Thou, O Raghava, art intelligent,
conversant with learning, wise, and judicious. Do thou cast
away this sorry way of thinking, even as a self-controlled
(ascetic) casteth away any course of thought interfering with
the attainment of his purpose. Crossing over the ocean
swarming with gigantic alligators, we shall enter Lank& and
slay thy enemy. Of a person that is dispirited and poor in
pluck and that hath his soul overwhelmed with grief, every
interest droopeth, and he cometh by misfortunes (one after
another). All these heroes, these leaders of monkey-hordes,
who are ardent for thy welfare, are competent to enter into
fire itself. From their cheerful attitude I know this, and firm
is my faith, It behoveth thee so to arrange things that,
slaying the foe, Ravana of impious acts, we may bring hither
Sita by our own prowess. Do thou, O Raghava, so order
matters that a bridge may be constructed (over the main),
and that we may behold the palace of the Kakshasa monarch.
We having seen the city of Lanka, established on the summit
of Trikuta, do thou for certain conclude Ravana as slain in
battle immediately after (we see her). Without throwing a
bridge over the ocean—the dread abode of Varuna—even
the Asuras and celestials with Indra (at their head) are
unequal to subduing Lank&. When the bridge over the
ocean hath been constructed up to near Lanka, and when my


1108 RAEMAFANA,


forces have crossed (over the sea),consider victory as secured.
As these monkeys are heroic in fight, and able to wear
forms at will, O king, do not let thy intellect get stupified
and thus mar all interests. In this world, sorrow berefts
people of their prowess. Do thou do even what should be done
by a man—summon thy manliness ; for what an actor doeth
promptly, conduceth to his success. At this time, O eminently
wise one, do thou realise goodness through thy energy.*
Of heroic, high-souled, men like thyself, on their sustaining
an entire or a partial loss, grief undoeth every interest,
Therefore, the foremost of intelligent persons, and conversant
with every lore, thou shouldst along with councilors like me,
strive to beat thy foe. Find I none in the three worlds, O
R&ghava,who can stay in fight before thee equipped with thy
bow. Thy business entrusted to these monkeys shall not
(anyway) suffer. And soon, crossing over the boundless
main, thou shalt behold Sita. Therefore, O king, renounce
thy sorrow, and call up wrath. Those Kshatriyas that
conceive no anger in respect of their enemies, have their
activity annulled ; and all fear furious persons. Drawing
nigh unto us, do thou, gifted with acute intelligence,cast about
for crossing over the dreadful deep—lord of streams—along
with us. On these forces getting beyond the ocean, do thou
take it for certain that we have won ; and when my whole
host hath reached the further shore, do thou indubitably
conclude that we have obtained victory. These monkeys,
heroic and capable of assuming in fight forms at will, shall
slaughter those foes by showering rocks and trees. If I see
any means of crossing the ocean, Varuna’s abode, I shall, O
destroyer of foes, deem him as slain in battle. And what is
the use of dilating ? Every way thou shalt prove victorious,
And I see omens, and my mind is filled with delight.”


* 4. «a8 1 understand this rather obscure passage, prove thew good through
thy vigor—secure victory to the cause of goodness through thy might —T


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1109


SECTION 111.


“Heaaine Sugriva’s speech, reasonable and fraught with
high sense, Kakutstha accorded his assent to it and spoke
unto Hanumin, saying,—“By asceticism, or constructing a
a bridge, or drying up the ocean,—competent every way am
I for crossing over this ocean. Of impracticable places, tell
me how many there are in (Lank&), which are incapable of
being come at. O monkey, as thou hast seen personally,
I wish to get acquainted with all this. And thou hast at thy
leisure duly noticed in Lank& the number of the army,
the inaccessibility (or otherwise) of the gates, the defence
of Lanka, and the dwellings of the Rakshasas. Do thou
faithfully relate this unto me, for thou art observant.”
Hearing R&ma’s speech, Hanum&n, offspring of the Wind-
god, foremost of those conversant with speech, again spake
unto Riima,—‘“Hearken ! I will describe unto thee by what
method is the city of Lank& guarded and protected by the
R&kshasas, how loyal the Rakshasas are, the surpassing
Prosperity of Lanka, the dreadfulness of the deep, the
divisions of the forces,and the number of the elephants, horses,
cars, efc.,” Having said this, that best of monkeys, knowing
the nature of things, went on—"Lanka, filled with mad
elephants, ever rejoiceth. She is great, thronging with cars
and inhabited by Rakshasas, Her doors are firmly established
and furnished with massy bolts. And she hath four wide
and giant gates. (At those gates) are powerful and large
arms, stones, and engines,whereby a hostile host approaching,
is opposed. At the entrances are arrayed and set in order
by bands of heroic Rakshasas,hundreds of dreadful sharp iron
sataghnis.® She hath a mighty impassable golden wall,


* A kind of fire-arms, or ancient Hindu rocket ; or a stone set round with
sharp iron spikes.—According to RamAnuya, a sort of mace about two yards in
length, with spikes.—T.


1110 SAMAPANA,


having its side emblazoned in the centre with costly stones,
coral, lapises and pearls. Round about is a moat, exceedingly
dreadful, with cool water, eminently grand, fathomiess, con-
taining ferocious aquatic animals, and inhabited by fishes, At
the gates are four broad bridges, furnished with machines and
many rows of grand structures. On the approach of hostile
forces, their attack is repulsed by these machines,and they are
thrown into the ditch. One among these bridges is immovable,
strong and fast established ; adorned with golden pillars and
daises. O Rama, albeit Ravana hungereth for fight, yet
is he calm; and he is vigilant and ever engaged in superin-
tending his army. And dreadful and resembling a celestial
citadel, Lank& cannot be ascended by means of any support.
She hath fortresses composed of streams, those of hills, and
artificial ones of four kinds. And, O Raghava, she is
situated on the other shore of the ocean having its limit far
away. And way there is none even for barks,—and all sides
are destitute of division, And that citadel is built on the
mountain's brow ; and, resembling the metropolis of the im-
mortals, the exceedingly invincible Lank& is filled with
horses and elephants. And a moat and sataghnés and various
engines adorn the city of Lanka, belonging to the wicked
Ravana. And an ayuta of Rakshasas, dart-handed, hard to
subdue,—aud all fighting at the front with their swords—~
protect the Eastern gate. And a #zyuta of Rakshasas with a
fourfold force, and with the flower of the soldiery—protect
the Southern gate. And a prayuta of Rakshasas, bearing
swords and shields, and skilled in all arms, protect the
Western gate. And an arvuda of Rakhas protect the
Northern gate. And car-warriors and horsemen—persons,
honored and sprung from noble lines—by hundreds and
thousands,—and irrepressible goblins and £of#s of Rakshasas,
Protect the gartison. Ihave broken down the bridges and
filled up the entrenchment. I have burnt the city of Lanka
and laid the wall low. Let us by any way whatever cross


PUDOHARINDAM. Tet


ever Varuna’s abode, Do thou take it for cértain that the
sity of Lanka is subdued by the monkeys. What is the use
of thy reckoning the rest? Angada, Dwivida, Mainda,
Jambavan, Panasa, Nala, and the general, Nila, bounding and
reaching Ravana’s abode, and riving the same consisting of
woods and hills, moat and gateway, walls and dwellings,
shall, O Raghava, bring (hither) SitS. If this be so,* do thou
order the entire body of the army to be brought; and do
thou set out at the proper hour.”


SECTION Iv.


——


Heaanc Hanum&n’s speech duly from the begin-
ning, the exceedingly energetic Rama having truth for his
prowess, said,—"What thou sayest-—'l shall speedily destroy
the city of this dreadful Raksha,’—is true, I tell thee.
Therefore, at this very moment arrange for Sugriva’s march.
The Sun hath attained his meridian at this proper moment,
capable of conferring victory.t Let Ravana carry away Sith
(to his own country),—whither shall Ravana, living, repair?
Like a dying person who hath taken a death-dispelling
drug and drunk ambrosia, Sits, hearing of my preparations
for war, shall inspire hope of life. To-day the Northern
Phalguni (is in the ascendant); and to-morrow the moon
shall be in conjunction with Hast&.} O Sugriva, shall we set


* Ebam djndpaya ; RamBnuja reads sense into this passage, Jf thou wishest
the principal monkeys to go, bring thems ; if thou wish the whole host to march,
call it hither, and march ot the auspicious moment.—T.

+ The moment is named abhijit,—7.

+ Hast& sprung from Punarvasu is the star of doom, portending death to
Ravana. The Northern Phalguni is Sitt’s natal star. The expedition beguo
during the influence of this star, augurs deliverance to Vaidehi—T. _


istry RAMAYANA.


out, surrounded by the entire host? The omens I witness,
augur, that, having slain R&vana, I shall bring back Janaki.
The upper lid of my eye throbbeth; and it betokeneth that
my desire hath indeed been had.” Then, honored by the
monkey-king as well as Lakshmana, the righteous Rama,
understanding the import of things, again said,—"Surround-
ed by hundreds and thousands of fast-speeding monkeys,
let Nila go ahead of this force, for surveying the route. O
Nila, do thou, O general, expeditiously take the army by
a path furnished with fruits and roots, having cool waters
of the woods, and replenished with honey. The wicked
R&kshasas vitiate* fruits, roots and water along the way.
Thou, ever on the alert, shouldst preserve these from the
Rakshas, And, bounding down into hollow places, mountain-
fastnesses, and woods, let the rangers of the wilds, spy the
posted detachments of the enemy. Let those that are in-
competent, stay here. This business is dreadful, and we
should apply our best strength in conducting the same.
Therefore let the foremost monkeys gifted with prodigious
Prowess lead forth the choice portion of the army, numbering
hundreds and thousands, And let Gaja resembling a hill,
and the exceedingly powerful Gavaya, and that monkey,
Gaviksha, master of the leaping ones,t like # haughty bull
among kine, go in the van of the monkey-host. And let
that foremost of monkeys, Rishava, go, protecting the right
wing (of the army); and let Gandha, irrisistible like
an elephant with the fragrant temporal juice trickling down,
and the vehement Gandham&dana, go,} protecting the left
wing (of the monkey-army). And, cheering the army, I
myself, mounted on Hanumén, like the Lord (mounted) on
Airavata, shall march in the midst of the forces. And like


* By means of poison, efc—F.

+ 4, monkeys. —T.

} The verb is singulas, instead of dual, as also the qualifying epithet,
Pérpamadishthita, But the sense is cleat.—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1113


the lord of wealth and master of riches, mounted on
Sarvabhauma, Iet Lakshmana resembling the Destroyer,
march forth, mounted on Angada. And let that king of, bears,
the long-armed Jambavan, Sushena, and the monkey,
Vegadargi, protect the rear (of the forces).” Hearing
Raghava's words, that foremost of monkeys and Jord of the
army, the exceedingly energetic Sugriva, issued his orders.
And anon those highly powerful monkeys issuing up
from caves and mountain-summits, began to bound (on all
sides). Thereafter, honored by the king of monkeys and also
Lakshmana, the righteous Rama, accompanied by his forces,
set out in a southerly direction. And he marched,surrounded
by hundreds and thousands, Kotis and Ayutas of monkeys
resembling elephants. And he marching was followed
by the mighty host of monkeys ; and all those maintained by
Sugriva were filled with joy and betrayed domonstrations of
delight. And bounding by way of guarding the flanks of
the forces, and leaping in front of the army for pioneering,
blustering, emitting feonine roars, and uttering cries, the
monkeys made towards the south. And some partook of
perfumed honey and fruits, and some bore mighty trees,
holding the sprouts, And some in pride (of strength)
suddenly raised others and threw them down. And some
fell and were anon up, and some brought others down.
‘We shall slay Ravana, as also all the rangers of the night’ ;
thus did the monkeys roar out in the presence of Raghava.
Before (the army), Rhirishabha, the heroic Nita, and Kumuda,
along with many monkeys, went on clearing the route. In
the middle were king Sugriva, Rama and Laksbamana,
environed by innumerable powerful and terrible monkeys.
And the heroic monkey, Satavali, surrounded by ten Kotis
(of troops), alone on all sides protected that monkey host.
And accompanied by an hundred Kotis, Kesari, Panasa,
Gaja* and Arka, by means of many protected. that host on


‘* Some other than the first-mentioned Gaja.—T.


140


ants RAMAYANA.


every side. And taking Sugriva before them, Sushena, and
Jambavin, surrounded by innumerable bears, protected the
rear (of the army.) And that foremost of rangers possessed
of excellence, and of restrained senses, the heroic Nila,
general (of the army), kept going round the ranks. And
Valimukha, and Prajangha, Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa,
went everywhere, urging on the monkeys. While thus
marching, breathing pride of strength,those tiger-like monkeys
saw that foremost of mountains Sakya crowned with
hundreds of trees, and watery expanses laughing with
flowers, and beautiful tanks. And knowing the order of
Rima of dreadful wrath, that terrible and mighty host,
exceedingly terrific and resembling the bosom of the deep,
cowed down through fear, leaving behind cities and villages
‘and provinces, went like the deep-sounding sea. And at
the side of Dagaratha’s son those heroic monkeys resembling
elephants, proceeded by bounds, like noble horses, spurred
on. And those foremost of men, mounted on the monkeys,
looked beautiful like the Sun and the Moon half eclipsed by
the two mighty planets, vzs., K&abu and Ketu. And (thus) did
the righteous Rama proceed towards the South, accompanied
by his army. Then Lakshmana, furnished with consummate
sense and promptitude, who was mounted on Augada,
spoke unto R&ma, inviting words, fraught with import.
“Speedily recovering Vaidehi, who hath been carried away,
and slaying Ravana, thou wilt, thy end attained, return
to Ayodhya, who shall also have her desire. O Raghava,
1 see all the great auspicious omens on earth and in the sky,
signifying success unto thee. Mildly and grateful doth the
blessed breeze blow behind the army, inspiring pleasure.
And the birds and beasts are crying in sonorous voices.
And all the points (of the compass) appear pleasant ; and
the lord of day is cloudless. Bhrigu’s son, Uganas, also
weareth for thee an auspicious aspect, and Dhruva is without
blemish, And all the rishis, pure and furnished with lustre,


YUDDHAKANDAM. nig


go round Dhruba. And before us shineth the grandfather
of the high-souled Ikshw&kus ; the spotless R&jarshi Triganku,
with his priest.—And stainless and free from disturbances
appeareth Viskh’. This is the racial star of us, the
high-souled Ikshw&kus. And Nairita, the radical star of the
Nairitas, is sore afflicted and, touched by the rod-bearing
Dhumketu is in trouble. All this is for the destruction of
the Rakshasas. At the fated time, those that are in the
clutches of Death, have their stars afflicted by the planets.
And the water is dear and tastes sweet ; andthe woods are
stocked with fruit. And the odorous gale doth not blow
strongly ; and the trees are furnished with all blossoms of
of the season. And, O lord, this host of monkeys appeareth
splendid to the height, as did the celestial host on the
occasion of the destruction of T&raka. Seeing all this,
thou shouldst, O noble one, feel delighted.” Having
thus consoled his brother, Sumitr&’s son, feeling enlivened,
said this. The monkey-host went on, covering the
earth. And the mighty dust raised by bears, monkeys,
and tigers, having for their weapons nails and teeth,—with
the foreparts of their feet and hands, enveloped the world,
and the splendour of the sun was obscured. And as clouds
envelope the sky, the mighty monkey-host went on, covering
up the Southern quarter with its mountains, woods, and sky.
And as they marched covering many a yoyana, the streams
seemed as if they flowed in an opposite direction.* And
they, while proceeding, took rest by pools of clear water, on
mountains covered with trees, on plains and in forests
teeming with fruits, Some moving straight, some moving
askance, and some moving on the earth, that enormous


* Kataka remarks —"As when clouds drift past, the Moon it ia that seems
to scud accross the sky, as the monkey-army marched on, the rivers seemed
to flow in an opposite direction”. RamAnuya says that the waters of the
streams dashed by the monkeys, held an opposite course. The former inter-
pretation is hardly satisfactory, and Ramanuya seems to be right,—T.


1116 7 RAMALANA,


monkey-host went on covering the entire earth. And they
were all of delighted countenances and gifted with the
velocity of the wind. And these monkeys devoted all
their energy to the accomplishment of R&ghava’s work.
And they were displaying unto each other their joy, prowess
and energy. And influenced with the vanity of youth they
set up diverse cries. Some proceeded with speed,some leaped,
some set up cries expressing joy, some were uplifting
their tails, and some were striking the ground with their feet.
Some, stretching forth their arms, were breaking the hills,
and others the trees. And others were ascending the tops
of the hills, Some began to make terrible sounds, and others
made a tingling noise. And many others blasted the
creepers with the velocity of their thighs. And some were
engaged in sporting with trees and rocks. And thus was
the earth enveloped with millions and Zof’s of fearful
monkeys. And thus the enormous monkey host went on day
and night. And all those monkeys, delighted, guided by
Sugriva, and taking delight in battle, went on speedily. And
they did not take rest even for a moment, desirous of rescuing
Sit. Thereupon, getting at the mount Sahya covered with
various trees and forests, those monkeys ascended it. And
Rama went on beholding the variegated forest, rivers and
fountains of the mount Sakya and Malaya. And those
monkeys broke down various trees—Champakas, Tilakds,
mangos, Prasekas, Sindubarakas, Tinigas and Karaviras,
Asokas, Karanjas, Plakshas, Nyagrodhas, Fambukas and
Amalakas. And seated on picturesque rocks, various forest
trees, shaken by the wind, showered flowers on them. And
there blew in those forests filled with the smell of honey, a
wind of pleasant touch, cool as the Moon, accompanied by
the hummings of the bees. And that mount was richly
embellished with diverse metals. And dust issuing from
these metals and thickened by the air, enveloped on all sides
the huge monkey-host. There blossomed in that picturesque


YUDDHAKENDAM. 1117


mountain-vale Kefakas, Sindubaras, beautiful Vasantees,
Méadhabis, Gandhapurnas, Kandas, Chiravilyas, Mahikas,
Vanjulas, Vakulas, Ranjakas, Tilakds. Nagas, Chutas,
Patalikas, Kobidaras, Muchlindas, Arjunas, Singsapas,
Kutajas, Pintalas, Tinigas, Churnkas, Neepakas, Neela-
Sokas, Savalas, Ankolas and lotuses. And all these trees
were greatly disturbed by those monkeys, delighted with
their view. There were in that mountain many a picturesque
Jake and pond filled with Chakravakas and Karandavas,ducks,
Chraunchas and the mount abounded on all sides with boars,
deer, and terrible bears, lions and tigers and various other
fearful animals, and it was beautified with full blown lotuses,
lilies, U¢palas and various other fragrant trees growing in the
water. And various birds set up their musical choir on the
summit of that mount. And bathing and drinking, these
monkeys sported in the” water. And ascending the mount
these monkeys continually bounded. And excited with drink,
they crumbled into pieces the ambrosia-smelling fruits, roots
and flowers of the trees. And those monkeys yellow as
honey, delighted, feasted on mangoes, long and measuring a
drona. Breaking down the trees, blasting the creepers,
bounding from one tree to another and making the mount
Sahya echo, those leading monkeys went on delighted and
excited with drink. Some ascending the trees, and others
drinking, the whole earth was enveloped with those monkeys,
and seemed as if beautified with ripe paddy crops. And reach-
ing the mount Mahendra, the large-armed Rama, having eyes
like lotuses, ascended the summit adorned with diverse trees,
And getting at the top, Dagaratha’s son espied the vast deep
filled with tortoises and fishes. Thereupon, passing by
the mounts Satya and Malaya and arranging their enormous
host, they* by and by reached the roaring deop. And
descending therefrom, Rama, the foremost of those who
minister happiness unto all, accompanied by Lakshmana and


* The monkey leaders—T.


3118 RAMAPANA,


Sugriva, entered tho forest situate on the banks of the
ocean, And reaching the expansive banks having rocks there-
on and continually washed by the rising billows, Rama spoke
saying,—“O Sugriva we have arrived at the abode of Varuna.
Now hath arisen in my mind what I had not thought of
before. And this ocean, the lord of the streams, whose other
side is not seen,cannot be crossed over without some excellent
measure, Let the monkey-host be encamped here therefore,
and then concert a plan by means of which they might get
at the other side. And reaching the shores of the ocean, the
large-armed Rama, stricken with grief for Sita, ordered their
encampment, saying,—‘O foremost of monkeys, do thou
encamp thy host on the brink of the ocean, Now hath
arrived the hour for counsel, when we should devise some
plan for crossing over the main. I fear the Rakshasas at every
step, for they are greatly illusion creating—let the leaders
therefore go to their own hosts and Jet them not proceed any-
where else, renouncing them.” Hearing the words of Rama,
Sugriva along with Lakshmana, encamped the army on the
brink of the ocean,covered with trees. And stationed near the
main,the monkey-host in consequence of their resemblance in
colour with the blue contents of the deep,looked like a second
ocean, Thereupon, teaching the shore, those leading monkeys
engaged in concerting a plan to cross over the vasty deep,
And the tumult, of that monkey-bost encamped there, was
heard above the roaring of the deep. And that huge
army of the monkeys commanded by Sugriva, and set up in
three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplish-
ment of Rama’s work. And reaching the shore of the vasty
deep, that monkey host, delighted, beheld the ocean moved
by the Wind. And they waited there beholding the deep of
unimpeded expanse, having its distant shore inhabited by
the demons, and thronged with various aquatic animals.
While upheaving its foam on the approach of eve, it
appeared laughing and setting up its surges, it appeared to


PUUDHAKANDAM. rg


dance. It increased with the rising of the Moon and he
reflected himself on its breast. That abode of Varuna was in-
fested with gigantic sharks,whales and Zimingalas*, disturbed
with the fury of the Wind, filled with serpents having flaming
frames,and various aquatic animals and rocks,and was fathom-
less deep. it had picturesque fortresses on its marge and its
other shore was hard to get at. And the Makarast and
serpents living therein were moved by the Wind. The
waters, as if delighted, were rising and falling. And baving
serpents of flaming frames underneath, it appeared as if
sprinkled with scintillations of fire. And that terrible
abode of the demons extended down to the regions inhabited
by the Wagas or serpents. The deep resembled the welkin
and the welkin the deep, and there appeared no difference
between them. The sky crested with stars and the deep
filled with gems resembled each other, The sky enveloped
with clouds and the ocean overflowing with surges presented
no contrast whatsoever. The waves of the mighty deep beat-
ing at each other continually, set up a sound resembling that
of a trumpet in the sky. It was filled with diverse gems
and its water was poisoned by means of the air. It was filled
with various aquatic animals, and upheaving its billows, it
appeared as if excited with ire. And there beheld those
high-souled monkeys the mighty main agitated by the Wind
and muttering as if with the upheaval of the waves. There.
upon, overwhelmed wth surprise, those monkeys, stationed
there, espied the main brimming with rolling waters and
moving as if (off its place).
* A large fabulous fish—T.
+ A marine monster confounded usually with the crocodile and shark.—T.


1120 RAMAPANA.


SECTION Vv. .


Trere on the northern shore of the ocean the army was
encamped and arranged in order by Nila. Aud the two
leading monkeys Mainda and Divida patrolled about on all
sides to protect the monkey host. And the army being
encamped on the shore of the lord of streams and rivers,
Rama, beholding Lakshmana by his side, spoke, saying—"I
know that grief abates as time passes by, but my sorrow
arising from the separation of my spouse, is increasing day
by day. I am not sorry that she hath been stealthily taken
away by the demon—but my sorrow is that her end is
drawing nigh. O Wind, do thou go there where my dear
spouse is, and touching her person, do thou touch me, for I
shall thon be happy stationing my looks in the Moon and
being touched by thee. Alas! my dear one cried ‘O
lord, O lord’ when she was taken away. Those words,
revolving burn me like poison. Iam now being burnt down
day and night by the firo of désire,having separation from her
for its fuel and her thoughts for its flame. Leaving thee,
O Son of Sumitra, I shali jump into the deep and then
shall not this fire burn me any more. This is my only
consolation,for which I draw my vital breath—that myself and
she breathe on the same earth. Like unto a dry land drawing
wator from a watered ground, I do live, hearing that Janaki still
survives. Wien shall 1, discomfitting my enemies, behold
Sita, having’ a beautiful waist and eyes resembling lotus-
petals, as a victorious hero beholdeth the royal Grace. Like
unto the sick drinking the e/éx/r of life, when shall I, raising a
little her lotus-like countenance having graceful teeth and
lips, imprint kisses thereon ? And when shall she, laughing,
embrace me with her rising breast resembling the palm
fruit?’ Alas that chaste dame having scarlét cerners of the


2 ODDHAKANLAM, 1120


eye, being encircled by the demons, is wishing for a protector
like unto one having no husband, albeit having a husband in
me. How fareth in the midst of the she-demons, that daughter
of the king Janaka, my beloved spouse, and the daughter-in-
law of king Dacaratha? And having those Rakshasas,
hard to repress, slain by me, truly shall she appear like
unto the rays of the Moon extricated from sable autumnal
clouds. Sita is constitutionally slender, and forsooth, she has
been greatly reduced by sorrow, fasting and calamities
touching time and place.When shall piercing with my shafts
the breast of the lord of R&kshasas, renounce my mind’s
grief? And when shall my devoted Sita resembling the
daughter of a celestial, fling herself anxiously around my
neck and shed tears of joy? And when shall I renounce
this my sorrow arising out of Maithili’s separation, like
unto one casting off his soiled clothes?” The highly
intelligent Rama bewailing thus, the day passed away and
the Sun, decreasing gradually, disappeared at last. And
consoled by Lakshmana,Rama,stricken with thought touching
Sita having eyes like lotus-petals, engaged in rites relating
to the worship of Eve.


SECTION VI


Banovowe in Lanka that dreadful and awe-inspiring
work performed by Hanum&n like unto the high-souled
Sakra, the lord of R&kshasas, looking down with shame,
addressed them all, saying—‘‘That monkey alone hath
invaded and entered the city of Lanka hard to reach and
hath: espied Sita, the daughter of king Janaka. He hath
shattered the palace,and the altar of sacrifice,slain the leading


14h


1122 RAMAYANA.


Rakshasas, and, in short, agitated the whole city of Lank&.
What shall I do now? And what should you all do on this
occasion? It behoveth you all to give me such counsel as
becometh me and will. conduce to my glory.” ‘Victory is the
outcome of consultation’—this do the sages* say. Let us,
therefore, O mighty ones, engage in counsel, relating to the
measpres we should adopt towards Rama. There are three
orders of men on this earth—the superior the middling and
the inferior, This distinction cannot be perceived without a
knowledge of the signs, and so I shall relate unto you their
merits and demerits. He is said to belong to the superior
order, whose counsel contains the three signs (mentioned
below), or who engages in works after consulting duly with
friends capable or with persons having the same end in view,
and some times with others, and who serveth Providence.
He belongs to the middle order who consults his own self
only,depends on the Providence, and engages alone in works.
And he belongs to the inferior order who engageth in works
without ascertaining their merits or demerits, disregarding
the will of the Providence and saying, ‘I will do this’, and is,
inactive (at last), And counsels are also divided into three
divisions like unto the three orders of men (mentioned).
That counsel belongs to the superior order in which the
counsellors with their judgment reinforced by a knowledge
of political ethics, are unanimous. That one belongs to the
middle order in which the counselfors after varied discussion,
arrive at unanimity in the long run. And that one is
the worst in which the counsellors differ from each other
and agree a little in the long run, with no good result.
You are all gifted with good intellects: do you all unani-
mously settle as to what becometh me and conduceth to my
well-being. Environed by a thousand of patient monkeys,
Rama, with a view to capture our city, is approaching
towards Lank&. Forsooth, shall he cross over the main along


* Manasmine, according to Ramanuya, means, hero.—T- -


FUDDFARAND iM. 1123


with his younger brother and a mighty host. He can by his
prowess dry up the ocean and do the other.* Rama ap-
ptoaching thus with a hostile intention along with the
monkeys, it behoveth you to devise such means as might
protect my city and army.


SECTION VII.


Bawe thus accosted by their lord, the highly powerful
Rakshasas, devoid of good sense and ignorant of sound
counsel, reptied with folded palms, saying,—Thou hast, O
king, enough of soldiers and weapons. Why art thou smitten
with sorrow then? Repairing to Bhagavati, thou didst dis-
comfit the serpents in battle. The God of Death, living on
mount Kailaga, encircled by Yakshas, was subjugated by
thee in a great battle. And that mighty lord of men, proud of
his friendship with Siva, was defeated by thee wrathfully in
battle. Discomfitting and slaying the band of Yakshas, thou
didst bring this flowery car from the mount Kailaga. O
Jord of R&kshasas, desiring thy friendship out of fear, Maya,
the king of Danavas, offered thee his daughtert for thy
spouse. O thou of mighty arms, thou didst bring under thy
subjection the powerful and irrepressible D&navat for the
pleasure of Aumbhinasi.§ And entering the region under
the earth, thou didst defeat the serpents—and thus bring
under thy subjection V&suki, Takshaka, Sankha, and Jati.
Those heroic Danavas, the Xalakeyas, were greatly powerful,


* £. e. bridge over the ocean —T.
+ This refers to Mandodari, Ravana’s favourlte queen.--T._
+ This refers to Madhu—T.

§ Ravana's sister, who was married to Madha.—T.


1194 RAMAPANA,


irrepressible, and proud of the boons conferred on them.
And fighting with them perpetually for a year, thou didst
bring them under thy control, O lord, O slayer of foes, and
learn from them the science of varied illusions, O king of the
Rakshasas. O great hero, by thee were defeated in battle,
the heroic and powerful sons of Varuna, followed by a fourfold
division of their army. The dominion of Death is like the
mighty main, having his rod for aquatic animals, agonies
for the trees that cover its islands, the noose for the
billows, his attendants for the serpents and his terrible
fever for the dreadful attitude of the deep. And diving
into this terrible deep, thou didst, O king, discomfit Death
himself and win glorious victory. And every one was
pleased there with thy successful fight. The Earth was filled
with various heroic Kshetriyas, resembling Sakra in prowess
as she is adorned now with various trees. R&ghava is not
their equal either in strength or prowess. And all those heroes,
hard to repress in battle, were slain by thee, O king, Do
thou wait here, O great king; thou needst not take any
trouble. Indrajit alone shall slay all these monkeys. And
this one, O mighty monarch, having celebrated the
M&heswara* sacrifice, hath obtained a noble boon, rarely
(attained by persons). Having agitated the ocean of celestial
hosts, having darts and lances for its fishes, showering arms
for its moss, elephants for its tortoises, steeds for its frogs,
Rudra and Aditya for its ferocious animals, the Maruts and
Vasus for its mighty serpents, cars, horses, and elephants
for its volume of waters, and infantry for its spacious shore,
this one (Indrajit), taking captive the lord of the celestials
himself, had brought him into Lank&. Then, O king, liberated
agreeably to the injunction of the Great-father, the slayer of
Samvara and Vritra, worshipped of all the celestials, went
(back) to heaven. Do thou, O great king, entrust Indrajit
with this business,—until he bringeth to destruction the


* Relating to Mahagwara—the great Lord, a designation of Siva—T.


YUDDRARANDAM. 11Z5


monkey-host along with Rama. O king, thou must not Lhink
that this calamity, coming from an ignoble person is not in-
significant. Thou shalt slay Raghava.”


BECTION vill.
—+ aa


Taen that heroic general, the Rakshasa named Prahasta,
possessing the splendour of sable clouds, submitted
with joined hands,—‘I am competent to baffle in battle
gods and D&navas and Gandharbas, ghosts, birds and
serpents,—-what then is a couple of human beings ? Having
been negligent and confident {in our power), we have
all been deceived by Hanumf&n. But, I living, that ranger
of woods shall not (again) go hence with his life. Ali the
earth down to the ocean, containing hills, forests and woods,
shall be rendered free from monkeys. Do thou command me.
And, O ranger of the night, I shall deliver (the R&kshasas)
from the monkeys; and thou shalt not have to suffer in the
least in consequence of thy transgression.”"* Then the
Rakshasa named Durmukha, growing enraged, said,—'This
overpowering of all of us must not be forgiven—this flagrant
discomfiture of the metropolis of the auspicious lord of the
Rakshasas as well as of his inner appartment by the foremost
of monkeys. This moment marching alone (from hence) will
1 exterminate the monkeys, even if they shall have entered
the dreadful deep, or the sky, or the subterranean regions.”
Then the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra, weilding up a
terrific bludgeon, stained with flosh and gore, wrathfully
observed,~Rama the irrepressible existing,and also Sugriva
with Lakshmana, what have we to do with the weak and
: * Fe. the ravishment of Sita —T.


1126 RAMAYANA.


wretched Hanuman? This very day, slaying single-handed
RAma with Sugriva and with Lakshmana, with this bludgeon,
shall I return, after having sorely troubled the mankey-host.
And, O monarch, if thou art minded, hear this other word
of mine! Verily he that is fertile in resources and ever
ready, compasseth success. Let thousands of R&kshasas,
heroic, terrible, fearful to behold, and wearing forms at will,
appointed by the lord of Rakshasas, presenting themselves
before Kakutstha in palpably human shapes, calmly say unto
that foremost of the Raghus,—-'Despatched have we been by
thy younger brother.’ Hearing this, he (RAma), sanmmoning
his forces without delay, shall come hither. Then, equipped
with darts, javelins and maces, and bearing bows, arrows
and scimitars in our hands, we shall swiftly and summoning
speed* set out (from hence); and stationing ourselves in
the sky in bands, and slaughtering the monkey-army with
mighty showers of rocks and weapons, we shall lead it to
Death’s door. Let us in this wise decoy Rama and
Lakshmana ; and if they fall into our design, they shall,
without doubt, lose their lives.” Then that. hero,
Kumbhakarna’s son, named Nikun:bha, endowed with
exceeding prowess, in high wrath remarked unto Ravana,
destroyer of worlds—“Do ye, all of you, stay here along
with the great king. I alone shall slay Raghava together
with Lakshmana, and Sugriva with Hanum§&n, and all the
monkeys.” Then a R&kshasa, named Vajrahanu, resem-
bling a hill, in wrath lapping the corners of his mouth with
his tongue, said,—'Do ye,casting off anxiety, engage yourself
as ye list. I alone shalt swallow up that entire monkey-host.
Do ye,remaining at ease and without anxiety, drink Varunat
wine. 1 single-handed shalt slay Sugriva with Lakshmana,
as well as Hanumin with Angada,—and all the monkeys.


* Tearita—sammoning speed—redundant—T.
+ VPérune wine, otherwise named Véruni is prepared from hog-weed,
ground with the jsice of the date or palm, and then distilled —T.


VYUDDHAKANDAM 31327


SECTION IX.


——


Tues, in fierce wrath seizing bludgeons, and patfizas,
lances and bearded dasts and javelins, and axes, bows and
excellent shafts and swords, resembling crystelline water,
sprung up the Rakshasas, Rabhasa, and the mighty
Suryyagatru, aud Saptaghua,and Yajnakopa, and Mahapargwa
and Mahodara, Agniketu the irrepressible, and the Rakshasa
Kagmiketu, and the lusty Indragatru, son unto Kavana—
and Prahasta, Virupaksha, and the exceedingly strong
Vajradanshtra,—and Dhumraksha, and Nikumbha, and the
Raksha Duravokha. And, flaming in energy, they all addressed
Ravana, sayiug,—" lo-day shall we slay Rama, and Sugriva
along with Lakshmana, and the helpless Hanumaa, who hath
damaged Lanka, Then, preventing them, who bad (thus)
equipped themselves with all kinds of weapous, and making


them sit down, Vibhishana, with joined vands, again spoke
unto them, saying,—"


Phe wise have asserted that an appeal
to prowoss should be resarted tu anent # business then only
when the end sought caunot be attaimed through the three
(other) means.* Prowess produceth fruit only im respect of
well-advised action directed while carefully watching(enemies)
that are negligent, or captive,t or under Diviue affliction,
But why do ye inteud to discomfit (kama), who is vigilant,
who desireth victory, who is strong ia the Divine strength,
who hath subdued passion, and who is hard to subdue ?, Who
bad in this world ever thought of or reasoned abyut Hanu-
inan’s career over the dreadtul deep, the lord of streams and
rivers? O rangers of the night, the strength and prowess (of
“the foe) being immeasurable, ye should by no means reck-
lessly disregard him. And what was the wrong that formerly


"* Vie., conciliation, gift, and creating division —T.
+ In the hands of other enemies.-


1138 RAMAYANA,


had been done by RAma unto the king of the R&kshasas, that
he hath carried off from Janasthina the spouse of that illustri-
ous one ? If Khara, who had trespassed into regions not his
own, hath been slain in battle by Rama, surely a creature
should to the best of his might preserve hislife. It is for this
great fear that exerciseth us on the score of Vaidehi owing its
existence to this,* that she, having been ravished, should
(now) be given up. What is the use of acting so that quarrel
may be the consequence ? And (Raima), possessed of prowess,
yet ever abiding by morality, is incapable of initiating
hostilities for no purpose. Therefore, do ye give him his
Maithili, And before, he by means of his shafts riveth this
city together with her elephants and steeds, overflowing
with countless gems, do ye give him his Maithili. And before
the dreadful, irrepressible and mighty monkey-host blocketh
up this Lanké of ours, do ye give (back) Sits. This city of
Lank& shall perish as also all the heroic R&kshasas, if thou
dost not thyself make over Rama’s spouse unto him. 1 exert
myself to pleasure thee, because of the fraternity (that
subsisteth between us). Do what { say. I say what. is truth
and what also is for thy good. Do thou render (back) Rama’s
Maithili. Ere yet the king’s son, for compassing thy
destruction, showereth sure shafts resembling the rays of
the autumnal Sun, having shining heads and feathered parts,
and exceedingly hard, do thou render Maithili unto
Dagarathi. Forsake thy wrath at once, which destroyeth
happiness and virtue; and follow righteousness, which
enhanceth enjoyment and fame. Be thou propitious,—so that
we may live (at ease) along with our sons and relatives.
Render (back) Maithili unto Dagaratha’s son.” Having
heard Vibhishana’s speech, R&vana—lord of Rakshasas—
leaving all of them, entered his own chamber. B


* The feeling of revenge for the slaughter of Khara aod the rest.—T,


PUDDHAKANDAM., 11ag


SECTION x.


"Tiaen early in the morning, like the fiery and refulgent
sun entering a mighty mass of clouds, Vibhishana, fast to
virtue and interest, heroic and possessed of exceeding
splendour, playing a perilous part,* entered the apartment
of his elder brother, resembling an assemblage of mountain-
summits and elevated like the peak of a mountain, orderly,
divided into spacious rooms,—the resort of the great—
inhabited by august and intelligent persons attached (to
Ravana); guarded around by lusty R&kshasas in limited
numbers ; having the air agitated by the breath of mad
elephants ; with loud blares of conchs, and resounding with
trumpets ; embosoming numbers of beautiful damsels, with
its high-ways (overflowing with talk) ; furnished with doors
of polished gold; embellished with excellent ornaments ;
resembling the abode of the Gandharbas, or the mansion of
the Maruts; containing heaps of gems; like unto the
dwelling of serpents. And that one of exceeding energy
heard sacred and holy sounds uttered by Voda-versed
Brahmanas celebrating the victory of his brother; and that
highly powerful (hero) acquainted with Mantras and the
Vedas saw Vipras worshipped with vessels of curds, clarified
butter, flowers and fried paddy. And the mighty-armed
(Vibhishana) saluted the younger brother of the bestower of
tiches,f seated there. And that one acquainted with
manners, after proper courtesy, sat him down on a seat
decked in gold, which was pointed out (by a royal glance).
And in retirement as also in presence only of his counsellors,


* The project he had conceived, vis., converting Ravana to his own policy
of pacification, was fraught with peril to himself, considering his brother's Serco
temperament. —T.

+ Kuvera—Ravana was Kavera’s younger brother —T.


£42 -


1130 RAMAYANA.


Vibhishana spoke unto the high souled Ravana words backed
by reason, and greatly fraught with his welfare. And
having, with soothing speech, pacified his elder brother and
extended towards him the due civilities, that one, who through
height of sentiment had noted excellence and the want of it,
addressed (Vibhishana) in words befitting the occasion and
the place,—"Ever since, O subduer of enemies, Vaidehi bath
come hither, are seen inauspicious omens, Fire, enveloped
in smoke at the time of its being ignited, and thereafter
throwing out scintillations, with its brightness obscured by
vapour, doth not increase adequately even on oblations
being poured into it with Mantras. Reptiles are discovered
in kitchens, sacrificial fire-chambers, and the places of
Vaidika recitations ; and ants (are found) in clarified butter.
The milk of the kine hath been dried up ; and the nobler
elephants are without the temporal juice. And horses,
albiet they have feasted on fresh grass, neigh distressfully.”
And asses, camels and mules, O king, with their hair
standing erect, shed tears ; and although they are ministered
unto medically, they do not return to nature, And crows in
numbers emit harsh cries on all sides, and are seen in
swarms at the tops of edifices. Vultures sit sadly and
distressed upon the ronfs of houses. During the two twilights,
the jackals, coming in sight, utter ominous howls, And
wolves and other (ferocious) animals, as well as deer,
approaching the gate of the palace in swarms, are heard to
set up loud roars resembling the thunder. Things having
come to this pass, even this expiation, I fancy, is capable
of removing the evil omens. Do thou render back Vaidehi
unto Raghava. If I have said this through ignorance or


covetuousness, thou ought not, O mighty monarch, criminate
me. All R&kshasas and R&kshasis, as well as those be-
longing to palace and the inner apartment—shall have to


* The commentator remarks, evidently with justice—"That is, the horses,
having eaten their fill, stilt hunger.""—T. :


YODDHAKANDAM. 4131


experience the evil consequence (of this act of thine). All
the counsellors have refrained from tendering this counsel
unto thee ; but surely I must tell thee what I have seen
or heard; and adopting proper measures, it behoveth
thee to act so.’* (Ravana’s) brother, Bibhishana, thus spoke,
unto his brother, the chief of Rakshas, in the midst of
counsellors, these words fraught with his good. Hearing
this beneficial, mild and pregnant speech, fortified by reasons
and capable of compassing (his welfare) for the present, past
and the future, (Ravana) who had conceived a passion
(for Sit&), getting into a rage, replied,—‘Fear find I none
whatever. R&ghava never shall have Mithila’s daughter.
Even if Lakshmana’s elder brother should be supported in
battle by the celestials with Indra (at their bead), how can
he stay before’ me (in the field)?’ Having said this, that
destroyer of celestial hosts, the Ten-necked one, possessed of
mighty strength and of terrific prowess in battle, then
dismissed his brother Vibhishana, who had spoken truth.


SECTION x1,


"Pus unrighteous king, overmastered by his passion (for
Sita), in consequence of his sinful act as well as the loss of
honor he sustained at the hands of his friends, became
reduced, And the occasion for war was wanting, Ravana,
possessed by lust, and continually thinking of Vaidebi,
conceived along with his counsellors that the time for entering
into hostilities had arrived. And sallying forth, he ascended
a mighty car furnished with golden network, adorned witt
pearls and coral, and yoked with trained steeds. And having


* In accordance with my suggestion. —T.


1132 RAMA PANA,


ascended that excellent vechicle, having sounds resembling
those of mighty clouds, that foremost of Rakshas, the Ten-
necked one, drove towards the court. And as he coursed
on, Rakshasas, bearing swords and shields, and carrying all
kinds of weapons, went before the lord of the Rakshasas.
And (some of) these, wearing various frightful suits, and
decked with diverse ornaments, went, surrounding his rear
and flanks. And afivathas went with cars, and superb mad
elephants, and sportive steeds; and bearing in their hands
maces and bludgeons; and darts and clubs. And as Ravana
marched towards the court, there arose the loud blares of a
thousand trumpet, and the uproarious sounds of conchs.
And that redoubtable and mighty car-warrior held his course,
suddenly making sides resound, and beautifying the high
ways, And the spotless white umbrella of the lord of
Rakshasas, being raised up, looked beautiful like the Moon
at her full, On his right and left graced two crystal white
chowris furnished with threads of gold. And all those
Rakshasas standing on the ground with joined hands, bowed
down their heads to the foremost of Rakshasas who was seated
on his car. Hymned by the R&kshasas with blessings of
victory, that exceedingly energetic chastiser of enemies
arrived at the court constructed (by Vigwakarma). And
that highly energetic one in person entered that court
paved with silver and gold, having its heart decorated with
crystal, and gracefully covered with silk, embroidered with
gold; excellently constructed by Vigwakarma, and guarded
by six hundred ghosts. And Ravana sat down on a superb
and august seat consisting of lapises, furnished with a
pillow; and covered with a soft dear-s And lord-like
he commanded the envoys possessed of fleet vigor, saying,—
“Do ye speedily summon hither the Rakshasas. | fancy
some mighty effort hath to be put forth against our foes.”*
Hearing his words, the envoys began to range Lanka; and
going to every house, they fearlessly collected the Rakshasas


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1133


from places of sport, bed-rooms, and gardens. Then some
set out, mounting cars, and seme mounting proud coursers,
and some on foot. And like the welkin filled with fowls,
the city thronged with approaching cars, elephants and
steeds. And leaving their various vehicles and cars behind,
they entered the court on foot, like lions entering mountain
caverns. And taking the feet of the sovereign, and honored
by him (in turn), they sat them down, some on raised seats,
some on cushions of Kuga, and some on the floor, And
presenting themselves agreeably to the command of the
monarch, they sat them down each according to his position,
before the lord of Rakshasas, Ravana. And there came also
the learned and competent to arrive at infallible decisions,
and they sat them down in order of merit: And there alse
came courtiers endowed with virtues, versed in every thing,
and having intelligence for their eye-sight,—and innumerable
heroes by hundreds also (arrived) at that court for ascertaining
the course that would prave beneficial. And then mounting
a large, noble and splendid car, having its parts decked with
gold, and yoked with horses, the magnanimous and renowned
Vibhishana went to the court of his elder brother, And
that younger brother (of Ravana}, announcing his name,
bowed down at the feet of his elder brotlitr. And Suka and
Prahasta were employed in giving to each a separate seat
befitting his rank. And from all sides in the court there
began to spread the odour of excellent agura and sandal and
wreaths belonging to the R&kshasas, decked in gold and
various gems, and clad in costly attires. And no one among
these present at court uttered any thing, or spoke any
falsehood, or conversed in loud accents. And having
completely attained their desire, all of fierce prowess, gazed
atthe face of their lord. And in the assembly of those
intelligent, and exceedingly powerful persons, equipped
with arms, the intelligent Ravana appeared spleadid like the
Vajra-handed Indra among the Vasus.


1134" RAMAYANA.


SECTION Xi.


"T'wen surveying that entire assembly, that conqueror in
batile delivered himself unto Prahasta,—general of the forces,
saying,—“O general, it behoveth thee so to order the
disciplined fourfold forces that they may successfully protect
the city.” Thereat, Prahasta, carefully carrying out the royal
behest, stationed all the forces within and without the city.
And having posted the army for the defence of the city,
Prahasta sitting down before the king, said,—‘I have
stationed the forces belonging to thee who art possessed of
strength, inside as well as outside. (Now), without suffering
thy mind to be agitated with anxiety, speedity, do what
is in thy heart. Hearing the speech of Prahasta seeking the
welfare of the kingdom, Ravana craving for enjoyment,
spoke in the midst of his aderents,—“When virtue, or happi-
ness, or interest is in straits, it behoveth you to (know your
course) in relation to pleasant and unpleasant, happiness
and misery, profitable and unprofitable, and good and evil.
No business of mine which ye have set about after taking
counsel, hath ever miscarried. And like V4sava environed
by the moon, stars and planets, and the Maruts, I surrounded
by you, have attained to plenitude of prosperity. I am, for
certain, going to employ you all. In consequence of his
sleep, I could not inform him of this matter. After having
slept for six months that one of prodigious strength—loremost
of those bearing arms—hath just risen. Janaka’s daughter and
Ama’s beloved wife hath been brought hither from the forest
of Dandaka, the region ranged by Rakshas. That indolent
damsel wisheth not to ascend my bed ; nor is there any in the
three spheres, that to me is like unto Sit&. She is slender-
waisted,and high-bipped,and her face is as the autumnal Moon
resembling a golden image. She is meek and looketh like the


VUDDHA KANDA. 1135


hand work of Maya himself gifted with an infinite variety of
fascinations.* And beholding her dainty and tender feet with
roseate soles, and having coppery nails, my mind burneth
(with desire). And seeing her resembling the flame of a
sacrificial fire and the splendour of the Sun himself; and
ber fair face furnished with a prominent nose and elegant
eyes, I, having lost control over self, have come under the
sway of desire. And my passion, uninfluenced by anger and
joy, capable of producing pallor, and constantly causing
anguish and sorrow, hath rendered me pale. Expecting her
Jord, R&ma, the beautiful one having expansive eyes, hath
solicited for a year’s space; and I have pledged my fair
woods to her of graceful eyes, But tired am I on account of
my passion,—like a horse spent on the way. How can the
rangers of the woods, or the sons of Dagaratha cross over
the sea ungovernable and swarming with countless creatures
and fishes? On the other hand, a single month hath
troubled us grievously. Hard it is therefore to understand
the course of events. Do ye act, each as he thinks
Proper. And although no fear can come from mortals, yet
ye should deliberate (as to what ye should do). Formerly I
had gained victory with the help given by you; do ye in the
same way stand by me now. The king’s son, having learnt
that Sita is on the other shore of the ocean, taking before
them monkey headed by Sugriva, .reached Varuna’s abode.
Do ye so counsel that Sita may be with-holden by me and
the sons of Dagaratha may be slain; but ye must prefer
certain counsel. No othert person in this world hath the
power to cross the sea along with the monkeys,—-victory,
therefore, is undubitably mine.” Hearing the sorrowful


* This reminds one irrisistibly of Cleopatra’s, The Bengali translators
evidently failing to understand Mayava Mayanirmita,have conveniently—tras-
ferred the phrase in tact to their versions.—T.

+ I fail to understand anyasya, “no other person” ;—nor does the commen:
tator helps me anyway—T.


1136 RAMAPANA.


speech of (Ravana) afflicted with lust, Kumbhakarna grew
enraged, and said,—‘When just on seeing (Siti) of Rama
along with Lakshmana, theu didst by main force carry her
away, it plainly appeareth that thy mind, like the Yamun6
filling her bed, hath been possessed (by her).* O great king
all this (that thou hast done) is not worthy of thee. If thou
hadst at the outset consulted us in this matter, we would
have done what was proper.t O ten-faced one, the king,
that arriving at certain conclusions, carrieth on his regat
affairs agreeably to justice, hath not to repent afterwards,
But those actions that are done without deliberation, like
unto clarified butter poured in an impure sacrifice, conduceth
only to harm. He doth not know what is proper and what
not, that performs prior actions afterwards, and posterior
actions first. Others spy holes in the actions of the volatile,
the latter may be possessed of great power,—like swans
passing Krauncha through the hole.t By luck it is that
Raina hath not yet slain thee, who hath done this tremendous
thing, without reflection, resembling food mixed with poison.
But as thou hast entered upon a course of action which is
improper even in repect of foes, I will, O sinless one, perform
thy work by slaying thy enemies. And, O ranger of the
night, t will exterminate thy foc. Even if Sakra and the sun,
even if fire and the War-god, even if Kuvera and Varuna,
should range themselves against me, I will fight them,
Purandara himself shall be afflicted with fright when | having
my body measuring a mountain, and furnished with sharp
teeth, shall, setting up roars, fight with my huge bludgeon.
Before Rama shooteth a second shaft, to slay me, I shall
drink bis life-blood. Be thou comforted by staying Dagaratha’s
son, I will exert to secure blessed victory for thee. Having


* This passage is very obscure, and the commentator’s gloss does not at all
serve.—T.

+ he. we mould have prevented thee —T.

+ The hole made by the dart of Kumara—T.


PUDDHARANDAM. 1137


killed Rima along with Lakshmana, I shall devour all the
principal monkeys. Bo thou make merry at thy will, drink
the Varuni, and, with thy mind set at rest, conduct affairs
fraught with thy welfare. On Rama being despatched to the
mansion of Yama, Sit& shall come under thy subjection for
ever and a day.”


SECTION xt,


Srzine Ravana wrought up with wrath, the exceedingly
strong Mah&p&rcwa, reflecting for a moment, observed with
joined hands,—‘The man that, entering the forest, abound-
ing with deer and ferocious animals, doth not drink honey,
maketh a fool of himself. O destroyer of foes, who is the
lord of thee, that art lord thyself Enjoy with Vaidehi,
taking thy enemy by the hand. And, O thou endowed
with prodigious power, do thou exerting thy might lead thy
life, after the manner of hens, and invading Siti again
and again, do thou enjoy her and derive pleasure (therefrom).
And when thou hast attained thy purpose ; what fear can
succeed? Alike when on thy guard, and off it, thou shalt
provide against all exigencies. Kumbhakarna along with
us, as well the exceedingly powerful Indrajit, are competent
to chastise the thunder-bearing (Deity) equipped with his
thunder. Passing by gift, conciliation, and dissension, which
have been assigned by the wise as the means of success, I
telish the success in business which is attained thrqugh
chastisement. OQ highly powerful one, we shall, without
doubt, by the prowess of our arms, subdue all these enemies


143


1138 RAMAYANA.


of thine that have come hither.” Thus addressed by
Mab&parewa, king Ravana, honoring his speech, said,—“O
Mab&p&rcwa, I will relate unto thee, who hast spoken (thus),
asecret matter relating to myself, which befell me long
since I saw Panjikasthala, ike a flame in the sky, coursing
to the Great-father’s mansion. Her pace slackened, as soon
as she saw me, (turn) I feasted on her and deprived her of
her attire. Then she went to the Great-father’s place,
like a crumpled Jotus, That high-souled one received in-
formation of all that I had done; and thereat, waxing
enraged, the Deity spoke unto me,—“IE from this day, thou
ravish a female by force, thy bead certainly shall be riven
in an hundred pieces. It is for this, that with my mind
afflicted with fear, I do not violently force, Videha’s daughter
Sit&, anent lying with her fairself. My rush is like that of
the sea, and my motion that of the wind. Da&caratha’s son
doth not know this, and therefore doth he approach sea, Who
wisheth to address a lion that is lying asleep in a cave,
resembling Death wrought up by wrath? Rama hath not
seen shafts shot by me, resembling two-tongued serpents,—
and therefore, it is that he approacheth me. Like a meteor
burning an elephant, I shall, with shafts shot from bow in
hundreds, resembling the thunder-bolt, consume Rama, And
as atthe proper hour the risen Sun defeateth the splendour
of the stars, will I, surrounded by a mighty army, overpower
his strength. Neither the thousand-eyed VSsava, nor yet
Varuna, is capable of fighting me. By the might of this arm
did { formerly conquer this city, governed by Vai¢ravana.”


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1139


SECTION XIV.


ee


FHHearixe the words of the lord of Rakshasas, as well as
the thundering of Kumbhakarna, Vibhishana addressed the
Rakeshasa chief, in a pregnant speech,fraught with his welfare,
—Thou hast been bound about thy neck by the mighty and
huge serpent, Sit@, having her breast for its body anxiety for
its venom, smite for its sharp fangs, and her five fingers for its
hood. Therefore before the monkeys, resembling mountain-
peaks,having teeth for their arms and nails for their weapons,
—subjugate Lank&, do thou render Maithili unto Dagaratha’s
son, And before the shafts shot by Rama, resembling the
thunder-bolt and having impetuosity of the wind, cut off the
heads of the foremost of the R&kshasas, do thou render
Mithila’s daughter unto the son of Dagaratha. Neither
Kumbhakarna nor Indrajit, neither MahSpargwa nor Mahodara,
neither Nikumbha nor Kumbha nor yet Atikaya, O king,
can stay in the field against Raghava. Living, thou, whether
thou art protected by the Sun or the winds, or throwest
thyself into the lap itself of Vasava, or enterest the sky or
the nether spheres, shall not escape death.” Hearing
Vibhishana’s words, Prahasta said,—'Fear know we none
whatever from the celestials, or D&navas, or Yakshas,
or Gandharbas, or huge snakes ; fear know we none in battle
with birds and serpents. How can fear at all afflict us
proceeding from the king’s son, Rima? Hearing Prahasta’s
speech, Vibhishana, secking the welfare of the king, and
having his intellect grounded in virtue, interest and profit,
said words enfolding high sense,—‘“O Prahasta, like a sinful
person being unable to ascend heaven, what the king,
Mahodara, thou, and Kumbhakarna, are saying with reference
to Rama, shall not prove true. As one without 2 raft cannot
cross over the mighty main, how can J, or thou, or allthe


1140 RAMAYANA,


Rakshas combined, cause death unto Rama, who, O Prahasta,
is versed in the sense of things. Even the gods become
stolid before the sovereign of the IkshwAku race, having
righteousness for his principle quality, and being a mighty
car-warrior and of such a character, and who is competent
in action. As yet the Kanka-feathered, terrible and sharp
shafts shot by Raghava, have not pierced into thy body;
and therefore thou dost speak so. And, O Prahasta, as yet
the sharpened shafts, capable of destroying life and having
the impetuosity of the thunder-bolt, have not entered into
thy body, and therefore thou dost speak thus, neither Ravana,
nor the exceedingly powerful Trigirsha, Neither Kumbha-
karna’s son Nikumbha nor Indrajit, is capable of bearing
in battle the son of Dagaratha, resembling Sakra himself.
And neither Devantuka* nor Narantaka,t neither Atikdya,t
nor the magoanimous Atiratha, nor the equally strong
Akampana, is competent to stay R&ghava in fight. And the
king, naturally of fierce temper and thoughtless, through the
instrumentality of ye who appearing to be his friends are
in reality his foes, seeketh to destroy the Rakshasas. Do
ye take out and deliver the monarch, who hath through force
become subject to a dreadful and mighty, and thousand-headed
serpent bursting with immeasurable prowess. As a person
possessed by fearfully strong ghosts, is saved by his friends
pulling him by his hair, attaining your desire ye should,
assembling together, rescue the king. This one is sunk in
the Raghava sea having excellent waters. Do ye speedily
coming together deliver him. He (the king) hath fallen into
the K&kntstha nether regions, I tell thee my full mind,—
fraught with the welfare of this city together with the
R&kshasas, as well of the king with his adherents. Do thou
make over Maithili unto the son of the king. He is a true


* Lit —destroyer of the Deity—T.
+ Lit--desteoyer of men.—T.
t Lit—buge-bodied —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. ttgt


counsellor who adviseth his master, after duly ascertaining
the strength, position, increase or destruction of the enemies
as well as of their own party.


SECTION xv.


‘Hearne carefully the words of Bibhisana, gifted with
the intelligence of the lord of speech, the high-souled
Indrajit, the leader of demons, spake, saying,—‘Why art
thou, O uncle, speaking these useless words like one
terrified ? He even, whois not born in this race, cannot
speak or act in this wise. Only one man in this family, my
uncle Bibhisana, is weak in energy, strength, prowess,
patience, heroism and: vigor. Why art thou O timid one,
afraid of them since any one of these R&kshasas is capable of
slaying those two princes, human beings as they are? The
master of the three worlds, the lord of the celostials, has been
brought down by me as captive on this earth. And all the
celestials smitten with fear fled to different quarters. I
brought down on earth the loud-roaring celestial elephant
Airavata and uprooted by force its tusks. And all the
celestials were terrified at this. Am I not, who have shatter-
ed the pride of the celestials, afflicted the leading Daityas,
and am gifted with excellent prowess, capable of discomfit-
ting these two princess—very ordinary mortals as they are ?”
Hearing the words of (Indrajit) gifted with high energy,
irrepressible and resembling the lord of celestials, Bibhisana,
the foremost of those using weapons,addressed him with words,
fraught with high import,—“O my son, thou art a mere child
and of unripe intellect and hence thou art not capable of as-
certaining the propriety and impropriety of counsels. Thou art


1142 RAMAYANA,


therefore speaking thus like a maniac for thy own destruction.
Thou art known as 2 son unto Ravana, O Endrajit,but in sooth,
thou art his foe in disguise, since knowing of his destruction
from Raghava, thou dost not prevent him. Thou art brave,
childish and hast been impelled by thy silly understanding.
Thou shalt be slain along with him who hath brought thee
in this counsel chamber. Thou art, O Indrajit, foolish,
imprudent, devoid of bumility,of an irritable temper, of-feeble
sense, vicious-minded and of a silly understanding. And
thou dost speak so, being impelled by childishnéss. Who
shall withstand in battle, the shafts, shot by R&ghava,
resembling the rod of Death, the stick of Brahman, flaming
like the Fire of Dissolution. Do thou render back Sits, O
king, unto Rama, with riches, jewels, excellent ornaments,
clothes and jems and we shall then be able to live here
void of grief.”


SECTION Xvi.


Bostistana addressing him with these excellent and
auspicious words, fraught with high sense, Ravana, impelled
by Death, again spake in harsh accents.—"It is better to live
with open enemies or enraged serpents than with those who
pass for friends but are in reality foes. I know well the
nature of kinsmen, in all the worlds, O Rakhasa,—one takes
delight in another’s misfortune. The kinsmen, O Rakshasa,
generally disregard him who is their king,* protecteth the
kingdom, educated and pious—and they always try to discom-
fit him, if he be a heroe. These terrible enemies—the kinsmen,
hypocrite as they are, always take delight in one another's


* On account of the priority of his birth—T.


VYUDDHARANDAH. . 1143


calamity.’ Hear, I shall retate what the elephants, in yore,
spoke beholding some persons with noose in hand—“We do
not fear, fire, weapons, or even the terrible noose—we fear
only the dreadful kinsmen, blinded with selfishness. They
alone unfold the means of our detection—there is not the least
doubt about it. Fear from kinsmen is therefore known as the
worst of all fears. In kine there is milk, in kinsmen, there is
fear, in women there is fickleness, and in Brahmanas, there is
asceticism, It doth not please thee, I fancy, O gentle one, that
I am honored of the three worlds, the lord of riches, and the
subduer of my foes. As the drops of water do not last long
on the leaves of lotuses, so is the friendship with unworthy
persons. As the autumnal clouds, albeit muttering, do not
pour forth water, so is the friendship with unworthy persons,
As a bee flies away after sucking up the honey so is the
friendship with unworthy persons. As a bee, after feeding
upon the Kfga flowers, doth not get honey so is (fruitless)
the friendship with unworthy persons. As an elephant,
after being bathed, covers its body again with dust, taking it
with its trunk, so is the friendship with unworthy persons.*
Fie thee, O monkey, O thou that bringest disgrace on the
family, Had any one else spoken thus he would have
ceased to live by this time.” Being thus accosted harshly,
Bibhisana, speaking truth, rose up along with four Rakshasas
having maces in their hands. ‘Thereupon, rising up in the
welkin, the graceful brother Bibhisana, worked up with ire,
addressed the lord of Rakshasas—Thou art mistaken, O king.
Do thou speak what thou wishest—thou art my elder brother,
adorable like unto father—thou dost not follow the track of
virtue. I cannot tolerate the harsh accents of thine, my
elder brother—For thy ‘welfare I spoke those well-meaning
words, O Ten-necked one, but thou didst not pay heed to
them being brought under the control of Death, O king, many
are the persons who speak sweet words, but rare are’ they


* They afterwards forsake their former friends.—T.


thas RImiPana.


who can speak and hear unpalatable but well-meaning words.
How can 1 disregard thy death like unto a burning house
bound as thou art by the noose of Deaths the destroyer of all
creatures. I do not wish to behold thee slain by the well-
sharpened shafts of Rama, feathered in gold and resembling
the flaming fire. Even the heroic and powerful persons, well
versed in the use of weapons, wear away like sands in battle,
being attracted by Death. Thou art worshipful unto me, do
thou forgive me for what I have said for thy welfare. Do
thou protect thyself and this city, abounding in Rakshasas,
May good betide thee! Iam going away and do thou ‘be
happy without me. What, [ spoke unto thee, O ranger of
the night, to prevent thee, for thy welfare, did not please
thee. Persons, whose lease of life is well-nigh expired, do
not pay heed to the well-meaning words of their friends.”


SECTION XVit.
—


Have addressed Ravana with these harsh words, his
younger brother, reached in no time, where Rama along with
Lakshmana was. The leading monkeys, stationed on earth,
espied him on the welkin, resembling in size the summit of
the mount Meru, and burning like lightning in the effulgence
of his own person. And his four attendants of terrible
prowess were adorned with excellent ornaments and armed
with armours and maces. He was like unto a collection of
clouds, powerful as the thunder-bolt, holding an excellent
mace, heroic and embellished with excellent ornaments.
And beholding him along with four counsellors, the highly
intelligent Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, engaged in medita-
tion along with them. And meditating for a while, he spoke


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1145


unlo the monkeys headed by Hanuman the following
excellent words—-"Behold, there comes a R&kshasa, armed
with vatious weapons and followed by four demons to
slay us and there is not the least doubt about it.” And
hearing the words of Sugriva, the excellent monkeys, taking
up huge trecs and crags, bespoke him,—“Do thou order us,
O king, to destroy these vicious-souled demons. These
shall crush them to death, limited as is the tenure of their
life.” They addressing each other in this wise, Bibhisana
descended from the sky on the northern shore. And
beholding Sugriva and all others stationed near him, the highly
intelligent Bibhisana accosted them, at the highest pitch
of his voice, saying,—"Liveth there the R&kshasa, Ravana,
the lord of demons, and perpetrator of many iniquitous
deeds. I am his younger brother known as Bibhisana. By
him, slaying the vulture Yatayu, was carried away Sitd from
Janasthdna. She is imprisoned, brought under his sway,
poorly, and being well guarded by the Rakshasees. With
various well meaning words and reasonings I pointed out
unto him, the necessity of rendering back Sita unto Rama.
And Ravana, possessed by Death, paid no heed to my well-
meaning words, like unto one, lying on the brink of death,
neglecting the administration of medicine. Being reviled by
him and treated harshly like a menial, I have come to seek
Raghava’s shelter, renouncing my children and wives. Do ye
soon mention unto the high-souled Raghava, the refuge of
all creatures, that Bibhisana hath arrived.’’ Hearing those
words the quick-paced Sugriva, excited with irc, spake unto
Rama, before Lakshmana, saying,—''Forsooth hath an enemy
entered secretly in our midst and he shalt slay us getting
an opportunity like unto an owl killing the crows. O slayer of
foes, it now behoveth thee to be particularly careful about the
counsels, arrangement of soldiers, polity—civil and military
and spies of our own party as well as those of the enemies.
These Rakshasas are heroic; they assume shapes at will,


144


1346 RAMAYANA,


always lie in ambush and secretly bring about others’ ruia-—~
we should not therefore place confidence in them. This
must be the emissary of Ravana—the lord of R&kshasas.
Entering in our midst, he shall, in sooth, sow dissensions in
our camp, or he shall slay us when we are careless,
confiding in them. Avoiding the euemies, we should now
collect the forest-rangers our friends and servants. O lord,
this man is 2 Rakshasa by birth and the brother of our foe
and so is he our enemy, how can we trust him? R&vana’s
younger brother, known as Bibhishana, hath come here with
four Rikshasas, to seek thy shelter. O thou the foremost
of forgiving persons, I consider this Bibhishana, who hath
been despatched by Ravana, worthy of being slain. Being
impelled by his wicked intention and commissioned by
Ravana, this Rakshasa hath come here and secretly by virtue
of his illussive powers he shall slay thee, O innocent one,
when thou shalt place confidence in him.” Having thus
accosted Rama, skilled in the art of speech, that lord of the
army, Sugriva, well versed iu speech, became silent. And
hearing the words of Sugriva, the mighty Rama spake unto
the monkeys, near him, headed by Hanum&n, saying.—"'Ye
have all heard, the words well grounded in reason, the lord
of monkeys hath said, regarding Ravana’s younger brother.
Jt behoveth him, who desireth for perpetual wealth, and is
intelligent and capable of giving sound counsels, to advise
his friends in difficult matters.” Being thus addressed by
Rama (to minister unto him best counsels) all those monkeys,
intent upon encompassing his well-being, gave out their
respective opinions. ‘“O Raghava, there is nothing beyond
thy knowledge in the three worlds, It is only to show
thy respect towards us, O Rama, that thou dost accost
us in this wise. Thou art of truthful vows, heroic, pious, of
firm prowess, discriminating, recollecting and having implicit
confidence in thy friends. Let the intelligent and capable
counsellors deliver their reasonable opinions unto thee.” They


FUDDHARENDAM. 147


speaking thus unto Raghava, the intelligent monkey Angada,
spoke as follows for sounding the intention of Bibhishana,—
“We should always suspect him since he has come from the
side of our enemies, and should not, all on a sudden, place
confidence in him. The wicked-minded always move about
hiding their real self, and bring about peoples’ calamity,
taking advantage of their weak points. Aad great is the
disaster thereof. It is always proper to engage in actions,
considering what is right and what is wrong. Virtues should
always be gathered and vices abondoned. Do thou renounce
him unhesitatingly, if dost thou find in hima source of a
great calamity and do thou embrace him if dost thou find
him crowned with many virtues.” Thereupon followed
Sarava with words fraught with high import,—"O best of
men, do thou speedily despatch emissaries to sound
Bibhishana. If dost thou, sounding him well through the
instrumentality of sharp spies, fiad him friendly, do thou win
him over to thy side.” Thereupon the wise Jambhaban,
arriving at conclusions by virtue of his knowledge of Sastras,
began with words, void of defects,—‘“Surely doth Bibhishana
come from the vicious lord of Rikshasas, dead set against
us and hath arrived at such a bad place and in such a bad
hour. We should always fear him.” And thereupon followed
Maiada, conversant with what is right and wrong, after due
deliberation, with words pregnant with reason,—‘‘He is
Ravana’s younger brother, by name Bibhishana. Let the lord
of men ask him every thing at first in sweet words. Do
thou first ascertain, O foremost of men, with what intention
he hath come—evil or good—and then settle what course to
adopt.’ Thereupon spake Hanum4n, the foremost of the
counsellors and well versed in Sastras, in accents sweet,
glorious and fraught with a high value—Even Vrihaspati,
(the lord of speech) cannot excell thee, capable,* gifted with
the best of intellect and foremost of those skilled in the art


* Capable to ascertain the truth of all Sastras—T.


1148 RAMRIANA.


of speech, as (hou art. And what I know I speak, O king. I
do so, in the interest of Rama’s work and not impelled by my
skill in the art of speech, by the pride of being a counsellor,
by the vanity of being gifted with a high intellect or by the
desire of speaking for its own sake. What thy counsellors
have said for ascertaining the good or evil intention of
Bibhishana appeareth to me as most defective and productive
of no consequence whatever. It is impossible to sound him
without any command.* And even to command him now
for the same appears to me as improper. And as regards the
despatch of spies, anent what thou hast been advised by
thy ministers, I do not observe any utility. And what little [
have thought of,f have something to say (regarding Jambaban’s
proposal) that Bibhishana hath arrived at such a bad place and
in such an evil hour. He has really come to a very good place
and in avery good hour. And truly has he performed a be-
coming and sensible action by coming here after duly ascer-
taining that Ravana is a vicious wight and thou art a pious
person—he is full of vices—thou art gifted with many virtues—
he is tyrranical and thou art powerful. And what they have
said, O king, as regards sounding him through secret spies,
appears to me as one requiring great wisdom. Aq intelligent
man, when questioned by any suddenly, suspects many things.
And if the new-comer be a friend and has come here for his
own happiness, how greatly shall his mind be changed by
such a course? Besides by a sudden questioning it is
impossible to ascertain the intention of a foreigner. Do thou
therefore thyself accost him and determine, by his voice, his
secret motive. I did not however mark anything of his
wickedness while he spoke; rather | did observe signs of
gladness on his countenance. So I do not suspect him. The
wily can never come fearless and undisturbed. Nor were his
words cunning. SoIfdo not suspect him. It is mot very
easy to hide one’s real nature. It manifests itself by force.


Te command to relate for what he has come-—T-


VOPDHA KANDA. 1149


So this action of Bibbishana is not out of place or season.
When accomplished it shall redound to his own interest.
Considering well thy preparations for war and Ravana’s vain
conduct, hearing of Vali’s destruction and Sugriva’s
installation on the throne, he hath, impelled by his good
sense, come here, desirous of gaining the kingdom. Taking
these into account, it seems prudent to take him to our side.
© thou the foremost of the intelligent, 1 have spoken thus
considering him sincere. It now behoveth thee to perform
what thou thinkest proper.”


SECTION xvilt.


Hearne those words of the Wind-god’s son, the
irrepressible Rima, conversant with all the Sastras, replied,
with words expressing his own opinion—‘I have also thought
of some thing regarding Bibhishana. 1 wish you all,
interested in my well-being, to hear that. (Bibhishana) hath
come here as a friend so I cannot forsake him by any means.
And even if he has come with any evil intent it is not
culpable for the pious to afford him shelter.” Thereupon
hearing bis words and considering them well, Sugriva, the
lord of the monkeys, replied in more auspicious* words,—
“Whether this ranger of the night is sincere or wicked, he
should never be offered any shelter, since he hath forsaken
his brother in the midst of these calamities. What reason is
there to believe that he shall not renounce us in our
difficulty ?” Hearing the words of the lord of monkeys and
casting his looks towards them, K&kutstha, having truth
for his prowess, smiling a little, spake, unto Lakshmana,


_ * More reasonable words.—T.


TIs0 RAMATANA,


crowned with all the marks of piety, saying—“Without being
conversant with Sastras, and living in the company of old
men, none can speak such words as have been uttered by the
king of the monkeys. There appear unto me, however two
subtler reasons anent the difference between brothers,
amongst the kings—one is evident and another mundane.
There are two classes of foes—one consisting of the members
of the same line the other of the neighbours. And these
generally bring about our misfortune whenever any oppor-
tunity presents itself. And it is for this that he hath come
here. Those kinsmen, who do not think of one another's
mischief, generally long for their respective well-being. But
even such well-meaning relatives are feared by the kings.
And hear, I shall relate, what the Sasfras say regarding the
weak points thou hast mentioned as to the advisability of
taking the enemies to our side. We are not his kinsmen
and this Rikshasa hath come here with a view to gain the
kingdom. Even the Rakshasas are wise enough to ascertain
the proper course~~so we must take Bibhishana. If the
brothers are confident and satisfied with each other they
generally live together, or else they fear each other and
ultimately engage in a tumultuous war. And there hath
sprung up some difference with Rivana and therefore
Bibhishana hath come here. Nor are, O friend, all brothers
like Bharata, all sons like me unto their father, all friends
like thee.” Being thus addressed by Rima, the highly wise
Sugriva, along with Lakshmana, rose up and bending low his
head, said—“O thou the best of all forgiving porsons, this
night-ranger hath been despatched by Ravana. I therefore
think it better to kill him. Being impelled by his vicious
sense that Rakshasa hath come here to slay us, O innocent
one,when myself,thou and Lakshmana shall consider ourselves
secure. Therefore the large-armed Bibhisana, the younger
brother of the ruthless Ravana, deserves to be slain along
with his counsellors.” Having thus addressed (Rama) the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1152


foremost of Raghu's race, skilled in art of speech, Sugriva,
the lord of monkey host, equally versed in the art of speech,
became silent. And hearing the words of Sugriva, and
weighing them, Rima again addressed the foremost of
monkeys with more reasonable accents—“‘Wicked or other-
wise, whatever this night-ranger may be, he shall not be able
to do me the least mischief. Pisichas, D&savas,Yakshas or all
the Rakshasas on earth,—I can slay them all, if I like, with
the tips of my fingers, O thou the lord of monkeys. I have
heard of a pigeon adoring and entertaining with its own flesh,
an enemy who took its shelter. While a pigeon received so
friendly its enemy, the slayer of its mate, how can I then act
otherwise, O foremost of the monkeys? Do thou hear, I
shall relate, a sacred story, narrated by the great ascetic, the
truthful Kandu, son of the ascetic Kanya, O slayer of foes,
even a wicked-minded enemy, if he, with folded palms
anda poor heart, craveth for thy shelter, should not be
if an enemy, proud or terrified, seeketh shelter in
affright, he should be saved by a great man even at the risk
of his own life. One, who from fear, ignorance or wilfully
doth not protect him who seeketh his shelter, perpetrateth
a mighty iniquity, blamed of all, When a person is slain
before him whose shelter he hath taken he taketh away all
the virtues of his protector. So great is the sin in not
affording shelter unto those who seek for it; it standeth in
the way of going to heaven, bringeth in calumny and
destroyeth the strength and prowess. I shall therefore
follow the excellent words of Kandu—leading to piety, fame
and the attainment of the abode of the celestials. I always
declare ‘no fear’ unto all creatures, whenever any, approaching
me, says, ‘l am thine’ and seeketh my shelter. Even this is
my pious observance. O Sugriva, O foremost of monkeys, do
thou soon bring him here,whether he be Ravana or Bibhishana
and 1 shall declare unto him ‘no fear.’ Hearing the words
of Rama, Sugriva, the lords of those who go bounding,


1152 RAMAP ANA,


over-flowing with friendliness, bespake Kakutstha.— “What
wonder is there that thou wouldst speak these auspicious
words, O thou the foremost of kings, conversant with
morality, gifted with prowess and ever treading the pious
track as thou art. Truly doth my inner self regard Bibhisana
as devoid of any wicked intention. He has been well sounded
by signs and gestures. And let the greatly wise Bibhisana, O
Raghava, be placed on an equal footing with us and gain
our friendship.” Hearing the words of Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, the king of men (Rama) made instantly friends
with Bibhisana, like unto the conqueror of enemies’ cities
making friends with the king of birds.


SECTION xix.


a


Racuava thus declaring unto him ‘no fear’, Ravana’s
younger brother, the greatly wise Bibbisana, bending low his
head, cast his looks on the earth, And descending from the
welkin with his devoted attendants the virtuous-souled
Bibhisana, delighted, bowed unto Rama. And thereupon
touching his feet along with four Rakshasas, Bibhisana
addressed Rama,—with words, fraught with piety, befitting
the occasion and conducing to pleasure. “I am R&vana’s
younger brother and have been greatly insulted by him. I
have therefore come to seck thy shelter, the refuge of all
creatures, abandoning Lank& and renouncing my friends and
riches. My kingdom, life and happiness are all at thy
disposal.” Hearing his words Rama replied—-comfortirig
him with words and favouring him as if with looks. “Do
thou relate unto me truly the strength and weakness of the
enemies.” Being thus accosted by Rama of unwearied


YUDDHAKANDAM. £153


actions,the Raksha,began to describe the strength of Ravana.
“QO prince, by virtue of the buon acquired from the
Self-Create, the Ten-necked one is incapable of being slain
by ail creatures—Gandharbas, serpents, or birds. My elder
brother—-the one next to Ravana—is the heroic and highly
effulgent Kembhakarna—Sakta's equal in battle, Thou mayst
have heard, O Rama, his commander is Prahasta, by whom
was defeated Manibbadra on the mount Kailaga. (His son)
Indrajit, equipped with invincible armour, bow and finger-
protector made of the skin of iguana, becomes invisible in
fight. And, worshipping Fire and becoming invisible, that
graceful hero, O Raghava, slayeth the enemies in conflict,
having the contending parties vast and well arranged,
Mahodara, Mahap4rgwa and the Rakshasa, Akampana, are his
lieutenants, who equal the Lokapalas* in battle, His army
consists of ten thousand otis of Rakshasas, wearing shapes
at will, inbabiting the city of Lanka, and living on flesh and
gore, And with the Zotpélas and the celestials, they were
all defeated by the victous-souled Ravana.” Hoaring the
words of Bibhisana and weighing them in his mind, that
foremost of Raghu’s raco said—I understand well the
strength and prowess of Ravana, which thou hast depictel
truly, O Bibhisana, Do thou hear truly that I shall slay the
Ten-necked one.together with Prahasta and his sons, and
I shall make thee king. Whether he entereth the Rasdtalat
or the regions under the earth, or sceketh shelter of the
Grand-father of the ccelestials, he shall not be ablo to save
his life from me. Ido swear by my threo brethern that I
shatl enter the city of Ayodhya, alter slaying in battle
Ravana with his sons, kinsmen and friends.” Hearing these
words of Rama of unwearied action, the virtuous-souled


* Divinities who protect the regions, or the Sua, Moon, Fire, Wind, Indra,
Yama, Varuna and Kuvers—T.
+ The seven infernal region:
Asuras sn Dailyas.


eb the residence of the Nigay,
livisiens of Patily —T.


145


1354 RAMAYANA.


(Bibhieana), bowing hia head unto him, began—“I shall lend
thee my might in slaying the Rakshasas and devastating the
city of Lanka, and shall be in the midst of Ravana's army.”
Thereupon, embracing Bibhisana, who spoke thus, Rama,
delighted, said unto Lakshmana,—"O my brother, do thou
bring water from the ocean. Sprinkling the greatly wise
Bibhisana, I shall make him at once the king of the
Rakshasas, QO conferer of honor; for I am greatly
pleased with him.” Being thus addressed, Saumitri, at the
command of the king, annointed Bibhisana and made him
the king of the Rakshasas in the presence of the monkey-
host, Beholding R&ima’s kindness (towards Bibbiaana), the
monkeys eulogized the high-souled one, exclaiming “Excel-
Jent! Excellent ’? Thereupon, Hanuman and Sugriva
addressed Bibhisana, saying, ‘Do thou tell us how we shall
cross over the main—the abode of Varuna, along with the
host of the highly powerful monkeys. Do thou inform us
of the means by which we may cross over, along with our
army, the lord of rivers and streams—the abode of Varuna,”
Being thus addressed, the virtuous-souled Bibhisana replied,
—"It behovoth the king, Raghava, lo seek refuge from the
Ocean, This measureless deep was dug out by (the king)
Sagara And the great Ocean shall surely help Rima
belonging to Sagara’s race.” Being thus accosted by the
wise Rakshasa, Bibhishana, Sugriva reached where Rama
with Lakshmana was. Thereupon, the broad-necked Sugriva
began to explain the well-meaning words of Bibhishana,
requesting Rama to seek the shelter of the Ocean. And
those words pleased R&ma, pious by nature, And the
highly effulgent (hero) requested, smiling, the active Laksh-
mana and the monkey-chief Sugriva to collect necessariesfor
his adoration. “O Lakshmana, this counsel of Bibhisana
appearcth to me as most sound. Sugriva is always greatly


™ Sagara was a sovereign of Ayodhy&, belonging to the same family with
Réma—T,


YUDDIUARANDAM. 1855


wise,and thou art greatly proficient in counsel. Do ye, hold-
ing a conference, intimate to me what you think becoming.”
Thus addressed, those two heroes—Lakshmana and
Sugriva, spoke respectfully the following words fraught
with propriety,—“Why shall not the well-meaning words of
Bibhisana expressed now, please us, O Raghava, O thou
best of men? Without constructing a bridge over the deep,
the terrible abode of Varuna, even the celestials and their
lord (Indra) cannot get at the city of Lank&. Do thou
act on the genuine counsel of the heroic Bibhisana, and
without losing time, do thou engage the Ocean for this work,
so that we may with our army proceed to the city of
Ravana.” Being thus addressed Rama reached the shore of
the lord of rivers and streams, covered with Kuga, like unto
fire getting into the sacrificial dais.


SECTION xx.


oo


Terzvron the greatly powerful Rakshasa, by name
Sdrdula, beheld the army of Sugriva arranged on the shore
of the ocean. And, beholding the army all busy, the emissary
of the vicious-souled Rakshasa—Ravana, entered the city
of Lank& and, approaching his lord, said,—'The army of
monkeys and bears hath approached Lanka. It is immeasur-
ably deep as the ocean, And those two sons of the king
Dagaratha—the brothers Rima and Lakshmana, gifted with
great beauty, coming to rescue Sits, have stationed them-
selves on the shore of the ocean, O thou of great efful-
gence. The army of Rama extends over the sky and ter
yoyanas. \ave came, O great king, to acquaint thee with the
real truth. And, knowing everything, it behoveth thy


1156 RAMAL4NA.


emissaries, O hing, to settle whether to render back Sita,
to adopt measures of conciliation, or to sow dissensions
in the enemy’s camp,” Hearing the words of Sérdula,
Ravana, the lord of R&kshasas, being anxious to ascertain
his duty, addressed a Rakshasa by name Suka, the most
sensible of his counsellors, with tho following pregnant words,
—*Do thou go and communicate unto king Sugriva my
behest, in becoming and excellent accents, ‘Thou art born
of a great family and art the mighty son of the king of bears.
Thave no dissension with thee. In fact I consider thee as
my brother, O king of monkeys. Though I have stolen the
spouse of the bigh-souled prince (Rama), yet what is that to
thee, O Sugriva? Do thou return to Kishkindha, The
monkeys shall not by any means be able to attack the city
of Lanka. Even the cclestials and Gandbarbas could not—
what of these men and monkeys?’ And being thus
commissioned by the lord of Rakshasas, that night-ranger
assumed the shape of a bird and, bounding, speedily reached
the sky. And, proceeding far over the deep and stationing
himself at the welkin, he spoke unto Sugriva all the words
with which he was addressed by the vicious-souled R&vana,
Hearing him speak thus, the monkeys leaped up quickly and
cached there with a view to chop off his wings or to slay him
with their Glenched fists On being
these monkeys, that night-ranger was brought down speedily
from the sky to the earth, And being assailed by the monkeys,
Suka said,—°O Kakutstha, it doth not be hove (people) to slay
an emissary. Do thou therefore prevent the monkeys He who
passing by his master’s Libcot, Siveth out bis own intention,


scized vehemently by all


is not faithful; and he thercfore deserveth to. be slain.”
Hearing the pitcous accents of Suka, Rama spake unto the
moukeys, who were about to hill him, saying, “Do not kill
him.’ And again stationing himself on the welkin, that
night-ranger said—"O Sugriva, O thou gifted withigreat
vocrgy. O thou of great prowess, what shall I speak unto


YUDDHAKANDAM. | 1157


Ravana, dreaded by all people ?” Being thus addressed, that
mighty king of monkéys,the bull among them, of unwearied
energy, spake unto that emissary—the night-ranger, Suka,
saying—"O Ravana, thou art not my friend or an object of
pity. Thou art not my benefactor, nor art liked by me. Thou
art R&ma’s enemy,and thou dost therefore deserve to be slain
by him like Vali along with thy friends and relatives, I shall
therefore slay thee, O king of night-rangers, together with
thy sons, friends and relatives. And I shall have the whole
city of Lankfi reduced to ashes by my mighty force. Thou
shalt not be able to escape Raghava, O Ravana, O thou who
hast lost thy sense,even if thou art protected by the celestials.
And thou shalt with thy brother be slain by Rama, even if
thou dost fly into the sky, entor into the regions under the
earth, or seek shelter of Mahadeva. I do not behold any in
these three worlds—Pisacha, Rakshasa, Gandharba, or Asura,
who can protect thee. Thou hast slain the monarch of vul-
tures,who had grown decrepit through age.* Thou hast carried
off the large-eyed Sita from the vicinity of Rama and the
neighbourhood of Lakshmana ; but, having captured her, thou
understandest not (thy native strength). Nor dost thou
understand that foremost of Raghus, high-souled, possessed
of great strength, and incapable of being repressed even by
the celestials,who shall take thy life.” Then spake that
best of monkeys, Angada, son of Vali,—“O highly wise one,
this is no emissary. This one clearly appeareth to me asa spy.
He hath come to form an estimate of thy entire army. Take
him. Let him not go (back) to Lank&. This is indeed what
I would.” Thereat, commanded by the king, the monkeys,
springing up, seized (Suka) and bound him, as he burst out
bewailing like one forlorn. On being sorely handled by the


* The commentator has a queer and characteristic note on Farderiddka—
decrepit through age. One that is old, may stave off decrepitude through some


drug, while a youthful person may come by the same in consequence of some
curse —T.


4158 ‘ KAMATANA.


relentless monkeys, Suka cried unto the high-souled R&ma,
son of Dagaratha,—“They by main force sever my wings,
and they pierce my eyes. If I lose my life, may alt the evil
deeds that I have committed between the night when I was
bora and the night when I shall dies be thine!” Hearing
this pitiful cry, Rama prevented (the monkeys) ; and he said
unto them,—"Let go this envoy, who hath come here.”’


SECTION XX,
er


Tuer on the shore of the sea, Raghava, spreading
darbha, with his hands joined towards the great deep, laid
him down, with his face to the East. And that slayer of foes
(lay down), making his pillow his arm resembling the shining
form of a serpent; always dight with golden ornaments ;
full many a time pressed with the palms of beauteous
damsels,* decked with jewelled golden Keyuras and superb
ornaments studded with pearls; smeared from above with
sandal and agurz ; (his arm) which formerly had been graced
in bed with the head of Sita ; like unto the body of Takshaka
under the waters of the Ganga; resembling a yoke; in
battle increasing the sorrow of foes and enhancing for long
the delight of friends ;—his left arm having its skin
destroyed by the strokes of the bow-string; which was the
refuge of the entire earth ;—his right arm resembling a
mighty bludgeon,—the donor of thousands of kine,—making
this great arm his pillow (he laid him down). ‘To-day either
1 shall die, or shall the Ocean.”—Having thus formed his


* © The commentator appropriately remarks: As Réma eas wedded to a
single wife, these damscls must mean nurses attending on him —T.


YUUDHAKANDAM. 1159


resolution in respect of the great deep, Rima, restraining
his speech, with a concentrated mind lay down there
agreeably to rule. And as Rama slept on the earth on Kuga
spread over, without ever swerving from the rule, three
nights passed away. And while spending three nights,
Rama, learned in polity and attached to virtue, prayed unto
that lord of streams—the Ocean. Yet the wicked Ocean,
albeit adored according to his deserts by Rima with his
mind concentrated, did not show himself. Thereat Rima
grew enraged and had the corners of his eyes crimsoned ;
and he spake unto Lakshmana of auspicious marks, saying,—
“Behold the hauteur of the Oceau in not presenting himself
before me. Calmness,forbearance, candour, and soft speech—
these virtues of the good are by the insolent taken for the
effects of incompetency. The person that is self-laudatory,
wicked, and badly-bold, publisheth his owa praise,and meteth
out chastisement everywhere,t is honored in the world. By
moderation one cannot attain celebrity, by moderation one
cannot attain fame—~and, O Lakshmana, in this world by
moderation one cannot attain victory on ‘the edge of battle.'f
See, O' Sumitra’s son, the abode of Makaras, with his waters
obstructed all around with Makaras destroyed by my shaits.
And, O Lakshmana, see the bodies here of serpents, and the
huge bodies of mighty fishes, and the trunks of elephants,—
torn by my arrows. And to-day in terrible battle will I
dry up the Ocean with conchs and oysters, and fishes and
Makaras. This abode of Makaras taketh me, who is forbearing,
to be incompetent. Fie on forbearance towards such as he |
Jn consequence of my moderation, Ocean showeth not his
own form. O Saumitri, bring thou my bow, my arrows
resembling venomous snakes. I will dry up the Ocean, and


* ‘The word, however, is naram (ac,), man.—T.
t ie. indiscriminately—T.
$ Rana murddhani,—'The perilous edge of battle when it raged.’
Par, Lost., Bk, I.


1160 RAMAYANA.”


the monkeys shall go over on foot. And, being angered,
to-day, albeit incapable of being agitated, will [ agitate the
deep. And by means of my shafts will I make Varuna’s
abode, surging with a thousand billows and having kis
dignity maintained hy his -shores,—overleap his continents.
And I will agitate the deep harbouring numbers of mighty
Danavas.” Having spoken thus, Rama, equipped with his
bow, with his eyes dilated in wrath, became exceedingly
irrepressible, like unto the flaming fire at the final dissolution.
And straining his dreadful bow, making the earth shake,
tremulously, he let fly fierce shafts like him of an hundred
sacrifices hurling his thunder-bolt. Thereat, flaming up, those
vehement choice shafts surcharged with energy, enter into
the waters of the sea, with its serpents afflicted with fear.
And then great and exceedingly dreadful was the motion of
the sea, with fishes and Makaras, and with the roar of the
winds (blowing there). And on a sudden the mighty deep
was heaving with mighty surges, with conchs scattered about,
and a smoke (enveloped) the ocean ; and the billows became
visible on all sides. And the serpents were distressed, with
their faces flaming and their eyes aglow; as well as the
Danavas of terrific energy, and the dwellers of the nether
spheres. And billows of the sovran Ocean, resembling
Vindhya or Mandara, containing crocodiles aud Makaras,
sprang up by thousands. And Varuna’s abode had its surges
whirling, its serpents and Rakshasas seized with affright, and
its ferocious aquatic animals borne all around ; and it sent
forth sounds. Then Sumitra’s son, springing up, said unto
R&ghava of fiery vehemence,as he sighed and kept stretching
his matchless bow.—‘This must not be.” And he took away
his (&4ma’s) bow. “Without doing this unto the Ocean, thou,
supreme of heroes, mayst have thy work accomplished.
Personages like thee do not come under the influence of
passion. Do thou deliberately look about for some worthy
means (for compassing thy end.’ Then remaining invisible


PUDDHAKANDAM. 16x


in the sky, Brabmarshis and Surarshis,* exclaiming,—"Well-
a-day !” and "Do’at,” in loud accents ejaculated,—(Qh ! and
alas !)


SECTION xx.


"Ten the foremost of Raghus addressed Ocean in stern
words, saying, —'To-day will I dry up the Ocean along with
the nether regions. And, O Ocean, thy waters being burnt
up by my shafts, and thou being dried up, with thy (aquatic)
animals slaughtered, a mighty volume of dust shall arise
(from thy bed). And, O Ocean, in consequence of the arrowy
shower discharged from my bow, the monkeys shall go over
tothe further shore on foot. Having attained dimensions
in consequence of access of waters, thou knowest not my
manliness or my prowess. But, O abode of Danavas, grief
shalt thou reap at my hands.” Then fixing an arrow resembl-
ing the rod of Brahma with a Brahma Mantra, on the best
of bows, that exceedingly strong on drew it. And as Raghava
suddenly stretched his bow, heaven and earth seemed to be
riven, and the mountains trembled. And darkness covered
the world, and the cardinal points became invisible. And
at once the watery expanses and rivers were agitated. And
the stars appeared simultaneously with the Sun and Moon.t
And the sky was illumined with the rays of the Sun, and yet
it was overspread with darkness; and it burned with an
hundred meteors. And thunder-bolts sending forth sounds
surpassing all others, dropped from the firmament. And the

* Celestial saints.

+ The phenomenon, remarks the commentator, was owing to the heavenly
bodies obstructing cach other's orbit —T.

146


4362 RAARY ANA,


winds began to blow violently; breaking down trees and
momentarily scattering clouds ; damaging mountain-tops and
shattering summits. And then the dread and mighty thunders
possessing impetuous speed and emitting tremendous roars,
coming together, produced lightning flashes. And those
creatures that could be seen, uttered sounds resembling the
thunder; and those that were invisible gave forth frightful
eries. And overwhelmed with fright, and quaking (for fear),
the creatures began to measure their lengths,—and they were
sore affiicted, and bereft of motion through terror, And then
the mighty deep with its animals, and with its waters and
waves, and with its serpents and R&kshasas, was suddenly
wrought up with a violent motion. And albeit it was not the
occasion of the universal dissolution, the Ocean passed
beyond his shores for a full hundred yoyanas. And seeing
the elated Ocean—lord of streams and rivers—thus overpass
his bounds, that destroyer of enemies, Ragho's son, RAma,
was not moved.* Theo from forth the mid-sea arose Ocean
himself, even as the maker of day riseth from the mighty
ascending-hill, Meru. And accompanied by Pannagast of
flaming faces, the Ocean showed himself, appearing like cool
Japises, adorned with golden ornaments,—wearing a wreath
of gems and a jewelled vesture, with his eyes resembling
lotus-leaves, bearing on his head a noble garland containing
all flowers ; decked with ornaments of polished gold; as well
with excellent ornaments of gems originating in himself, like
the mountain Himavan embellished with metals (sprung in
himself),—(the Ocean arose) with wave on wave whirling
around, and rife with winds blowing among clouds,—surround-
‘ad by streams, Ganga, Sindhu (and others). And approaching
the arrow-showering Rama, and greeting him fair, Ocean
spoke unto him with joined hands,—“O R&ghava, earth, air,


* Nétichakr#ma may also mean, (Réma) did not discharge any more
arrows. —T.
t Semi:


FUDDHARANDAN. 1163


sky, water and light,—these, QO mild one, retaining theic
eternal course, maintain their (respective) natures. Mine
also is that nature whereby I am fathomless and incapable of
being crossed. The reverse of this is the having a bottom.
And for this reason I speak to thee (concerning the means).
QO king’s son, not from desire, or covetuousness, or fear, or
anger, can I anywise deprive my waters abounding in
alligators of their (perpetual) motion. I will tell thee how
thou wilt pass (over me); and I will bear it. And no
ferocious aquatic animals shall do wrong so long as thy forces
have not crossed. And, O Rama, [ wilt make as it were firm
land for the crossing over of the monkeys.” Then Rama
said,—'O Varuna’s abode, listen to me! This arrow (of mine)
must accemplish the end (intended), Where shall I let it
fight?” Hearing Rama's speech, and looking at the mighty
arrow, that exceedingly energetic one, the great Deep,
addressed Raghava, saying,—‘There is a certain spot of mine
in the North, which is more sacred (than the rest). It is
famed as Drumakulya, even as thou art famed in the world.
There are there many robbers of ferocious forms and actions,
wicked wights, headed by cow-herds,—who drink of my
water. These persons of unrighteous acts touch me, and
T cannot bear this sin. O R&ma, do thou at that place render
this best of arrows successful.’ Hearing the words of the
high-souled Ocean, (Rima) immediately after,* let fly that
flaming shaft. And the place where the arrow resembling
the thunder-bolt and va/ra in splendour, alighted, hath been
celebrated on earth as Maruk&nt&ra. And hurt with the
dart, the Earth emitted roars; and in consequence of this,
water began to gush out at the mouth of the wound from the
subterranean regions. And this then became well-known
as Vrana; and there are seen the waters of the Ocean spring
up. And there arose a terrific report of riving. And owing


* Sdgaradargandt—may also mean, agreeably to the Ocean's instruc
tion —T.


1164 RAMArANA.


to this,* as well as the incident of the arrow, the water that
existed in the tanks, was dried up. Having dried up
Marukiintra famous throughout the three regions, as well as
the reservoirs of water, Rama the son of Dacaratha, learned

and of god-like prowess, conferred a boon on the desert,
saying,-“This place shall be filled with food nourishing
beasts ; and ailments shall be rare here. And the fruits and.
roots shall be replete with relish ; and it shall abound in oil
and overfiow with milk ; and it shall contain various odorous
drugs.” Thus did the desert come to possess these attributes ;
and from Rima’s bestowal of a boon, it attained a pleasant
aspect. On that place being burnt up, that lord of streams,
the Ocean, thus spake unto Raghava, versed in every branch
of learning,—"O mild one, this one is named Nala, son unto
Vigwakarm’. He hath received a boon from his sire.
Viswakarm4’s son is well pleased with thee. Let this
monkey, surcharged with exhuberant spirits, build a bridge
over me. I will hold that up. This one is as his sire.’
Having delivered himself thus, Ocean disappeared. Then
that foremost of monkeys, Nala, arising, spoke unto the
mighty Rima,—“Resorting to my sire’s skill, 1 will build a
bridge over the spacious abode of Makaras. The mighty
Ocean hath spoken justly, In respect of the ingrate even
chastisement is supreme in this world,—this is my conviction.
Down with forbearance, or moderation, or gift ! This dreadful
Ocean, this mighty deep, expecting to see a bridge (thrown
over him), hath granted depth unto Raghava.—(Formerly) in
Mandara, Vigwakarma had conferred a boon on my mother :
*O exalted one, thy son shall be like me.’ I ama son of his,
sprung from his loins, and I am like unto Vigwakarm&. Not
having been asked by thee, I had not unfolded my qualifica-.
tions. I also am capable of constructing a bridge over
Varuna’s abode. Therefore this very day let the foremost
monkeys construct the bridge.” Then directed by Rama, the


* ie. the sound.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1163


principal monkeys with alacrity entered the mighty forest in
hundreds and thousands. And themselves resembling
mountains, the foremost of the monkeys began to break down
trees and draw them towards the Ocean. And the monkeys
filled the Ocean with sé/as, and agwakarnas, dhavas, bamboos
and kutajas, arjunas, palms, tilakas, tinigas, billakas,
saptaparnas, and blossoming Aarnikdras, mangoes, and
agoka trees. And those monkeys—the foremost of their
species—began to gather the trees, some with their roots,
and some without them,—carrying them like Indra’s ensign.
And those huge-bodied monkeys possessed of prodigious
strength, procured palms and pomegranates, cocoanuts and
Vibhitakas, Kariras, Vakulas, and Nimbas,—-as well as rocks.
measuring elephants’ dimensions ; and uprooting crags, they
carried them by means of machines. And on rocks being
plunged into the waters, the latter, suddenly swelling up,
mounted to the welkin, and again subsided.—-And (the trees)
dropping (into the deep), vexed it all around. And some
took lines (for insuring straightness unto the bridge). And
at the middle of the lord of rivers and streams, Nala made a
grand bridge measuring an hundred yoyanas. And then he
set about’ constructing the bridge with the assistance of
monkeys of dreadful deeds. And some took the measuring
rod, and others bore (timber to the sea). And by help of
hundreds of monkeys following R&ma’s mandate, hued like
clouds or mountains, (they) constructed a bridge with grass,
and wood, And the monkeys made the bridge of trees with
blossoming tops. And (monkeys) resembling Danavas were
seen rushing all around with rocks resembling hills, and
mountain-summits. And tremendous was the tumult that
arose of crags thrown and rocks toppled down into the
mighty deep. And on the first day the elephant-lika monkeys
full of spirits and exerting themselves vigorously, finished
fourteen yoyanas. And the exceedingly strong and huge-
bodied monkeys on the second day speedily disposed of


1166 KAMAYANA.


twenty yoyanas. And on the third day the buge-bodied active
monkeys did one and twenty yoyanas on the sea. And on
the fourth day the exceedingly impetuous monkeys, bestirring
themselves vigorously, did two and twenty yoyanas. Andon
the fifth day the fast-speeding monkeys accomplished three
and twenty yoyanas reaching unto- the fair shore. And
resembling his sire, that best of monkeys, the lusty and
graceful offspring of Vicwakarm&, (thus) constructed the
bridge over the sea. And that bridge built by force over the
abode of makaras, looked graceful and splendid like the
Milky way in the firmament. And then the deities and
Gandharbas, the Siddhas and the prime sainls, appearing
in the heavens, stood there, eager to behold this wonder.
And the gods and Gandharbas saw that bridge of Nala,
difficult of being made, having an area of ten yoyanas and
measuring an hundred in length, And the monkeys, leaping
and bounding and roaring, as well as all creatures, beheld
that building of the bridge on the ocean, inconceivable, and
marvellous, displaying skill past thought and capable of
making one’s hair stand on end. And those thousands of
Kotis of exceeding vigor, having constructed the bridge over
the ocean, went over to the other shore of the mighty main.
And spacious, skillfully constructed, graceful, well-paved and
nicely finished, the great bridge appeared like the line where
the hair hath been parted on the Ocean’s head. Then on the
other shore of the ocean, Bibbishana,with the view of opposing
foes (that might advance), stationed himself mace in hand,
along with some councilors. Then Sugriva spoke unto Rima
having truth for his prowess,—Do thou get upon Hanumfn,
and let Laskhmana get upon Angada. © hero, vast is this
Ocean—abode of Makaras. These monkeys, rangers of the
sky, shall hold you up both.” Thereat the graceful and
righteous R&ma along with Lakshmana, equipped with his
bow, set out in the van of the army in company with Sugriva.
And some monkeys proceeded along the middle, and some


FUDDHAKAN DAM. 1167


plunged into the deep, and some went by the road. And
some coursed through the air, bounding up bird-like. And
that dreadful array of monkeys crossing over, with its
mighty uproar drowned the dreadful roar of the deep, which
had been arising. On the monkey-host having crossed, by
the bridge of Nala, the king stationed it on the shore
abounding in fruits, roots and water. Beholding that work
of Kayhava incapable of being performed,the deities together
with the Siddhas and ChSranas, and the Maharshis, suddenly
presenting themselves before Rima, sprinkled him one by
one with sacred water, and said,—‘‘Mayst thou be victorious,
© human-divine one! Rule thou the Earth eternally t”
Thus in various auspicious words, did they pay homage unto
that one honored by the Brahmanas, Rama.


SECTION XxIIh


Have seen omens, that one, Lakshmana’s elder brother,
conversant with them, embracing the son of Sumitra, said
these words,—"O Lakshmana, occupying (this tract) of cool
waters and woods affluent with fruits, will we, dividing and
arranging our forces, stay here. Mighty is the fear that
1 see at hand,—boding destruction to people and the
slaughter of the foremost heroes of bears, monkeys and
Rakshasas, The wind bloweth darkly, and the Earth
shaketh, The tops of the mountains tremble, and trees
topple down. And the clouds are ashen and roistering,
and roar roughly. And lowering, they shower portentous
drops of blood. And the twilight is terrible and looketh
like the red sandal. And a fiery circle droppeth from the
flaming sun, And on all sides birds and beasts, distressed,


1168 RAMIPANA.


uttering woe-begone notes, and grim-visaged, set up cries
against the sun, arousing great fear. And the Moon,
although not appearing* in the night, burneth, and with
dark and red rays riseth, as if it intended to exterminate
people, And the aspect (of the sun) is: slight, rough, and
good;t and, O Lakshmana, a blue mark is visible on the
unclouded Sun, And the stars seem erased by a mighty
volume of dust. O Lakshmana, behold this sight disastrous
to people like unto the universal dissolution. Crows, and
hawks, and the inferior vultures, wheel all round. And
jackals are sending inauspicious yells, exciting great fear,
The earth shall be covered with darts and javelins, and
swords discharged by monkeys and Rakshasas, and be
turned into mire with flesh and gore. Surrounded by all the
monkeys, will we, using speed, this very day rapidly enter
into the city ruled by Ravana, incapable of being subdued.”
Having said this, that subduer in conflict, that lord, that
enchanter of men, Rima,t equipped with his bow, proceeded
in the direction of Lanka. And all the principal monkeys—=
Sugriva with Bibhishana—went on, setting up roars, for the
destruction of foes, who were determined to battle with them,
And consequently Raghu's son was well pleased with the
fortitude and exertions of the powerful monkeys, for bringing
about what was dear unto Raghava,

* The moon, it seems, doth appear, but does not look out clearly.—T,

t Pracasta—l do not see the propriety of this epithet in this connection.
This may be @ mistake —T.

$ The word Réma occurs twice, one being the cognomen of the solar hero,
The other means, the enchanter of men—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1169


SECTION XXIV.


ee


Ano with the presence of the king* that assembly of
heroes looked beautiful, as doth the autumnal night, garnished
with beauteous stars, with the Moon. And oppressed with
the bursting energy of the host resembling the ocean, the
Earth trembled. And then the rangers of the forest heard
a hubbub in Lanka, as well as the sounds of trumpets and
Mridangas, mighty and capable of making people's down
stand on end. And at those sounds, the leaders of monkey-
bands were delighted beyond measure, and, resenting the
same, set up cries louder than those sounds. And the
Rakshasas also heard the roars of the monkeys, resembling
the rumbling of haughty clouds in the sky. Beholding Lanka
with variegated standards, and streamers, Dagaratha's son
wentt to Sita with an aggrieved heart. ‘Here that one
having eyes resembling those of a young deer, is confined
by Ravana, like unto Rohini overpowered by the red-bodied
planet."t And, sighing hot and long, and looking at
Lakshinana, that hero spoke words fraught with his good
at that time —“Behold, O Lakshmana, Lank& towering up
as if piercing the heavens; and, built by Vigwakarm& on the
brow of the mountain, she seems to have been made by the
Mind. Constructed in time past with edifices thronging her,
Lank& looks like the all-encasing air, covered with palé
clouds. Lanka is embellished with groves resembling
Chitraratha, fair, and eloquent with the notes of various
birds, and fraught with fruits and° flowers. Behold the
intoxicated birds, and the black bees blending (with the
blossoms). And the blessed breeze swayeth the trees vocal


* Rama—T.
t fe. mental;
$ Angaraka,—T.


T,


147


1170: RAMAYANA,


with the coels.” Having divided his forces there agreeably
to the directions of the scriptures, Dagaratha’s son, Rama,
thus spoke unto Lakshmana. And he ordered that monkey
army, saying,—“Taking his own forces, let the puissant and
invincible Angada along with Nila, station himself in the
centre of the forces. And let the monkey, named Rishabha,
surrounded by numbers of monkeys, post himself at the
right of the monkey-army. And let the active and
irrepressible Gandhamadana, resembling an elephant fragrant
with the temporal exudation, stay, occupying the left of the
forces. I myself along with Lakshmana, shall heedfully stay
in the fore-front. And the monkeys, Jamvabin, Sushena
and Vagadargi, the three high-souled, foremost bears,#+—
shall protect the interior (of the forces). And as the Sun,
surcharged with energy, protects the hind half of the globe,
let the monkey-monarch protect the rear of the monkey-
army.” Andthat army being skilfully divided into parts
and protected by great monkeys, resembled the welkin
covered with clouds. Then, taking up mountain-peaks and
mighty trees, the monkeys began to proceed towards Lank&,
burning to crush Lanka in battle. “We shall demolish Lank&
by burling mountain-peaks, or with our clenched fists,” Thus
did the foremost of monkeys think in their minds. Then the
exceedingly energetic Rama addressed Sugriva, saying,—
“Our forces have been rightly marshalled,—let gu (now) Suka.”
Hearing Rama’s words, the lord of monkeys possessed of
great strength, liberated the envoy, Suka, at the command
of Rama. Liberated at the word of Rama, Suka, who had
been sore tormented by the monkeys, oppressed with
exceeding great fear, went to the lord of Rakshasas. There
at, R&vana, laoghing, said unto Suka,—‘Are thy wing:
fetteredp And thou seemst as if thy wings had beet


© ‘The epithet ‘bears’ coming after ‘monkeys’ may look incongruous ; but,
fancy, ‘monkeys’ is used in the general sense of being connected with th
monkey-host,—-T. 7


PUDDHARANDAM. tye


severed, Why? Didst thou come under the control of the
volatile (monkeys) ?” Thereat, exercised with fear, Suka,
commanded by the monarch, answered the lord of Rakshasas
in this excellent speech, saying—‘Repairing to the northern
shore of the sea, I, pacifying (the monkeys) with mild speech,
communicated thy tidings clearly (unto Sugriva). Thereat,
as soon as they saw me, the monkeys flying into a wrath,
captured me, and attempted to clip my wings and slay me
with their clenched fists. They are insuseptible of being
‘spoken to. No doubt whatever can exist that, O lord of
R&kshasas, the monkeys are by nature wrathful and fierce.
The same R&ma that hath slain Viradha and Kavandha and
Khara, hath arrived (here) along with Sugriva, searching
for the whereabouts of Sita. Having thrown a bridge across
the brine and crossed the salt sea, Raghava, equipped with
his bow, stayeth here, setting the Rakshas at naught. And
the hosts consisting of thousands of bears and monkeys,
resembling hills and clouds, envelope the Earth. And peace
there can be none between the forces of the Rakshasas
and the hosts of the sovereign of monkeys, like unto the
deities and the Danavas. And they advance before the wall,
Speedily do one of these things—make over Sita without
delay, or give (him) battle.” Hearing Suka’s speech, Ravana
with his eyes reddened in wrath, spoke, as if burning (Suka)
with them,—"Even if gods, and Gandharbas, and Danavas
should array themselves against me, I will not from fear of
all creatures, render (back) Sité. When shall my shafts
pursue Ra&ghava, like maddened Bhramaras making towards
blossomy trees in spring? When by means of flaming shafts
shot from my bow shall 1 burn (Raghava) with his body
bathed in blood, even as a meteor (burneth) an elephant ’
And when, surrounded by 2 mighty host, shall [ confound his
ranks, even as the Sun arising, (vanquisheth) the light of the
stellar spheres? My impetuosity like the Ocean's, my
strength like the Wind's, Dacarathi doth not know,—and


aay2 RAMAIANA,


therefore it is that he desireth to figitt with me. Rama hath
not seen my shafts resting in the quiver, resembling venomous
serpents,—and therefore it is that he secketh to fight with
me. R&ghava hath not in conflict formerly known my bow
representing my Vin& sounded with my shafts; having
tremendous sounds proceeding from the strings; dreadful;
with the cries of distressed people for its mighty strains of
music; and resonant with the reports of N&rachas and palms.
And, haying bathed in the great field of battle representing
the river of hostile forces, I will in the encounter strike
(this Vina). Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava, nor Varuna
himself, can (cope) with me in battle; nor can Yama, or
Vaicravana’s self vanquish me in mighty conflict with the fire
of arrows.”


SECTION xxv.


er


Os Dagaratha’s son, Rama, having crossed the Ocean
with his forces, the graceful Ravana addressed his two
counsellors, Suka and S&rana, saying,—“The crossing the
entire ocean incapable of being crossed, by the monkey-
forces, and the building over the sea of the bridge by Rama—
all this had never happened before. The construction of <
bridge over the ocean cannot at all command credence. But
(however it be),I must enumerate the monkey-hosts. Entering
the monkey-army unobserved, it behoveth you to ascertait
the magnitude thereof, its strength, who are the foremos
monkeys, who are the councilors assembled there of Rama
and who of Sugriva, whe range at the head, who among the
monkeys are heroic; how they have constructed the bridge
over the water of the ocean ; how the high-souled monkeys


FUDDHARANDAM, 1173


stay there ; R&ma’s, as well as Lakshmana's purpose, prowess
and the arms (they fight with). And who is the commander of
those magnanimous monkeys ? Having learnt all this truly, ye
ought to return speedily.” Being thus commissioned, these
heroes, the Rakshasas, Suka and Sarana, assuming monkey-
shapes, entered into the hosts of monkeys. But Suka and
Sfrana could not number that army of monkeys, incompre-
hensible and capable of making people's hair stand on end.
‘The forces were on mountain-tops, by fountains and in caves.
And those rangers of the night beheld those forces, some
having already crossed, and some crossing, and some intent
on doing so; and some having sat down and some sitting—
that mighty army sending terrific roars,~that ocean of hosts
incapable of being disturbed. As they remained thus
disguised, they were discovered by Vibhishana. Thereat,
taking them captive, he unfolded (the fact) unto Raima,
saying,—"These are the counsellors of the lord of Rakshasas
-Suka and Sirana, © captor of hostile capitals, they have
come as spies from Lank&.” Seeing Rama,they were greatly
afflicted, and, despairing of their lives and exercised with
fear, with joined hands, said,—-"O placid one, cammanded by
R&vana, we have come here, O son of Raghu, for the purpose
of gathering information concerning this army.” Hearing
their speech, Rama—son unto Dagaratha—~ever engaged in
the welfare of all beings, laughing, remarked,—“If you have
heedfully noted this entire array, or if you have done what ye
had been commanded to do, return in peace. If aught
remaineth unseen, do ye see it anew. Or Vibhishana will
again fully show it unto you. Having been taken, ye need
not fear on the score of your lives. Even if envoys happen
to be taken who are equipped with weapons, they should not
be slain. And albeit these night-rangers have come as ‘spies
in disguise, with the view of creating division among their
foes, yet, O Vibhishana, let them off. Entering the extensive
Lanka, ye should say unto the king—younger brother unto


wes RAMAYANA.


the Dispenser of riches—the words which I ulter,—That
force relying on which thou hast carried away my Sita, do
thou as thou wishest, along with thy forces and friends,
display the same. On the morning of the morrow behold the
city of Lanka with her wall and gates, as well as the hosts of
Rakshasas, destroyed by me with my shafts. And as
V4sava equipped with the thunder-bolt hurleth the same
amidst the Danavas, will 1, O Ravana, on the morning of the
morrow pour down my dreadful ire upon thee along with thy
forces.” Thus directed (by Rima), those Rakshasas, Suka
and S&rana, having saluted the righteous Raghava with
‘Victory |,’ came (back) to Lank& and spoke unto the lord of
R&kshasas, saying,—"O lord of Rakshasas, having been
taken by Vibhishana for the purpose of being slain, we came
to be seen by the righteous-souled Rama of immeasurable
energy, and (finally) were liberated (by him). As these four
persons have combined—like unto the Lokap&las, heroic,
accomplished in arms, and of steady prowess—v
Dagaratha’s son, Rama, the graceful Lakshmana, Vibhishana,
and the highly powerful Sugriva, resembling tlie great Indra,
these are capable of uprooting the city of Lanka—walls and
gateways—and replacing her (on her former site),—leave
thou the monkeys aside. Such is R&ma’s figure and arms
that he shall alone demolish Lank&,—leave the other three
alone. And that host protected by Rama, Lakshmana and
Sugriva, shal! become exceedingly hard to combat even by
the Asuras and gods.—And the army of the high-souled
rangers of the woods, eager for encounter, contains warriors
bursting with high spirits. No use of dispute. Be thou intent
on pacification. Do thou render back Maithili unto


Dagaratha’s son.”


VUDDHARKANDA ML 1195


SECTION xxv


Hearne S4rana’s words, pregnant and truthful, king
Ravana addressed him, saying,—"Even if the gods,
Gandharvas and D&navas should attack me, Sita will I not
part with from fear of all creatures. O amiable one, thou,
having been hard handled by the monkeys and distressed in
consequence, deemst it fit that Sit& should be rendered back
this very day. What foe of mine is there who is competent
lo conquer me in battle ¢” Having uttered this rough speech,
the graceful Ravana—tlord of the Rakhasas—desirous of
surveying (the monkey-husts), ascended an edifice white like
snow,and elevated like many palms (placed one upon another).
And transported with passion, Ravana in company with those
spies, saw the sea, mountains and forests. And they beheld
the Earth enveloped with monkeys, and the mighty host of
monkeys, boundless and irresistible. And having seen this,
king Ravana asked Sfrana,—“Who among these monkeys
are the foremost, who are the heroes, and who possessed of
great strength ? Who, bursting with spirits, stay all about
the fore? Whom doth Sugriva listen to? And whg are
the leaders of the monkey-leaders ? OQ Sdrana, relate thou
all this unto me. And what is the prowess of the monkeys ?”
Thereat, Sérana, knowing the chiefs (of the monkey-army),
spoke uuto the sovereign of R&kshasas, who had asked (him),
as to who were the heads of the rangers of the woods. “This
monkey, that, setting up roars, stayeth in front of Lank&,
surrounded by hundreds and thousands of monkey-leaders,
by whose tremendous shouts Lank4 trembleth with her wall,
gateways, hills, woods and forests, and who is posted in front
of the forces of the high-souled Sugriva—master of all the
monkeys~-is the heroic leader of monkey-bands named Nila.
And that one, possessed of prowess, who,folding up his arms,


1396 RAMAYANA. -


paceth the gound on foot, who, facing Lank&, from wrath is
frequently yawning, who resembles a mountain-peak and is”
like the filaments of a lotus, who, enraged again and again,
soundeth his tail,and the ten cardinal points resound with the
sounds of whose tail,-is he who hath been sprinkled by
Sugriva—king of monkeys—the heic apparent,named Angada.
He challengeth thee to the fight. The worthy son of Vali
and ever dear unto Sugriva, he putteth forth his prowess,
as Varuna doth for Sakra. That that well-wisher of
Raghava,the vehement Hanum4n,hath seen Janaka’s daughter,
was owing to the advice uf this one. That powerful (hero)
is proceeding, taking innumerable bands belonging to
the lord of monkeys, for the purpose of beating thee by
means of his soldiery. Following Vali’s son, and surrounded
by a mighty force, stayeth in the field the heroic Nala,
the builder of the bridge. Those that with their limbs lying
inactive, and setting up roars and ululations, are following
this one,* are heroes dwelling in Chandana.t With his own
army alone, the silver-hued Sweta of dreadful prowess hopes
to subdue Lanka. Marshalling his monkey-forces and
cheering up his soldiers, that intelligent monkey, famed over
the three regions, having speedily met with Sugriva, is
retracing his steps. From days of yore on the banks of the
Gomati there is a mountain, (named) Ramya, (otherwise)
called Sanrochana. The mount abounds with various trees.
There that leader of bands, named Kumuda, governs his
kingdom. And he that cheerfully draweth after him
hundreds and thousands of monkeys, and the long grim hairs
of whose tail, coppery, yellow, sable and white, are cast
about, is the energetic monkey, Chanda, eager for encounter.
And he hopes to conquer Lank& by help of his own forces.


* The reference is prospective. It means the monkey, Sweta, in the next
stoha—T.

+ This may mean some wvod of sandals; but the commentator is silent
over it.—T.


“ PUDDHAKANDAM. 97


And this one, resembling a lion, tawny and furnished with a
fong mane, who, remaining apart, vieweth all Lanka as if con-
suming her with his eyes, dwelleth for ever and a day in
Vindhya, the mountain Krisha, Sahya, and the mount
Sudargana, and, a leader of bands, is named Rambha, Three
hundred Kotis of the foremost of monkeys, dreadful and
fierce and possessed of terrific prowess, surrounding (him)
goin his wake for the purpose of demolishing Lanka by
their (native) might. And he that expandeth his ears and
yawneth again and again, who defieth the fear of death and
doth not move his forces, who trembleth for wrath and eyeth
frequently askance,—and behold the lashing of his tail !—and
who setteth up leonine shouts, O king, with great energy
and with fear cast off,—resideth in the romantic mount,
Salweya, and, a leader of companies, is named Sarabha. To
him, O king, belong forty hundred thousands of powerful
leaders. And he that stayeth, like unto a mighty mass of
clouds covering up the sky, in the midst of the monkey-
heroes, as doth Visava in the centre of the celestials, whose
lofty shout is heard (mingled with) the uproar set up by the
foremost monkeys, burning for battle, dwelleth in the excellent
hill P&rijatra; and, ever irrepressible in fight, is named
Panaga, a leader of (monkey)-bands, Fifty /acs of leaders
with their forces arranged, environ this commander of
monkeys, He that stayeth gracing the dreadful array over-
flowing with talk, stationed on the shore of the ocean,—
resembling a second sea and like unto Durdara*—is the
leader named. Vitata, And he rangeth, drinking of (the
waters of) the Ven&,—best among streams—and his forces
are sixty lacs of monkeys. And the monkey, named Krathana,
challengeth thee to conflict. He hath (under him) powerful
and vigorous generals, and forces well divided. And the
monkey owning that person of the hue of red chalk, and,
who, elated with strength, disregardeth all the monkeys,—is


* Name of a celebrated monkey-leader.—T.
448


1178 RAMAYANA,


named Gavaya, who approacheth thee wrathfully, Seventy
lacs (of troops) girt him round ; and by their means he hopes
to bring down Lank&. These are the heroes, incapable’ of
being borne, whose numbers cannot be enumerated. These
are the leaders and the heads thereof, as well as the forces
set in order of battle.”


SECTION xxvn.


As thou lookest on, I shall describe unto thee those
leaders who shall put forth their prowess for Raghava, and
lay down their lives (in his behalf) That one of dreadful
deeds the long hairs on whose long tail, coppery, and yellow,
and black, and white, thrown up, look like the rays of the
Sun, and are trailing over the ground, is the monkey, named
Hara; whom follow hundreds and thousands (of monkeys)
desperately upraising trees, intent upon (scaling) Lanki—the
leaders of the monkey-king and his servants present (in this
conflict.) And these whom thou beholdest present,resembling
mighty masses of sable clouds, like unto black collyrium,
of genuine prowess,countless and incapable of enumeration, —~
‘dwelling in mountains, provinces, and rivers,—terrible bears
approach thee, O king. In their amidst is their king, grim-
eyed and of fierce appearance, like unto Parjanya* encom.
passed by clouds,—who dwelleth in that best of mountains,
Rikkbav&n, drinking of the Narmad&.—Behold this one
resembling a hill—younger brother of Dhumra, lord of all
the bears, He is equal to his brother in beauty, and of
superior prowess. This leader of redoubtable leaders is
named Jambavan. He is mild, obedient to his superiors and

* Indra.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1179


fierce in fight. The intelligent Jambavan assisted Sakra
signally in the war of the gods and Asuras, and he hath won
‘many boons {in consequence). Ascending the tops of
mountains, these burl down gigantic crags huge as colossal.
clouds, nor doth (the fear of) deatli (ever) disquiet them.
And their bodies covered with hair, they resemble Rakshasas
and ghosts (in their conduct), This one of immeasurable
energy hath innumerable troops going about, who behold
this leader of leaders under unusual excitement leaping
and resting (by turns). This lord of monkeys dwelleth near
the thousand-eyed Deity ; and this leader of bands, gifted
with strength, is named Rambha. And he that going,
toucleth with his side a mountain situated at the distance of
a Yoyana, and, rising up, measureth the same length,—and
whose beauty is surpassed by none among quadrupeds,—is
known under the name of Sannadana, the grand-father of
the monkeys ;—this intelligent one battled with Sakra,*—
nor did he meet with discomfiture. This is that generat
of the forces. And he whose prowess is like that of Sakra,
is this one begot by Fire on a Gandharva’s daughter, for
assisting the celestials on the occasion of the war of the gods
and the Asuras. And this graceful and powerful one—best of
monkeys—disporteth in that sovereign of mountains
inhabited by numbers of Kinnaras, where king Vaigravana
eateth rose apples, and which, O lord of Rakshas, ever
conduceth to the pleasure of thy brother. And this one who
never extolleth himself in battle, is named Krathana~leader
of hosts, Surrounded by a thousand Koti (of troops), and
stationed in the midst of the monkeys,he hopeth to subjugate
Lanka with his own troops alone. And he that roameth
about the Gang’, terrifying leaders of elephant-herds,
remembering the former hostility of the monkeys and the


* There is a word—rane, in battle—in this line, left out on the ground of
pleonasm.—T.


1180 RRMAPANA,


elephants, is this leader of bands, who, roaring, opposeth wild
elephants in mountain-caverns and crusheth trees, —and
foremost of monkeys, and chief of the monkey-forces—like
Sakra himself in heaven, sporteth, resorting to Ugiravija per-
taining to Mandara, best of mountains, on the goiden river.*
A thousand lacs of monkeys, elated with vigor and prowess,
setting up roars and furnished with (long) arms follow him;
and this one is the leader of those high-souled monkeys.
And, O king, he whom thou seest resembling clouds uplifted
by the winds, is a leader named Pramathi. And his fleet-
coursing soldiery are fiery, and volumes of red-hued dust are
scattered about him profusely on all sides. And these
wondrous strong and dreadful Gol&ngulast numbering
hundreds and hundred thousands, seeing the building of the
bridge, surrounding, O mighty monarch, the leader named
Gaviksha—a Golangula—set up shouts, intending to demolish
Lank& with their prowess, Where the trees bring forth
fruits of every season and the black bees resort,~—in the
“mountain furnished with solar splendour, which the Sun
circumambulates, by whose radiance ever beam beasts and
birds with a like hue,—whose table-lands are never forsaken
by magnanimous Maharshis; where the trees yield every
object of desire and all are fraught with fruits ; in which best
of mountains excellent honey is found,—there in the charm-
ing Golden hill, O king, sporteth this one—tho foremost of
the principal monkeys, Kagari by name, a leader of bands,
There are sixty thousand charming Golden hills. In theic
midst is that best of mountains,t even as thou; O sinless
one, art among the Rakshas. There in the inmost hill dwell
(monkeys) tawny-hued; and white,—with coppery faces;
yellowish like honey; sharp-toothed ; having nails for their
weapons ; and four teeth like lions; irresistible like tigers


* Ganga.—T.
+ Vide ante.
$ Savarai Meru.—T.


FUDDHARANDAM. u8


all equal to Vaigw&nara, and resembling flaming venomous
snakes ; furnished with long tails; like unto mad elephants ;
seeming like gigantic hills; roaring like mighty clouds;
with eyes tawny and round; of terrific mein; and emitting
sounds,—-and these are gazing at Lanka, a: devastating
her, And this powerful one staying in their midst, is their
leader, eager for victory; and the puissant (monkey) always
Jooketh like the Sun himself; and this one, O king, is famed
on earth by the name of Satavali. And this heroic one,
powerful and mighty, established in his own prowess, hopeth
to devastate Lank& with his own forces. And for compass-
ing Rama’s desire, the monkey doth not cherish any kindness
for his life. Gaya, Gavaksha, Nala, and the monkey Nila—
each of these is encompassed by ten fofts of warriors.
{Besides these), there are other choice monkeys dwelling in
the Vindhya mountain, but I cannot enumerate these
(monkeys) possessed of fleet vigor, in consequence of their
vast number. All these, O mighty monarch, are of exceeding
prowess,~all possess persons resembling mighty mountains ;
and all are competent in a moment to remove mountains and
scatter the Earth with them.”


SECTION XxvViit.


FHavine heard the words of Sirana, who had described
the forces (of the monkeys), Suka, addressed Rivana, lord
of Rakshasas, saying—-“Those, O king, whom thou seest
stationed, resembling mad elephants, like unto nyagrodhas*
belonging to the Gangi,—like unto Salas in the Himaviin,—
are incapable of being borne,—they are possessed of


* Banians.


1184 KAmArana,


atrength, and able to wear forms at will; resembling deities
and Danavas, and like the gods in conflict. These, numbering
nine, five, and seven thousand éotis and thousand sankus
and an hundred orindas, are the ministers of Sugriva,
residing in Kishkindh'—monkeys begot by gods and
Gandharvas, capable of assuming shapes at will. And those
two whom thou beholdest, staying there, of equal proportions
and endowed with god-like shapes, are Mainda and Dwivida,
—who have no equals in fight. Permitted by Brahma, they
had partaken of ambrosia. They hope to humble Lank&
by their prowess. And he whom thou seest staying like a
mad elephant, the monkey who, being enraged, can by his
strength agitate the deep itself, who, searching for Vaidehi,
had presented himself before thee, lord,—behold this monkey
come again !--whom thou hadst seen before }*—is the eldest.
son of Kagari, known as the offspring of the Wind-god——
celebrated as Hanuman, who had bounded over the deep.
Capable of wearing forms at pleasure, that first of monkeys
is endeued with grace and strength,—and is of irresistible
impetuosity even as that lord, the Wind. Seeing the Sun
tisen, (he) while a boy, resolving in his mind,—'Coursing a
way measuring three thousand yoyanas, I will bring the Sun,
my hunger is not appeased ;’ and he sprang up, elated with
strength, And, not getting that god, incapable of being sub-
dued by the deities, saints and Rakshasas, he dropped down
on the Ascending-hill. And thereat a jaw of that strong-
jawed one was a little fractured on the rock,—and he is called
Hanum&n in consequence. I know this monkey and all his
previous history. I cannot describe his strength, beauty
or prowess, And this one alone hopes to lay Lanka low
by his energy. And why dost thou today forget the monkey,
who had flung flaming fire into Lank&? And next to him
is the heroof dark-blue hue, having eyes like totuses, the


* This dislocation oceurs in the original. These descriptions generally
are hardly amenable to a sound syntax—T.


YUODHAKANDAM: 1183


Atiratha among the Ikshw&kus—of prowess celebrated in
the world—in whom virtue never wavereth and whe never
swerveth from righteousness; who knoweth the Brahma
Mantra and the Vedas,—the best of those versed in them—who
pierceth the sky with his shafts and cleaveth the Earth,whose
ire is like death, and whose prowess is like that of Sakra,—
whose wife, Sit%, hath been carried away by thee from
Janasth’na. And this is Rima, who, O king, advanceth to
encounter thee in conflict. And on his right side is one of
the splendour of pure gold, broad-breasted, having dark
curled hair—this one is named Lakshmana, ever mindful
of his brother’s welfare. He is versed in polity as well as
warlare--the foremost of those learned in all the branches
of knowledge; wrathful, invincible, victorious, powerful,
conquering and strong,—the right arm of Rama and his own
life going about. For Raghava he careth not for his life. He
hopeth to exterminate all the R&kshasas in battle. He that
stayeth occupying the left side of Rama, and sucrounded by
R&kshasas, is the king, Bibhishana, sprinkled as the king of
Lank& by the auspicious king of kings,—he, filled with wrath,
approacheth thee (for battle). And he whom thou seest
staying in the middle like a firm-based mountain, the lord
of all monkeys, of inmeasurable prowess,—and who in energy
fame, intelligence, strength, and lineage, is as superior to the
monkeys as the mountain Himavin overtoppeth all the mount-
ains, who in company with the principal monkey-leaders
dwelleth in inaccessible Kishkindha hard to penetrate, and
dense with trees,and difficult of access, and denying approach
on account of rocks ; and whose golden garland consisting of an
hundred lotuses looks exceedingly elegant, which is the
desire of men and gods, and where is established Lakshmi—(is
Sugriva). And Rama, having slain V4li, hath conferred this
garland, Tard, and the eternal monkey-kingdom on Sugriva.
An hundred of an hundred thousand is called a fot? by
the wise. An hundred of a thousand Zoff is called a Sanku.


+ 118q RAMAYANA.


‘An hundred of a thousand Sanku is known as a MahSganku.
An hundred ofa thousand MabScanku is here termed 2
Vrinda. An hundred of a thousand Vrinda is known as a
Mah&vrinda. A thousand Mablvrinda is called here a
Padma. An hundred of athousand Padma is known asa
MahSpadma. An hundred of a thousand MabSpadma is
(ermed a Kharva. An hundred of a thousand Kharva
is termed a Samudra. An hundred of a thousand Samudra is
known as a Mahaugha. Thus backed by a thousand off, and an
hundred Sanku, and a thousand Mahacganku, and an hundred
Vrinda,and a thousand Mahavrinda, and an hundred Padma,and
a thousand Mah3padma and an hundred dharva, and an equal
Samaudra and an equal Mahaugha,—by éotis of Mahaughas—
resembling the sca,—-and surrounded by the heroic Bibhishana
as wellas his counsellors,—that Lord of monkeys,always engirt
by a mighty force, and possessed of exceeding strength and
prowess, will encounter thee in battle. Observing this host,
that bath presented itself, resembling a flaming planet,
do thou, O mighty monarch, prepare thyself to the uttermost,
—so that victory may be thine, and that thou mayst not come
by discomfiture at the hands of the foe.”


SECTION xxix.


Scene the leaders of monkeys as pointed out by Suka,—
the exceedingly puissant Lakshmana—Rama’s right arm—and
his* brother Bibhishana staying near Rama, and Sugriva of
dreadful prowess—sovereign of all the monkeys,—and the
strong Angada, grandson unto the thunder-handed one,t


* de. Ravana’s
+ Indra.—T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1185


and the powerful Hanuman ; andthe unconquerable Jambaviia ;
and Sushena; and Nila; and Nala—best of monkeys,—
and Gaya; and GavAksha; and Sarabha; and Mainda; and
Dwivida,—Ravana, with his heart agitated a little, and his
wrath aroused,—when their talk had ended, rebuked those
heroes, Suka and Sirana. And he wrathfully spoke unto
them, standing in humble guise with their heads hung down,
harsh words faltering with passion,—"That counsellors
subsisting (on the wealth of their master and sovereign},
should say aught disagreeable to him, whether they meet with
his favor or disfavor—is not meet. Without being questioned,
it is (proper) for you both to hymn the praises of a foe that is
opposed and that hath advanced for encounter ! Ye have in vain
worshipped your preceptors, aged people,and spiritual guides,
for ye have failed to appropriate the cream of Political
Science, which should be availed of. Or if ye had appropriated
the same, you have forgotten it afterwards ; and ye bear the
burden of ignorance. And it is owing to my good fortune
that, having such stupid counsellors, I have as yet held my
kingdom, Have ye no fear of death that ye use harsh speech
towards me, who am the ruler and whose tongue dispenseth
good and evil? Even trees may exist in the forest, coming
in contact with burning fire; but transgressors cannot
exist, visited with the chastisement of the monarch, I shall
slay these wicked wights, who praise the side of the enemy,
if my anger be not moderated, remembering their former
goed offices, Avaunt! Go hence from near me! I do not
wish to slay you, remembering your good acts. Slain ye
(already) are, who are ingrate and cherish no affection
for me.” ‘Thus accosted, Suka and Sirana, seeing (how
things stood), covered with bashfulness, went out, saluting
Ravana by uttering ‘Victory! Then that ranger of night,
the Ten-necked one, said unto Mahodara, who was present,
to summon some spies. Thus accosted, Mahodara speedily
ordered some spies (to present themselves). Thereat, the


148


1186 RAMAYANA,


apies,hurriedly arriving there at the mandate of the monarch,
and, presenting themselves, stood with joined hands, uttering
blessings of victory. Then the lord of Rakshasas, Ravana,
addressed the spies, who were heroic, faithful, calm, and
courageous,—““Go hence, and acquaint yourselves with the
exertions of Rima; as well as with those who, being the
custodians of R&ma’s closest counsels, have gladly joined him
(here). How he sleepeth and how he waketh, and what be
engageth himself in,—having deftly acquainted yourselves
with all this thoroughly, do you come.(back here). The wise
king that gathers (a knowledge of) his enemy through spies,
can, putting forth a modicum of effort in conflict, neutralise
(his exertions).” Thereat the spies, saying,—"So it is”,
taking Sardula to the fore, with delighted hearts went round
the sovereign of the Rakshasas. And, having gone round
the high-souled Rakshasa-chief, the spies set out for-where
Rama with Lakshmana was. And repairing secretly to the
vicinity of the mountain bordering on the fair shore,* they
saw Rama and Lakshmana with Sugriva and Bibhishana.
And seeing that host, they were overwhelmed with fear.
And, while staying there, they, discovered by the righteous
lord of Rikshasas, Bibhisana, were sore harassed (by the
monkeys). And that wicked Rakshasa, Sardula, alone was
taken (before Rama). But Rama liberated him, who was
assailed by the monkeys. And Rima also, entertaining no
enmity against them, also liberated the others, (who
accompanied Sardula). And, on having been put to straits
by the powerful monkeys of fleet vigor, they,t breathing
hard, and with their consciousness lost, again arrived at
Lanka. Then those exceedingly strong spies, always ranging
outside, presenting themselves before the Ten-necked one,
informed him of the forces of Rama, stationed near mount
Suvela.


* Suvelasya Sailasya—may aiso mean, of the mount Suvela.—T.
+ The spies, that is.—T.


YUUDHARANDAM. 1187


SECTION xxx.


od


Tuen the spies communicated unto Lanka’s lord news
concerning Righava and his host stationed at the mount
Suvela. Hearing the words of the spies, that Rama,
accompanied by a mighty army, had arrived (there), Ravana
was a little agitated and spoke unto S&rdula,—"Thy color
hath changed its natural aspect, and, O ranger of the night,
thou loukest poorly, Didst not come under the control of
the wrathful foes ?”’ Thus ordered by him, then (Sardula),
bewildered by fear, addressed that tiger of a Rakshasa,
saying,—‘Those powerful monkeys, O king, puissant, strong,
and protected by Raghava, are incapable of being ranged
(by ns). And they cannot be conversed with or interrogated.
All around, the courses are kept by monkeys resembling hills.
As soon as I entered, and was scanning that host, | was
discovered. And forcibly taken by the Rakshas, [ was
pulled by them hither and thither. And furiously assailed by
the monkeys with thighs, clenched fists, teeth, and palms, I
was dragged in the midst of the army by the enraged
monkeys. And, after having been taken all about, | was (at
length) taken before Rima, bleeding, with my limbs showing
sorry work, and my senses swimming and paralysed. And,
raving been belabored by the monkeys, I, on craving his kind-
ness wilh joined hands, was, at his pleasure, rescued by
Raghava, with, “Don’t, don’t’! Baving filled up the deep with,
rocks and crags, Rama equipped with weapons, stayeth,
occupying the gate of Lank&. And, letting me off, that one
of suspassing vigor, surrounded by monkeys, and, arranging
his forces in the Garura fashion, advanceth upon Lank&. And
he draweth nigh to the wall. Therefore, do one of these
things in’ preference to the other,—cither render back Sita,
or give him battle.” Hearing this, Ravana, lord of Rakshasas,


1188 RAMAYANA.


then reflecting in his mind, spoke unto S&rdula these
pregnant words,—‘Even if the gods, Gandharvas, and Danavas
should array themselves against me, Sitd J shall not give, from
fear of all creatures.” Having said this, that exceedingly
energetic one again said,—Thou hast ranged this army.
Who here among the monkeys are heroic? And, O
amiable one, what is their potency? And what are those
monkeys that are hard to approach, likeq And, O thou
of fair vows, whose sons and grandsons are they? Truly
relate all this (to me). Having ascertained their strength
and weakness, I shall in this matter adopt my course. Those
who wish for fight, certainly take account of all this,” Thus
addressed by R&vana, Sardula—best of spies—thus began
to speak in the presence of Ravana—O king, that uncon-
querable one in fight, Jambavdn, is well known as the son
Gadgada, king of bears. The other son of Gadgada is the
son of Sakra’s preceptor. By which son, single-handed, was
done immense oppression to the Rakshas. And the righteous
and puissant Sushena is the son of Dharma.* And the mild
monkey, Dadhimukha, O king, is the son of Somat And
Sumukha,Durmukha and the monkey, Vegadargin (resembling)
Death himself, were for certain begot by the Self-create in
the shape of a monkey.f And Nila himself is the son of the
bearer of sacrificial oblations ;§ and Hanuman is famed as
the son of the Wind-god. And the irrepressible and youthful
Angada is the grandson of Sakra. And the lusty Mainda
and Dwivida are sprung from Agcwi. And five are the
sons of Vaivaswata, resembling the Reaper himself—Gaya,
Gaviksha, Gavaya, Sarabha and Gandham&dana. But I can
not enumerate the rest, ten Zofis of heroic monkeys—all


* Righteousness,

+ Moon,

4} Another meaning is,—"The monkey, Vegadarsi—who ix Death himself in
the shape of a monkey.” But 1 give the more acceptable sense,—T.

§ Fire.


FUDDHAKANDAM, 1189


sons of deities—burning for battle. And this is Dagaratha’s
son—this youth resembling a lion, who slew Dushana and
Khara and 7riciras. There breathes none on Earth that is
like unto Rima in prowess, by whom was slain Viradha aud
Kayandha, resembling the Destroyer. No person can on
earth describe the virtues of Rima; by whom have been
slain all those Rakshasas that had gone to Janasthana. And
here also is the virtuous Lakshmana, like unto the foremost
of elephants, coming in the way of whose shafts, even Vasava
doth not live. And here are Sweta and Jyotirmukha,
sprung from Vaskara’s self; and the monkey Hemakuta is
the son of Varuna. And the heroic Nala—best of monkeys,
is the son of Vigwakarm&. And powerful and impetuous,
Durdhara is the son of Vasu. And that foremost of R&akshasas,
Bibhishana, thy brother, engaged in the welfare of Raghava,
hath laid seige to Lanka. Thus have I described unto thee
the entire monkey host stationed in mount Suvela. As for
what remaineth to be done, thou art the master.”


SECTION XXXI.
a


"Then the spies of the king informed him of the forces
of Righava, incapable of being agitated, which had stationed
themselves on mount Suvela. Hearing the arrival of Rama’s
mighty army from the spies, Ravana was a little agitated,
and he spoke unto the ministers,—"Let the ministers speedily
present themselves, having their wits about them,—the
time forsooth hath come for counse!.” Hearing his mandate,
those Rakshasas, his counselors, swiftly presented them-
selves. And then he consulted with his R&kshasa counselors.
Having deliberated duly, that resistless one, dismissing


11g0 Kash yawns,


his ministers, entered his own abode. Then, taking with him
the highly strong Vidyujjibha huge-bodied and gifted with the
powers of illusion, he entered where Mithila’s daughter was.
And the lord of Rakshasas said unto Vidyujjibha, skilled in
ilusion,~-"Do thou bring Janaka’s daughter under the sway
of iNusion. And, O ranger of the night, do thou, taking an
illusory bead of Raghava, as well as a mighty bow with
the shaft (set), present thyself before me.” Thus accosted,
the night-ranger, Vidyujjibha, saying, “So be it,” displayed
that desired illusion unto Ravana, Thereat, the king, eager
to meet with Sita in the Aguka woods, well-pleased,
conferred an excellent ornament on him, Then the exceed-
ingly powerful lord of the Nairitas, the younger brother of
the Dispenser of riches, entered (into that place) and saw
(there Sitd) distressed, albeit unworthy of distress,—with her
head hung down, overwhelmed with woo,—sitting on the
ground, staying at the agoka woods, engaged in the contem-
plation of her lord, conciliated by dreadful R&akshasis
remaining near. Then,drawing near Sitd,Ravana, proclaiming
his exultation, said these haughty words unto the daughter
of Janaka,—-"O gentle one, he depending on whom thou,
being soothed by (me), slightest me—that slayer of Khara,
thy husband, R&ghava, hath fallen in battle. Thy roots
have been competely severed, and thy pride hath been
destroyed by me. In consequence of this calamity, O Sita,
thou shalt become my wife. O foolish (girl), renounce this
idea. What wilt thou do with him that is dead? O meek
(wench), be thou the mistress of all my wives. G thou of
slender religious merit! O thou whose object hath been
defeated! © thow that presumest to be wise! Hearken
unto the destruction of thy lord, like the dreadful destruction
of Vritra! Surrounded by a vast army gathered by the
sovereign of the monkeys, Raghava had presented himself
on the shore of the sea, for compassing my destruction. And
on the sun having set, Rima stationed himself with his


FUDDHAKAN DAM. 1191


mighty army, oppressing the northern shore (of the sea).
Then at midnight (my) spies coming to that host, thus
stationed, fatigued from travel, and sleeping soundly (in
conséquence),—first ranged it. Then my mighty forces led
by Prahasta slew his host overnight, where was present
Rama along with Lakshmana. And repedtedly upraising
pattigas and bludgeons, swords, rods and other mighty
weapons ; and (discharging) showers of arrows, and darts,
and daggers and maces and sticks and crows and bearded
darts and discuses and clubs ;—the R&kshasas discharged
these among the monkeys. And while Rama was sleeping,
the furious Prahasta by means of a mighty falchion, with
speed cut off his head clean. Bibhishana, who was flying
at his will, was takev captive. And Lakshmana along with the
monkey-atmy hath departed somewhere. And, O Sita,
Sugriva—lord of monkeys—hath his neck broken; and, O
Sita, with his jaw fractured, Hanuman hath been slaughtered
by the R&kshasas—And Jambavan, endeavouring lo spring
up with his thighs, was slain in the conflict; being severed
by bearded darts, even as a tree cut off. And the stalwart
Mainda and Dwivida--those foremost of monkeys—sighing
and lamenting, bathed in blood,—destroyers of foes~were
cut-off with a sword. And Panaga is rolling on the earth like
a (veritable) Panaga.* And mangled by many iron arrows,
Darimukha lieth in acave. And the exceedingly energetic
Kumuda, dumb, is slain by shafts. And torn by innumerable
{arrows) discharged on all sides by Ra&kshasas, Angada,
vomitting blood, lieth on the groundt And the monkeys,
hard pressed by elephants, and others by networks of cars,
lie low in the field, having beeu agitated like clouds by winds.
And others afflicted with affright, flee, attacked (by the enemy)
in the rear, and followed by the Rakshasas, like mighty
elephants pursued by lions, And some have fallen into the


* The tree of that name.—T_
+ This sfoke has 'Angada’ twice. One, of course, is left out —T.


1192 RAMAPANEA,


sea, and some have taken refuge in the sky ; and the bears
have mounted‘up trees along with the monkeys. Andon the
shore of the sea, and in mountains and woods many are the
tawny-hued monkeys that have been slain by Rikshasas of
frightful forms. Thus hath thy lord been slain by my forces,
along with his army ; and I have his head, washed in blood
and besmeared with dust.” Thereat, the exceedingly
irrepressible lord of R&kshasas, Ravana, spake unto a
Rakshasi, in the hearing of Sits,—“Bring (hither) the
Rakshasa, Vidyujjibha of cruel deeds, who hath personally
brought Raghava's head from the field.” Thereat, Vidyujjibha,
taking the head along with the bow, bowing down the head
(unto Ravana), stood before him. Then spake king Ravana
unto the Rakshasa, Vidyujjibha of the long tongue, who was
staying by,—'‘Do thou at once hold before Sit the head of
Dagaratha’s son. Let her clearly behold the ultimate sad
plight of her lord,” Thus addressed, that Raksha, throwing
that graceful head before SitS, swiftly vanished. And
Ravana cast down the mighty blazing bow, famed through
the three worlds, saying.—“This is Rama's. This is the
bew of thy Rima with the string fixed. Slaying that man
over night, Prahasta brought it hither.”


SECTION xxxtt.


Sezinc that head and that excellent bow, and (remember-
ing) the union of (Rama) and Sugriva related by Hanuman,—
and (seeing) those eyes, and the complexion of that face, and
that countenance like unto that of her lord,—and that hair
and that forehead; and that beautiful jewel forming the
crest ; and recognizing (RAma) by all these tokens combined,


YUDDBARANDAM. 1193


(Sith), exceedingly aggrieved, rebuked Kaikeyi, lamenting
like a female oxprey,—“O Kaikeyi, have thy wishes attained.
Slain hath been the son of the race; and the entire race is
exterminated by thee, partial to dissension. And what evil
had been done unto Kaikeyi by the revered Rama, that
along with me, he hadst been banished into the woods, with
eags given him (for his covering)?” Having said this,
Vaidehi, forlorn and trembling (all over), dropped to the
earth, like a plantain cut off. Then, recovering after a while,
and having regained her consciousness, the targe-eyed one,
placing the head in her front, gave way to grief. “Ab! tam
andone, O mighty-armed one! O thou that didst follow stern
vows! From thy (death), Ihave come by this final plight,
having been rendered a widow. The greatest calamity (that
can befall a woman), is said to be the death of her husband.
And, possessor of an excellent character, thou hast departed
before me, who have ever trod the path of the righteous; but
who have come by a mighty grief and am plunged in a sea of
sorrow. And thou, who was engaged in delivering me,
fast thyself fallen! And my mother-in-law, Kaugaly&,
attached (to thee), through the death of thee, her son, at the
hands of Rakshasas, hath been reduced to the condition of a
cow that hath been deprived of her calf. O R&ghava, oven
the astrologers had predicted long life for thee. But their
words are false,—thou,O Raghava, wast short-lived. Or
didst thy wisdom, wise and good as thou wert, come to
naughty For God, who is the origin of all beings, maketh
{every one) reap the fruit of his own acts. And why, versed
in polity as thou wast, didst thou come by death, unforeseen ?
Thou wast acquainted with the means of warding off mis-
fortune, and skilled in doing so. And having been brought
hither by me representing the Fatal Night, fierce and fell,—
after (being) embraced, and by force,—the lotus-eyed one hath
met with his death. Here liest thou, O long-armed one, leav-
ing me lone,—and embracing the Earth like thy beloved fair.


150


1194 | RAMAFANA.


Ever carefully worshipped with perfumed wreaths, this bow
of thine, O hero, embellished with gold, is dear unto me. O
sinless one, thou hast surely gone to heaven, and (art there)
in the company of thy sire and my father-in-law, Dacaratha,
and all thy ancestors. Thou hast become a star of the
firmament as the fruit of thy great act.* Thou hast dis-
regarded thy righteous race of R&jarshis. O king, why dost
thou not look at me? And why is it that thou dost not
answer me, who am a girl, hardly arrived at youth,—and who
am thy wife and companion? That thou at the time of thy
espousing my hand hadst vowed—I will practise (righteous-
ness) with thee—do thou, O K&kutstha, recollect the same,
and take me, who am overwhelmed with distress. Why, O
best of goers, hast thou gone from this world to that other,
leaving behind me, overwhelmed with distress? That
person of thine which, decked out with auspicious things, I
used to embrace, beasts of prey will for certain tear the
same. Having performed the Agnishtoma and other sacrifices
with Dakshinés (dispensed),—why hadst not thou attained
purity by means of the sacrificial fire? Kaugaly&, over-
whelmed with sorrow, shall only behold one of the three that
had gone away to distant lands,—come (back)—Lakshmana.
And, on being asked by her,he shall relate thine as well as the
deaths of thy friend’s troops over night at the hands of the
R&kshasas. And, O Raghava, hearing thee slain while asleep,
and me staying in the abode of the Raksba,she with her heart
cleft (in twain), shall cease to exist. And for the sake of me,
abject that [ am,that sinless son of the king, R&ma, possessed
of prowess, having crossed the ocean, hath been slain in the
footprint of a cow. I, the befouler of my line, who had been
wedded by Dagaratha’s son through want of discretion,
becoming the wile of the revered Rama, was (in reality) his
Death. Without doubt, in another birth I had abstained
from choice gifts,—and therefore it is that I sorrow to-day,


* The carrying out the command of thy sire —T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1195


albeit being the wife of one that was (ever dear) unto guests.
Do thou, O Ravana, speedily slay me upon Rama; and,
bringing the wife to the husband, compass my best benefit.
Do thou join my head to his and my body to his body.
I will, O Ravana, follow the way of my high-souled lord.”
Thus, burning in grief, did that large-eyed one indulge in
lamentations ; and Janaka’s daughter kept fast gazing at the
head and bow of her lord. And as the Rakshasa was by
while Sita was thus bewailing, there appeared before his
lord, with joined hands, the warder, saying—May the
worshipful one be victorious! Aud saluting and propitiat-
ing him, (Ravana), he told him that Prahasta, general
ofthe forces, had arrived. “Prahasta hath come to thee,
surrounded by all the courtiers. And, O lord, I was des.
patched by him, desirous of seeing thee. O mighty monarch,
surely there is—and thou art forgiving from thy regal
sentiment*—some work which is momentous; and do
thou see them.” Hearing these words of the R&akshasa,
the Ten-necked one, leaving the asoka wood, went to see the
counselors, And, having decided his entire course of action
in consultation with his competent advisers, (R&vana),
entering his court,—well knowing Rama's prowess, set about
his work. And as soon as Ravana left that place, that head
and that bow vanished? And in company with the councilors
of dreadful power, (Ravana) decided his course with reference
to Rama. And then the lord of R&kshasas, Ravana,
resembling the day of doom, addressed his generals,—~all
well-wishers—staying hard by, saying—“Do ye speedily
summon my forces with the beat of drums—nor do ye
give out the reason (of the summons).” Then assenting
to his speech with ‘So be it,” the envoys immediately sum-
moned that mighty force; and, when it had arrived, they
informed their master, eager for conflict, of its arrival.


* This dislocated period insinuates that Ravana, possessed of royal
nature, should forgive this untimely intrusion. —T.


1196 RAMAYANA.


SECTION XXXxXIIE


Sczine Sita overwhelmed with grief, a Rakshasi, named
Saram&, who was the beloved companion (of Sita), drew near
to his dear (friend), Vaidehi. And the mild-speeched Sarama&
comforted the exceedingly distressed Sit@, who had been
bereft of her senses by the lord of R&kshasas. Sits, who was
protected there (by Sarama), had been made a friend by her.
And, protecting her at the command of Ravana, that kind~
hearted companion, firm in vows, saw Sit3, deprived of her
consciousness, And she* comforted with a friend’s affection
that one of fair vows, who was rolling in the dust and rising
up from it like a mare.t “Having come to the solitary wood
for protecting thee, I, renouncing all fear of Ravana, have,
remaining hid, heard everything that he addressed unto thee,
as well as what thou hadst replied unto him. For thee, O thou
of expansive eyes, I have no fear of Ravana. And, O
Maithili, I, coming out, have also learnt well as to why the
Jord of R&kshasas huth gone out hence hurriedly, Rama,
acquainted with self, is incapable of being surprised in
sleep ; nor doth the staying of that tiger-like one commend
itself to me as probable. And the monkeys fighting with
trees, well protected by Raghava, like the gods protected by
the foremost of the celestials, are incapable of being slain.
And, possessed of arms long and rounded ; graceful; broad-
breasted ; powerful ; accoutred with the bow ; and mailed;
righteous; and famous over the earth; endowed with
energy; and along with his brother, Lakshmana, ever
protecting himself and others; of noble descent; apd


* Sarama.—T.


+ The commentator intelligently remarks: As a mare docs, to temove
fatigue —T.


PUDDHAKENDAH. 3197


versed in polity; the destroyer of the hostile ranks;
and of inconceivable strength and manhood,—the graceful
Raghava, O Sita, slayer of foes, is not slain. This illusion
hath been spread around thee by that fierce, iNusion-creating
one, whose mind ever runs upon improper acts and who
opposeth himself to al! creatures.—All thy sorrow hath
departed, and thy good day hath dawned. Certainly
Lakshmi seeketh thee. And, O lady, hearken unto what is
dear to thee! Having crossed over the ocean, along with
the monkey-host, Rama hath encamped himself on the
southern shore of the sea. By me hath been seen the
complete Kakutstha along with Lakshmana, accompanied by
the forces, stationed on the marge of the main,—protected
{by his native might). Those Rakshasas of fleet vigor who
had been despatched by this one, have brought the news
that Raghava hath crossed.—And, O large-eyed lady, having
learnt this news, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—is consulting
with all his counselors." As the Rakshasi, Saram3, was
relating this unto Sit&, she heard the leonine roars of the
army, emitted with the greatest energy. And, hearing the
mighty sounds of kettledrums produced by sticks struck
(thereon), the honey-tongued Sarama spoke thus unto Sit’,—
“These dreadful sounds of the kettledrum, O mother, call
to arms. And hark to the solemn notes of the kettledrums,
resembling the rumbling of clouds! The mad elepbants are
caparisoned and the car-horses are yoked ; and thousands {of
warriors) are seen, mounted on steeds, with bearded darts in
their hands. And, as waters fill up the ocean, mailed
warriors of wonderful forms, vehement and roaring, by
thousands rush out on all sides and fill the highways. And
mark the splendour spread around by the polished arms
and bucklers and mail,—and by the cars, horses and
elephants of the followers of the Rakshasa-chief,—consisting
of many lives shooting up,—like unto the appearance of a
fire in summer, burning a forest,—and also mark the


1198 RAMAPANA.


excitement of the high-spirited and fast-coursing Rakshas !*
And hear the sounds of bells and the rattling of the
car-wheels! And hear the uneighing of the steeds and the
reports of the drums And fierce is the excitement of these
Rakshasas—followers of the Raksha-chief,—with their hands
bearing upraised arms,—capable of making people's hair
stand on end, The sorrow removing Sree espouseth thee ;
and the fear of the Rakshas is come. And as Vasava did unto
the Daityas, the lotas-eyed Rima, thy lord—of controlled
anger, and of inconceivable prowess,slaying Ravana in battle
and thus delivering thee, shall approach thee. And, as
Vasava put forth his prowess among his foes, in company
with the foe-destroying Vishou, thy lord, along with
Lakshmana, shall display his prowess among the Rakshas.
On the enemy having fallen, I shall behold thee, devoted to
thy lord, with thy desire attained, soon lying on the lap of
Rama. And, O Janaki, embracing (thy lord), thou shalt shed
tears of joy on his mighty breast. And, O Sit, soon shail
the highly powerful Rama loosen this braid of thine reaching
unto thy hips, which thou hast been wearing fur many a
month, And, O exalted one, seeing his face like the full
moon risen, thou shalt shed water begot of ruth, even as a
she-serpent casts off her slough. And, O Mithila’s daughter,
speedily slaying Ravana in battle, that one worthy of
happiness shail reap felicity in the company of thee, his
beloved. And, loved by the high-souled Rima, thou shalt
be happy, even as the Earth furnished with crops brought
forth by plenteous showers. Do thou, O exalted one, take
refuge with him,who, going round the foremost of mountains,
speedily assumeth a steed-like circular movement ; for even
the maker of day is the source of people's joy and grief.”


* This line of verse defies all attempts to make it fall into syntactical order
with the rest of the sentence. It is a hideous hiatus in the passage —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM _ 1199


SECTION Xxxiv.


‘Branine with grief on account of those words,* Saram&
gladdened and cheered her, even as masses of clouds
(cheer up) the burning Earth. And then, desirous of doing
her good, (Sita’s) friend, conversant with season, and ever
preluding her speech with 2 smile, spoke unto her season-
ably,—“O thou having dark eyes, I can, secretly going to
Rama and communicating to him thy auspicions words, come
back clandestinely. Nor, when I course the supportless sky,
can even the Wind or Garura follow me.” As she said
this, Sita with her grief a little lightened, said unto Sarama
in sweet and smooth words,—"Thou art capable of even
going to the nethermost regions. But do thou on my behalf
that which is fit to be done by thee. If thou intend
doing me a good turn, and if thy sense be steady, I would
know what Ravana is doing after having left this place. That
guileful and wicked-minded one, R&vana, destroyer of
enemies, having powers of illusion, overwhelms me even as
the Vdruni just drunk. Confining me here for ever and a
day, (Ravana) sets on dreadful Rakshasas to alike threaten
and scold me constantly. And f am agitated aud alarmed,
and my mind is (always) uneasy. And I, dwelling in the egoka
wood, is ever agitated If there is any talk (of delivering
me), or keeping me confined,—thou shouldst communicate
unto me the decision arrived at. This is the highest favor
that I seek (at thy bands).” Thereat, the mild-speeched
Saramf, wiping (Sit8’s) face washed in tears, spake unto her,
as she said this,—"If this is thy wish, I will go, O Janaki. O
Mithila’s daughter, having possessed myself of the intent
of the enemy, I shall come back.” Having said this, (Saram4),


* ie, the words of Ravana.


1200 RAMAYANA,


repairing to the Raksha, heard Ravana’s converse with his
counselors. And having heard of the decision of that
wicked-minded one, she, understanding decisions, swiftly
retraced her steps to the fair agoka forest. And then, entering
there, she saw Janaka’s daughter, expecting (her) like a
very Sri, bereft of her lotus. And, the fair-spoken Sarama,
on getting back (near her), Sita, embracing her affectionately,
herself gave her a seat. “Sitting down here at ease, do.
thou relate to me faithfully all about the determination of the
wicked-minded and guileful Ravana? Thus accosted by the
trembling Sit@, Saram& related everything that had been
said by Ravana and his counselors. “O Vaidehi, the Raksha
lord was advised by his mother and the aged counselors in
pregnant words informed with affection, having thy deliver-
ance for their object. ‘Do thou make over Maithili uato the
king of men, paying him homage due. Thou hast in
Janasthana profusely witnessed wonderful instances (of his
prowess). The crossing of the ocean, Hanumin’s sight (of
Sita—-and the slaughter of the Rakshas in fight,—what
person is capable of doing all this in battle” Thus long
exhorted by his counselors as well as his mother, Ravana
doth not make up his mind to emancipate thee, even as a
covetuous person is loath to part with wealth (appropriated).
And, O Maithili, without renouncing his life in battle, he
doth not intend to liberate thee. Even this is the dermina-
tion which that cruel one hath arrived at along with his
advisers. This intent is in consequence of their coveting sur-
cease. He can not yield thee up from sheer fear ; nor is he
backward in battle, or shirketh his own destruction or that
of all the Rakshasas. O dark-eyed lady, slaying Ravana
in battle with sharp shafis, Rama shail take the back to
Ayodhya.” In the meanwhile there was heard a mighty
uproar occasioned by the whole host, and drums and conchs,
--which shook the earth. Hearing that hubbub of the
monkey-army, the servants of the Rakshasa monarch, ran


YUDDHARENDAM. . 1201


who were in Lank’,—growing dispirited,and bereft of energy,
with weakness overcoming their powers,—did not see any
goad, in consequence of the fault of the ruler.


SECTION Xxxv.


on


Ao that captor of hostile capitals, the mighty-armed
R&ma, was advancing (upon Lanka) with the sounds of drums
mixed with the blares of conchs. Hearing this noise, RAvana
—lord of Rikshasas—reflecting for a while, cast his eyes
upon his counselors. And addressing there all those
counsellors, that afflictor of the world—the crooked and
highly powerful lord of the R&kshasas, Ravana, making his
court resound,—=running down (R&ma’s) crossing the main,
as well as his vigor, strength and manhood,—said to them,—
“What ye have said touching RAma’s (prowess), hath beon
heard by me. And I also know ye to be of sterling valor in the
field. Yet why, knowing R&ma’s prowess, do ye silently look
at each other ?! Then the maternal grand sire (of Ravana),
possessed of exceeding wisdom, named Mflyavan, hearing his
words, said,—'The king that is accomplished in the various
kinds of learning,* and that followeth polity,ever commandeth
affluence and bringeth his enemies under his subjection. He
that seasonably concludes peace and carries on war with his
enemies,—and who advances his own party, attaineth great
affluence. A king should enter into peace, if he be an
equal or inferior of his adversary, and engage in war, if be
more powerful,—but an enemy should never be disregarded.


* The commentator says there are four and ten kinds of learning; but
unfortanately he does not enumerate them.-T.


15f


1203 RAMAYANA.


Therefore, O Ravana, peace with Rama is what commends
itself to me; and do thou render unto him that for which thou
hast been invaded (by him), viz., Sita. All the Devarshis
and Gandharvas wish for (R&ma’s) victory. Therefore, do
not enter into hostilities with him; but do thou bend thy
mind to the conclusion of peace with him. That possessor
of the six attributes, the Great-father, hath appointed two
courses, (respectively) for the Asuras and the celestials,
having for their proper objects righteousness and unrighteous-
ness, Righteousness, we hear, is the course of the high-souled
celestials, as, O Rakshasa, unrighteousness is that of Rakshas
and Asuras. During the Krita Yuga, righteousness swalloweth
up sin ; and during Tishya,* unrighteousness swalloweth up
virtuc. Thou, ranging the three worlds, hadst extinguished
pregnant piety, and reaped unrighteousness ; and it is for this
that thy foes have waxed potent.t And, having grown
through thy neglect, unrighteousness devoureth us, and that
protector of the gods, (righteousness), is strengthening the
side of the celestials. Thou, addicted to carnal pleasures
and acting in defiance of duty, hadst aroused the high wrath
of the saints resembling fire. The power of these possessed
of souls sanctified through asceticism, and ever engaged in
invoking the aid of righteousness, is incapable of being
resisted and is like flaming fire. The twice-born ones engage
in contemplation with intent minds, offer oblations into the
fire according to the ordinance, and loudly recite the Vedas.
They overpower the Rakshas,uttering the Vedas ; and thereat
they fly in all directions like clouds scattered in summer. And
the smoke that ariseth from the Agnihotra sacrifices of saints
resembling fire, enveloping the energy of the Rakshasas,
spreads over the ten cardinal quarters, And the fierce
austerities of vow-observing saints, performed at particular


* The Kali Yuga—T.
+ While ranging the three worlds on a career of conquest, thoa didst,
disturbing sacrifices, cfc, wrong righteousness —T.


PUDDHARANDA. 1203


sacred spots, try the R&kshasas sore. Thou hast obtained a
boon, conferring immunity at the hands of deities, D&navas
and Yakshas. But men and monkeys, bears and Golangulas,
possessed of enormous strength and endowed with vigor,
and of indomitable prowess,—coming here, are setling up
roars. Witnessing various and many dire portents,| perceive
the destruction of all the Rakshasas. Dreadful and terrific
clouds, uttering harsh sounds, are showering blood all around
Lanka, And (live) vehicles are dropping profuse tears.
And all sides, covered with dust, do not appear bright as
formerly, And beasts of prey, jackals and vultures, are
emitting frightful cries, and, entering into the garden of
Lanka, form themselves into bands. And in dreams
mighty dark-hued women in front of dwellings, seizing at (the
furniture ) thereof, and speaking inauspiciously, laugh
displaying their sable teeth. And in houses dogs are feasting
on the articles of worship. Aud cows bring forth asses, and
mungooses, mice. And cals are pairing with leopards, and
swine with dogs, and Kionaras with Rakshasas and human
beings. And red-footed white sky-coursing pigeons, urged on
by Doom, are going about for the destruction of the
R&kshasas. And female-parrots in houses, wounded and
worsted by other birds delighting in discord, are drop-
ping down, emitting indistinct notes. And all the birds
and beasts are crying (distressfully) with their faces turned
tewards the sun. And at dusk a frightful, withered, tawny-
hued male figure, looking like Death himself, with his head
shaven, peereth into the houses (of people). These and
other evil omens occur. Rama I deem as Vishnu assuming
the form of aman. Raghava of steady prowess, for certain,
is no human being,—he that hath built 2 bridge over the
deep, must be an exceedingly wonderful person. Therefore,
O Ravana, conclude peace with Rama—king of men. Having
ascertained fit course, do thou act properly.” Having said
this, unto that vile one, and known the intention of the lord


1204 . RAMAPANA.


of Rakshas, that strong M&lyavan, of exceeding prowess,
became silent, eying Ravana.


SECTION Xxxvi.


"Tur Ten-necked one, come under the controt of Time,
did not brook the beneficial speech spoken by M&lyav&n.
Contracting his face into a frown, he, coming under the
masterdom of passion, with bis eyes rolling in wrath,
addressed M&lyavn, saying,—"The words which, deeming
the strength of the enemy as superior, thou hast harshly
spoken, considering it as beneficial, had never before
entered my ears. A (mere) man, and feeble, and alone, and
having monkeys for his support, why dost thou deem Rama,
who hath (further) been cast off by his sire, and hath in
consequence taken refuge in the woods,—as competent (to
cope with me)? And why dost thou consider me, who am
the lord of the Rakshas, and feared even by the inmmortals,—
as weak and reft of all power? Thou, I suspect, speakest
(thus) roughly either from jealousy of my heroism, or
for inciting me. And who that is wise and learned, ever
addresseth him roughly that is at once puissant and of (high)
station, if not to spurhim on? Why, having brought Sita
like a Sri shorn of her lotus, shall I give her up, from fear of
Raghava? Behold Raghava,environed by Kotis of monkeys,
with Sugriva and Lakshmana, slain one of these days{ He
before whom even the gods cannot stay in the field,—how
can that Ravana ever come by fear? Better that I should
be riven in twain,—~but bend I never will. This is my native
fault; and nature is incapable of being overcome. And if
Rima hath at his pleasure constructed a bridge over the


VUDDAAKANDAM, 1205


ocean, what is the wonder in this that thou hast conceived
such a fear? And although Rama hath crossed the ocean
along with the monkey-army, yet I swear unto thee truly,
living, he shall not back hence.” When Ravana, wrought up
with passion, had spoken thus, Milyavn, knowing him
wroth, did not return a reply. And, duly tendering blessings
unto the king, Malyav&n, taking his permission, went to his
own abode. And the Rakshasa, Ravana, along with his
courtiers, having consulted together as to what was fit to be
done, set about the defence of Lanka. And he commanded
the Rakshasa Prahasta (to guard) the Eastern gate ; and the
exceedingly powerful Mah’p&rgwa and Mahodara (to guard)
the Southern gate ; and he ordered his son Indrajit.possessing
mighty powers of illusion, girt by innumerable Rakshasas,
to guard the Western gate. And he commanded Suka and
Sarana Lo defend the Northern gate. But he said unto the
counsellors,—"I will myself go thither."* And he posted
in the middle in the garrison the Rakshasa, Virupaksha,
endowed with exceeding prowess and energy, backed by
countless Rakshasas. Having taken these measures in
Lanka, the Rakshasa-chief, urged by Fate, deemed himself
as having achieved success. Having thus completely provided
for the defence of the city, he dismissed the ministers ; and,
honored by the counselors with blessings of victory, (then)
entered his magnificent and splendid inner apartment.


SECTION xxxvet.


"Trose kings, man and monkey, that monkey the Wind-
god’s son, Jambavin—sovereign of bears—the Rakshasa,


* i, ¢. to defend the Northern gate-—T.


1206 RAMAYANA.


Bibhishana, the son of Vali, Angada, Sumitra’s son, the
monkey, Sarabha, Sushena along with his friends, Kumuda,
Nala, and Panaga, arriving at the dominions of the enemy,
assembled together, began to deliberate. “Yonder is that
Lank& ruled by Ravana, invincible even unto the celestials,
serpents and Gandharvas. Let us, keeping before us success
in the enterprise, consult together for the purpose of arriving
atadecision, We are here daily nearing Ravana, lord of
R&kshasas.” As they were speaking thus, RAvana’s younger
brother, Bibhishana, said in a pregnant speech free from
provinicialism,-~“Anala, Panaga, Sampati and Pramati—all
courtiers of mine—having gone up to Lanka, have come back
here, Wearing the forms of birds, they entered into the
hostile forces ; and, having seen the measures that had been
adopted (by them’, have come (back). O Rama, hearken to
me as [tell thee truly anent the provisions which they have
related, made by the wicked-minded Ravana. In the Eastern
gate stayeth Prahasta along with his forces ; in the Southern,
the exceedingly powerful MahSparcwa and Mahodara; and
in the Western, Ravana’s son, Indrajit, supported by innumer-
able Riksbasas, equipped with pattizas, swords and bows,
and beating darts and maces in theic hands,—surrounded by
heroes carrying various weapons, And, backed by many
thousands of Rakshasas weilding weapons, and accompanied
by Rakshasas conversant with counsel, Ravana himself, his
heart agitated to the height, gyardeth the Northern gate of
the city. And Virup&ksha with a powerful force accoutred
in javelins, clubs and bows,protects the garrison in the centre.
Having seen these hosts thus disposed in Lank&, my
counsellors have speedily come back here. There are ten
thousand elephants, an Ayuta cars, two of horses, and. about
a &oti of Rakshasas, powerful and strong, and equipped
with arms in conflict.* These night-rangers are ever the
favorites of the R&kshasa ruler. And, O king, a oti of


+ These are, remarks the commentator, the leaders,—T.


PUDDHAKANOAM: 1207


forces accompany each of these Rakshasas in battle.”
Having conveyed this information concerning Lanka, which
had been communicated by his counsellors, the mighty-armed
Bibhishana showed (unto Rama) those Rakshasas themselves.
And in company with his counsellors, Ravana's graceful
younger brother, ever striving for the welfare of Rama, by
way of answer communicated everything that was going
forward in Lank& unto R&ma, having eyes resembling
totus-leaves,-—O Rama, when Ravana battled with Kuvera,
sixty lacs of R&kshasas marched forth (to meet him), In
prowess, energy, vigor, exceeding fortitude, and hauteur, they
resembled the wicked-minded Ravana himself. In this
matter, thou ought not to grow wroth,—1 only arouse thy
wrath, and do not endeavour to frighten thee.* Thou canst
subdue even the celestials by thy prowess. Therefore thou,
environed by a mighty army, having arrayed Lhe monkey-
forces in order of battle, shalt thrash Ravana (in battle).”
When R&vaua’s younger brother had spoken thus, Raghava,
said these words with reference to his beating the foe,—"“Let
that foremost of monkeys, Nila, surrounded by an immense
number of monkeys, cope with Prahasta at the Eastern gate
of Lanka. And, engirt by a mighty force, let Angada, son
of Vali, resist Mah&pargwa and Mahodara at the Southern
gate (thereof). And let that son of the Wind-god, Hanuman,
backed by innumerable monkeys, (beating the host stationed)
at the Western gate, find entrance (into the city). 1 myself,
determined to compass the destruction of the lord of
R&kshasas, who, waxing powerful in consequence of the boon
he hath received, bath brought about the destruction of
high-souled saints resembling gods and Danavas,—and who
goeth round all regions, oppressing people,—will, along with
Sumitr4’s son,smiting (the foe), occupy the Northern entrance,


where Ravana with his army is stationed. And let the


* ie. Thou onght not to be angry with me; for I do not frighten thee, but
rouse thy wrath against Révana.”—T,


£208 RAMAYANA.


powerful king of monkeys, and the puissant sovereign of
bears, and the younger brother of the R&kshasa-chief, manage
the soldiery posted in the centre. And in this battle, the
monkeys need not assume the forms of human being. And
let this serve for a sign that the monkeys, in order to the
recognition of our own forces, appear with their proper
monkey-marks, We seven only shall battle with the foe
in human shapes,—vis., 1 along with my brother, the
exceedingly energetic Lakshmana, and my friend Bibhishana
counting for the filth in company with his own following.”
Having said this unto Bibhishana for attaining success in the
enterprise, that lord, the intelligent Rama, seeing the sides
of Suvela more beautiful (than other places), intended to
ascend it. Then, environed by a mighty host, the high-
souled and magnanimous Rama, his features mirroring forth
high .exultation,—overshadowing the entire Earth (with bis
forces), set out for Lank&, determined upon destroying
the enemy.


SECTION xxxviit.
a


Tavine been bent upon mounting Suvela, Rama,
followed by Lakshmana, addressed in sweet and excellent
words, Sugriva, and that righteous night-ranger, Bibhi-
shana, versed in counsel and conversant with precepts,
who was devoted to him,—saying,—“We shall all ascend this
mount Suvela, bedight with metals; and pass this night
even here. And (from here) will we view the abode of that
R&kshasa who, foul of soul, hath carried off my spouse, to
bring destruction down on bimself,--who knoweth nor
morality nor goed conduct nor behaviour (conducive to the


YUDDHAKENDAM. - 1209


dignity of his descent),—and who, in consequence of his base
propensity, hath committed himself to so heinous a course of
action.” Having decided thus, Rima, filled with wrath at
“Ravana, coming to Suvela, ascended its variegated plateau.
And Lakshmana, collected, went in his wake. And, upraising
bow and arrow, Sugriva, (ever) engaged in valorous acts,
accompanied with Bibhishana as well as his counselors,
following him, also ascended (the mountain). And all those
rangers of mountains, gifted with the vehemence of the Wind
in hundreds ascended mount Suvela, where Raghava was
stationed. And ascending the mountain in a short time, they
all beheld from its summit the city, appearing to be built on
the air. And the monkey-leaders beheld Lank&, exceedingly
splendid with noble gateways; gracefully enclosed with a
wall; thronging with Rakshasas; and defended by sable
Rikshasas. And the foremost of monkeys saw these appear-
ing like another wall (overtopping the one beneath). And on
seeing the Rakshasas, the monkeys burning for battle set up
various roars in the presence of Rama. Then the Sun,
crimsoned with Eve, ascended the Setting-hill ; and Night
came, illumined by the Moon at his full. Then the master of
the monkey-army, Rama, saluted and honored by Bibhishana,
accompanied by Lakshmana as well as the leaders of the
monkeys, sojourned happily on the breast of Suvela.


SECTION Kxxix.


— ae


Havine passed the night in Suvela, the heroic monkey-
leaders surveyed woods and forests in Lanki. And seeing
those extensive (woods and forests), mild, and charming, and
beautiful to behold, they were seized with wonderment.


152


1210 RAMEYANA.


Abounding in champakas, agokas, vakulas, ¢élas, and palms ;
covered with famdlas and panagas,—and environed all
around with trees,—-and surrounded with Hintalas, Aryunas,
blossoming Saptaparnas , Tilakas, Karnik&ras, and Patalas,—
trees with flowering tops, entertwined with creepers,—Lank&
looked exceedingly lovely, with various sights,—resembling
the Amarlivati herself of Indra. And trees there, furnished
with variegated flowers having tender rosy leaves,—and blue
lawns, and rows of woods; and bearing odourous and
charming blossoms and fruits,—looked like men adorned
with ornaments. And there a delightful and pleasant wood
resembling Chaitraratha,and like unto Nandana itself—having
all the seasons present,—appeared beauteous to the view, with
black bees all around. And it had Datyuhas, and Koyasthivas,
and peacocks dancing; and the strains of the coels were
heard at the woodland rills. And the heroic and exhilarated
monkeys, capable of wearing forms at pleasure, entered those
woods and groves frequented by maddened birds and ranged
by Bhramaras,—tracts overflowing with the lays of coels,
and ringing with the voices of songsters,—resonant with the
notes of Bhramaras—sovereigns of their species—and
eloquent with the cries of ospreys. And as the exceedingly
energetic monkeys entered, there blew upon them the breeze
—like unto life—redolent of perfume obtained from contact
with the blossoms. And others of the leaders among the
heroic monkeys, coming out from the bands, ordered by
Sugriva, made in the direction of Lank& crowned with
ensigns. And, terrifying the fowls and dispiriting beasts
and birds and shaking Lank& with their roars, those fore-
most monkeys set up shouts. And they, endowed with great
impetuosity, went on, oppressing the earth with their
battle-array ; and clouds of dust suddenly arose from the
the march of the soldiery. And bears, and lions, and
buffaloes, and elephants, and deer, and birds, overwhelmed
with affright, made for the ten cardinal points. The graceful


FUDDHAKANDAH. qatr


and lovely summit of Trikuta was entire, elevated, sky-
piercing, of golden splendour, measuring an hundred yoyanas,
clear-shining, level, inaccessible even to fowls, and incapable
of being ascended even in thought—not to say of actual ascen-
sion by people. Lanka, ruled by Ravana, was situated on
its" top,—ten yoyanas in width and twenty in length. And
that city was graced with lofty ornamented gateways
resembling pale clouds, and golden and silvern walls; and
Lank& was adorned with palaces and piles ; like the skyt
graced with clouds on the approach of the rainy season.
And that palace, which was adorned with thousands of pillars,
and which, as if piercing the heavens, looked like a peak of
Kailaga—was the residence of the Sovereign of the
R&kshasas—the ornament of the city, (ever guarded by full
hundreds of R&kshasas. And Lakshmana’s auspicious and
puissant elder brother, beholding that flourishing and wealthy
city resembling the celestial regions,—charming to the mind,
made of gold, graced with mountains, and decked out with
mountains containing various metals,—resonant with the
nutes of various birds; abounding in various beasts,—
furnished with various kinds of flowers,—and inhabited by
various orders of Rakshasas,—was struck with astonishment.
And Rama, surrounded by his mighty forces, saw that palace,
filled with diverse kinds of gems, adorned with rows of
edifices, and having huge engines and gateways.


* Trikuta’s—T.

+ Madhyamam Vaishnavam podam—the middle foot of Vishnu. When
Vishnu in his Dwarf-form took the conceit out of Vali, the renowned Asura.
kking,—he covered the earth with one pace, the sky with another and heaven
with the jast.—T.


war2 RAMAPANA.


SECTION xL.
oe


Turn Rama, accompanied by the monkey-leaders,
along with Sugriva, ascended the top of Suvela, measuring
a circumference of two yoyanas. And staying there fora
while and looking at the ten cardinal points, he saw Lank®
finely placed on the charming summit of Trikuta,-graced
with elegant groves; and (he also saw) the unconquerable
lord of Rikshasas, stationed at the top of the gateway,
fanned with white chdmaras; graced with the umbrella
betokening victory ; smeared with red sandal ; adorned in red
ornaments ; resembling masses of sable clouds ; and apparelled
in golden attire,—his breast bearing scars from the tusk-ends
of Airdvata; covered with a sheet hued like the blood of
hares; and appearing like clouds lighted up by the evening
sun. And on seeing the Rakshasa-chief, Sugriva suddenly rose
up in the sight of the lords of monkeys as well as Ra&ghava.
And influenced by wrath, he, mustering strength and vigor,
rising from the brow of the mountain, bounded to the
gateway. And pausing for a while and eying the Rikshasa
intrepidly, he, stighting the Raksha, addressed him in harsh
speech, saying,—"O R&kshasa, I am the friend as well as
the slave of Rima—lord of men. Me, backed by the energy
of that king of the Earth, shalt thou not escape to-day.”
Saying this, be, suddenly springing up, descended on him;
and snatching away his variegated crown, let it fall on the
earth. And seeing him come abruptly, the night-ranger
spoke to him thus,—‘Thou that wert Sugriva beyond my
ken, shalt be neckless* near me.” Having said this, he


© The text has Afnagrica—neckless. There is a pon here, turning on the
word gried—neck. Ravana says: ‘Thou wert Sugriva (good-necked) in my
absence,—but now thou shalt be Afwagrive—neckless.""—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1213


rose up swiftly and dragged him* down to the earth.
Thereat springing like pith, the monkey pushed down his
antagonist with his arms. And each having his body bathed
in sweat and his person covered with blood,each choking and
annuling the efforts of the other,—and resembling a Sd/mal?
ora Kinguka, and dealing blows and slaps, and hitting with
his arms and hands,—those exceedingly strong ones, the
lord of the Rakshasas and that of the monkeys, fought
wonderfully. And having for along time encountered each
other in combat on the dais belonging to the gate,—they,
now lifting up their persons and now lowering them, went
down, each felling the other with his legs. And smiting
each other, they, their bodies fastened together, went down
between the wall and the moat,—and again stood upon the
ground. And heaving breath, they, resting for a space,
grappled with each other; and they fast bound each other
with their arms serving for ropes. Andeach fired with
wrath, and each baving both strength and skill, they now bore
themselves in the lists like a tiger and a lion, furnished with
teeth; or like the young of the foremost elephants engaged
in encounter,—and restraining and pushing each other with
their arms, they simultaneously both came down to the
ground. Then starting again to their feet, they, vituperating
each other, ranged the lists, displaying feats expressive of
skill and strength. Nor did those heroes speedily come by
fatigue. And resembling mighty elephants, they, resisting
each other by means of their powerful arms like unto the
trunks of elephants, fought for a long while, swiftly wheeling
about the arena. And approaching each other, they strove
to slay each other, like unto two cats seated, momentarily
encountering each other over some food. And the
lord of monkeys and RAvana, accomplished in fight,
coursed the arena, displaying wonderful mandalas,t various


* Sogriva.
+ A mandala is of four kinds,vis., chdri,kerana, Khanda and makdmandala,


tang RAWAPANA.


sthdnas,!a) curious gomdétrakas,(6) gatapratyégatas, tiraschi-
nagatas, vakragatas, parimokshas, varjanas, paridhdvanas,
abhidravanas,c) dpldvanas.d) savigrahdvasthdnas,'e) paré-.
vrittas, (f) apdvrittas,(g) apadrutas,(h) avaplutas,(s) apanyas-
4as,(7) and upanyastas.(k) In the meanwhile the Raksha
attempted to put forth his power of illusion. Knowing
this, the king of monkeys shot into the sky. And Ravana,
overpowered by fatigue and out of breath, thus balled by
the monkey-king, stood where he was. Thus the master of
the foremost monkeys, securing fame in fight, beat the night-
ranger, causing him to experience fatigue, And bounding
beyond the spacious sky, the offspring of the Sun came to the
side of Rama in the midst of the monkey-forces. And having
done that deed, the son of the Sun,—lord of monkeys—wilh
his heart surcharged with rejoicing, entered that host having
the speed of the wind ; enhancing the martial ardour of the
son of the foremost of the Raghus, and honored by the
monkeys.
Proceeding with one leg advanced is chdri, with two alternately advanced is
favana ; proceeding alter the manner of Aarana, with some special movements,
is Ahanda; and two or three Akandas combined is a mahdmandala—T.

() A particular adjustment of the steps successively ; awry, efe.——It in of
six kinds, vis, Vaishnava, Sampéda, Vaigtiha, Mandala, Pratydlirka and
Andlirhe,—T.

(8) A kind of motion resembling cow's urine flowing, as its name signifies.

(©) Swiftly fronting the antagonist.

(@) Proceeding ‘like a summer's cloud.’

(@) Standing before the adversary, after making others engage in combat.
‘What this means in the passage under notice is hard to divine.

(f) Turning away from a foe.

(2) Moving off from the side of the enemy.

(4) Movement with low posture for seizing at the thighs of the adversary.

(i) Going for a kick at the adversary.

(J) Distending the chest, so that the antagonist may not catch the arms,

(#} Stretching forth the arms for seizing those of the enemy.


YUODHARANDAM. ratg


SECTION XLI


ed


Sine those ominous signs, Lakshmana’s elder brother,
Ram4, embracing Sugriva, said,—“Without consulting with
me, thou hast acted thus rashly, But kings should not act
in such a rash way. Placing in suspense, me, this army
and Bibhishana, thou, O hero, enamoured of daring deeds,
hast put thyself to all this trouble. But, O hero, henceforth,
do not act so. O subduer of enemies, if thou come by any
mischance, what shall Sita avai} me; or Bharata; or my
younger brother—Lakshmana ; or Satrughna, O slayer of
enemies ; or, again, my own person? Ere thou badst come,
1 had arrived at this determination ; albeit, O thou that art
equal to the mighty Indra or Varuna, I knew thy prowess full
well. Slaying Ravana in battle along with his sons, forces
and vehicles, and installing Bibhishana in Lanka, and placing
the kingdom in the hands of Bharata, | shall renounce my
body, O exceedingly powerful one!” When Rama had said
this, Sugriva answered,—"Knowing my own strength, how,
O Raghava, viewing Ravana, who had ravished away thy
wife, could I forbear, O hero ?” As that hero was speaking
thus, R&ghava addressed Lakshmana having auspiciousness,
thus,—"O Lakshmana, occupying some tract furnished with
cool water and woods bearing fruits, we shall sojourn,
dividing and marshalling our forces. I see a mighty fear
present, destructive of people,—and boding destruction unto
the foremost heroes among the bears, monkeys and
Rakshasas. The winds ruffle ; and the earth is tremulous.
And the tops of mountains tremble, and the mountains
themselves send up loud souuds. And the clouds are
goblinish ; and fierce; and harsh-sounding. And wearing
terrific looks, they fiercely pour down showers mixed with
drops of blood. And the Evening resembles the red sandal,


1216 RAMAYANA,


and is fearful. And a flaming circle droppeth from the Sun.
And exciting great fear, inauspicious birds and beasts,
wearing cruel looks, and in distressful guise,—cry in piteous
accents, facing the Sun. And at night, the ominous Moon
with a black-red brim as at the time of universal wreck,
burneth. And, O Lakshmana, there is a crimson, rough,
slight, and graceful rim round the Sun; anda blue mark is
visible on his disc. And the stars do not course as formerly.
Behold, O Lakshmana, al! these, prefiguring the Doom.
And crows and hawks and vultures drop down, And
jackals yell with loud inauspicious notes. The Earth,
converted into mud with flesh and gore, shall be covered
with darts and javelins and swords, discharged by R&k-
shasas and monkeys. This very day with all expedition
shall we, surrounded on all sides by the monkeys, march
towards the city governed by R&vana.” Having said this
unto Lakshmana, Lakshmana’s elder brother possessed of
exceeding strength, hastily descended from the top of the
mountain. And descending from the mountain, the righteous
Raghava surveyed his troops, incapable of being beaten
by enemies. And after making the mighty host of the
monkey-king equip itself, Raghava versed in season, along
with Sugriva, at the proper hour, issued orders for battle.
Then in due time that one, accoutred with his bow, surround-
edbya mighty army, set out, with the intention of entering
the city of Lank&. And those two—Bibhishana and
Sugriva—and Hanum&n, and Jamvaban, and Nala, and the
bear-king Nila, and Lakshmana, followed (Rama). Behind
them, the mighty array of bears and monkeys followed
Raghava, cevering a wide surface of land. The monkeys,
resembling elephants, capable of resisting foes, took
mountain-peaks and tail trees by hundreds. And in a short
time those repressors of foes—the brothers Rama and
Lakshmana~—arrived at the city of Ravana; with pennons
streaming over her; charming ; garnished with groves and


YUDDHARENDAM, 1217


woods; having variegated gateways; inaccessible ; and having
walls and gates. And urged on by R&ma’s command,
the wood-rangers,* as commanded, blocking up (Lank&)
incapable of being subdued even by the gods, stationed them-
selves. Coming to Lank& roled by Ravana, that hero, Rama,
son unto Dagaratha, along with Lakshmana, remained stationed
at the Northern gate, where Ravana used to reside. None
save Rama was competent to protect that dreadful gate,
where Ravana used to reside. None save Rama was
competent to protect that dreadful gate, guarded by Ravana
himself, like the Ocean guarded by Varuna,—and protected
on all sides by terrible Rakshasas equipped with weapons;
capable of striking terror into the weak, like unto the
nether regions guarded by Danavas. And (Rama) saw there
many and various arms and mail of the warriors, ranged
together. And coming to the Eastern gate, that leader of the
monkey-army, the powerful Nila, along with Mainda and-
Dwivida,—took up his post there. And the exceedingly
steong Angada, accompanied by Rishava, Gavaksha, Gaya,
and Gavaya, occupied the Southern gate. And the mighty
monkey Hanumin protected the Western entrance. And
Sugriva himself, with Prajangha, Tarasa and other heroes,
was quartered near the garrision in the centre. And
accompanied by all the foremost monkeys resembling Su-
parna or the Wind, twenty £ofis of renowned monkey-leaders,
blocking up all sides, stationed themselves near the monkey,
Sugriva. And at Rama’s command, Lakshmana along with
Bibhishana, went from door to door, issuing instructions to
kotis of monkeys. Qn the west of Rama, Jambavan along
with Snshena, followed by innumerable troops, remained
hard by at the garrison in the middle. And those tiger-like
monkeys, furnished with teeth like unto tigers, weilding trees
and mountain-tops, stood ready for fight. And all had their
tails curled up, and all were armed with teeth and nails, and


* Monkeys.
153


1a1B RAMAYANA,


all had chequered bodies,and all had frightful faces. And some
had the strength of ten elephants ; and some had strength ten
times as much; and some of the monkey-leaders there had
the strength of a thousand elephants,—and some had the
strength of numbers (of elephants); and some had strength
hundred times as much. And others had immeasurable might,
And wonderful and astonishing was their meeting. And the
concourse at that place of the monkey-forces was like the
concourse of Jocusts. And the air was filled up, and the
earth was covered quite with the monkeys coursing towards
Lank& and dropping down into it. And hundreds and
thousands making up the army of monkeys, arrived at the
gate of Lanka; while others were pouring in from all sides
for encounter. And that mount was covered with monkeys.
And athousand ayxtas were going round the city. And
Lanka, blocked up everywhere with powerful monkeys bearing
trees in their hands, was incapable of being entered eveu by
the Wind. And the R&akshasas, sore pressed by thousands
of monkeys resembling masses of clouds, and like unto Sakra
himself in battle, were seized with amazement. And like
unto the roar of water on the ocean being riven, there arose
a mighty tumult in consequence of the forces surging hither
‘and thither, And with that sound the entire Lanka, with her
wall and gateways, her mountains, wouds, and forests, began
to shake. Aod that army, protected by Rama and Lakshmana
as well as Sugriva, became all the more invincible even by
the Asuras and celestials. And having arranged his forces
with the view of destroying the Rakshas, Raghava, versed
in the resources of war,* taking counsel of the counsellors,
and deciding again and again his course of action,~intending
to adopt further measures,—resolved to abide by the advice
of Bithishanat, remembering the morality regulating


* conciliation, &c.
+ Which was—t If Révana should seok thy suecour, thou shouldst
cunfer on him his kingdom.""—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1219


monarchs*. And then, calling Vali’s son, Angada, (R&ma)
said,—O mild one, going to the Ten-necked one, tell him
in my words,—‘Bounding over the deep and casting off fear
and dejection,! have laid seige to the city of Lank&; and
have reft thee of thy prosperity and thy wealth; and
rendered thee moribund and senseless. Thou hast, O night-
tanger, through delusion and pride injured saints and
celestiats, and Gandharvas and Apsaras, and Serpents, and
Yakshas, and crowned heads. But, O Rakshasa, thy pride
begot of the boon received from the Self-create hath gone
from thee, whose destroyer,t I, afflicted in consequence of
my wife having been carried off,—weilding the rod, have
sat down at the door of Lank&. O R&kshasa, thou shalt,
remaining steady in fight, attain the state of celestials
and Maharshis and R&jarshis. And, O worst of Rakshasas,
do thou display that prowess of thine by which, aided by thy
power of illusion, thou hast forcibly carried off Sits,
disregarding me. [ shat with my sharpened shafts render
this world free from Rakshasas, unless rendering back
Mithila’s daughter, thou throw thyself on my mercy. And,
for certain, that foremost of R&kshasas, the righteous and
graceful Bibhishana, who hath joined us, shall obtain, without
having a thorn in his side, all this wealth of Lanka’. For
thou, foolish, wicked, ignorant of self-knowledge, and having”
dolts for counsellors, art not competent to unrighteously
exercise kingship for a moment. Fight thou, O R&kshasa,
summoning fortitude and heroism, On being slain with my
shafts, thou shalt attain peace.} O night-ranger, if thou
shouldst range the three worlds in the shape of a bird, thou,
coming in my ken, shalt not be able to preserve thy life. It


 Inthis connection, the principle referred to is: “If a king can accom-
plish bis purpose by conciliation, he should not employ punishment.”"—T.

+ Dandadhara—lit—rod-bearing, a name of Yama,—who is described as
mreilding a rod for chastising wrong-doers.—T.

$ i. €. aftain heaven —T.


1220 RAMAYANA,


is all this for thy good ; do thou perform acts for the good of
thy body surviving death; and do thou see Lanka well;
for thy life is in my keeping.” Thus addressed by Rama of
untiring deeds, T&ra’s son went through the welkin like the
embodied bearer of sacrificial offerings.* And arriving
near that subduer of enemies, Ravana, in a moment, that
graceful one saw Ravana, sitting calmly in the midst of hiv
ministers. And dropping down in his vicinity like a flaming
fire, that best of monkeys, Angada, resembling a golden
bracelet,t stood there. And then introducing himself,
Angada delivered unto Ravana along with his ministers all
that Rama had excellently spoken unto him, neither
extenuating nor setting down aught of himself,—I am the
envoy of the king of Kogala—- Rama of untiring deeds ; and
Fam the sun of Vali—!I do not know whether thou hast
heard of me. And Raghu’s son, Rama—enhancer of
Kaugaly&’s joy—hath said uuto thee,—"Do thou, O fell one,
coming out, give me battle and prove thy prowess, Thee
shall I slay together with thy ministers, and with thy sons
and relations and friends. And thou being slain, the three
worlds shall attain peace. And to-day shall I destroy the
enemy of the gods and Danavas, and Yakshas, of the
Gandharvas, serpents and Rakshasas,—and the thorn (in the
side of} the saints. And on thee being slain, all the wealth
shall be Bibhishana’s ; unless, bowing down (unto me) and
paying me homage, thou render back Maithili.” When that
monkey-chief had spoken thus, the lord of the night-rangers
was wrought up with wrath. And coming under the sway of
passion, he commanded his counsellors, saying,—“Take
this one of perverse understanding, and slay him at once”.


* Fire,

+ This simile is hardly happy; but the lure was even the name of the
monkey, Angade suggested Aanakéngada—golden bracelet. This typifies the
tendency prevailing to this day of Hindu authors to exercise their ingenuity in
puns—T.


YUDDHAKENDAM. 1238


Hearing Ravana’s speech, four grim-visaged night rangers
seized (Angada) flaming in energy like fire itself. And
T&ra’s son suffered himself to be taken, in order that the
hero might then display his prowess befure the Yatudhfnas.*
Then -Angada, taking them up, who were pressed against his
arms, like insects,—leapt up
Thereat, in consequence of the impetuosily of his bound, the
Rikshasas, slipping off, fell on to the ground in the very
sight of the Rakshasa king. Then the powerful son of Valé
with his legs attacked the top of that palace, elevated like a
hill,t of the lord of R&kshasas. And thereat, as formerly
the summit of the Himavan had been cleft by the thunder-
bolt, the palace, thus assailed, was split in the very presence
of the Ten-necked one. Having reft the top of the edifice,
and proclaimed his name, Angada, setting up a mighty
roar, sprang into the sky. And, aggrieving the Rakshasas
and rejoicing all the monkeys, he came back to the
side of Rama in the midst of the monkeys. Ravana was
transported with wrath in consequence of the breaking down
of the palace. And, finding his destruction (at hand), he
began to heave sighs. And Rama, surrounded by innumer-
able delighted monkeys setting up shouts,—anxious for
slaying his foe, prepared for battle. And at the command
of Sugriva, the exceedingly powerful monkey—Sushena—
resembling a mountain-summit, surrounded by a large number
of monkeys capable of assuming shapes at pleasure, began
to range from door to door ;f like the Moon ranging the stars.
Seeing the hundred aéshawhinis of the wood-rangers,
stationed in Lanka, extending down to the sea, some of
the Rakshasas were struck with astonishment, while some


* Rékshanas.

+ The commentator, however, would make dadarga—saw—understood.
“Angada saw that the palace was high like a hill, efe.” This is unne-
cessary—T.

+ For protecting the entire army, as well as for procuring information of
the movements of the enemy —T.


ba palace resembling a hill.


1222 RAMAPANS,


came under the influence of fear; and some experienced
delight from the (anticipated) delight of battle. And the
space between-the well and the moat all was flooded with
monkeys. And the distressed Ra&kshasas saw the wall
thronging with monkeys ;* and thereat exclaiming “Alas”
Alas," the Rakshasas were extremely terrified. And on
that frightful uproar arising, the warriors of the Rakshasa
monarch,-Rakshasas—seizing mighty arms, began to patrol
about, like unto winds blowing at the time of the universal
dissolution.


SECTION XLII.


ett


Taen thoseRakshasas, going to that subduer of enemies,
Ravana, informed him that Rama along with the monkeys
had laid seige unto the city, Hearing the city beseiged, the
night-ranger was enraged. And, hearing that double arrange-
ments had been made (by Rama) in guarding the gateways,
(Ravana) ascended the palace. He saw Lank& with her
hills, woods, and forests, covered everywhere with innumer-
able monkeys eager for encounter. And he saw the entire
Earth tawneyed with the monkeys; and he reflected within
himself how he could destroy these. And reflecting for
long, Ravana having expansive eyes, assuming patience gazed
at Riighava and the leader of monkeys. Raghava with
his host was fast approaching (the wall); and Ravana saw
Lank& defended on all sides by Rakshasas. And Dagaratha’s
son, seeing Lanka crowned with variegated ensigns and


" A translator cannot help a feeling of disappointment at the difference—-to
the disadvantage of English—between Sanskrit and English. The origina! for
‘thronging with monkeys’ is a verbal attributive—rdnarikrita—lit.monkeyed.—T.


« VUDDHAKANDAM. 3223


standards, mentally went to Sit&, with a sad heart. ‘For my
sake, here that one, Janaka’s daughter, having eyes resembl-
ing those of a young deer—is undergoing affliction ; and
fieth down on the ground.” And aggrieved at the thought
of Vaidehi, the righteous Rama speedily commanded the
monkeys to compass the destruction of the enemies. As
Rama of untiring deeds said this, the monkeys, filling (the
air) with leonine roars, began to press forward furiously.
“We shall cleave Lank& with mountain-peaks, or with our
blows’—thus thought the leaders within themselves, And
the monkey-leaders stood, raising up gigantic mountuin-
peaks and tops of mountains, and rooting up various trees.
And for doing what was dear unto Rama, that army,
divided into separate parties, in the presence of the Rakshasa-
chief commenced scaling Lanka, And those copper-faced
ones of golden sheen, who. had consecrated their lives to
the service of Rama, equipped with trees and rocks, began
to throng upon Lank&’. And the monkeys with trees and
hill-tops and blows crushed countless gates and tops of
walls; and they filled the moat containing crystal water
with dust, tops of crags, straw, and wood. Then leaders
of thousands and 4ofis and hundreds of fof7s began to scale
Lunk’, And the monkeys crushed golden gateways; and,
breaking down gates resembling the tops of the summits of
Kailiga, bounded roaring, some towards the wall and sume
all around. Aud resembling gigantic elephants, they rushed
towards Lanka. ‘Victory to the mighty Rama, aod Victory
to the exceedingly powerful Lakshinana, and Victory to
king Sugriva, who is protected by Raghava.’ Thus shouting,
those monkeys, wearing forms at will, sending up roars,
rushed amain towards the wall of Lank&. And Viravahu,
Suvahu, Nala and Panaga—leader of monkeys—breaking
(a portion of) the wall, took up their post there. Io the mean-
time, (they) arranged the forces in order of battle. And the
stropg Kumuda, sarrounded by ten £ofis of victorious monkeys,


waag 2 RAMAYANA, 2


stood obstructing the Eastern gate. And for backing him,
there remained the monkey, Prasabha, as also the long-armed
Panaga,surrounded by monkeys. And obstructing the Southern
entrance stood the strong and gallant monkey, Satavali,
surrounded by twenty Aofzs. And the strong sire of Tar&, the
powerful Sushena, obstructed the Western gate, backed by
kotis upon otis (of monkeys). And obstructing the Northern
gate,remained the puissant Rama himself along with Sumitra’s
son, as well as the king of monkeys—Sugriva. And that
hage-bodied and dreadful Golingula—the mighty and powerful
Gavaksha--surrounded by a 4ofr, remained by the side of
Rama. And that destroyer of foes—the exceedingly mighty
Dhumra of the bears of terrific wrath, remained by the side
of Rama—where, surrounded by vigilant counsellors, and
bearing a mace in his hand, stood the exceedingly strong
Bibhishana, endowed with wonderful powers, in complete
panoply. And Gaya, and Gavaksha, and Gavaya, and
Sarabha, and Gandham&dana, protected the monkey-army,
coursing all around. And then, his soul wrought up with
wrath, Ra&vana—lord of Rakshasas—speedily ordered the
whole host to sally out. Hearing those words, which came
out from R&vana’s mouth, all of a sudden the night-rangers
sent up a dreadful yell. Then awoke the kettle-drums,
having moon-like pale faces,—sounded by means of
Golden sticks. And conchs by hundreds and by thousands,
capable of producing loud blares, filled with air proceeding
from the mouths of dreadful Rakshasas,—were winded.
And with conchs placed in their mouths, those night-rangers,
having bodies blue like those of Cukas, resembled masses of
clouds, with lightning and cranes, And, commanded by Ravana,
the troops cheerfully issued forth like the onrushing of the
mighty main filling all at the time of the universal dis-
solution. And then the monkey-army gave a roar, spreading
all around; and it seemed as if the sound filled all Malaya
with its sides and caves. And sounds of conchs, aud drums,


FUDDHAKANDA&M. : #225


as well as the leonine shouts of the impetuous (warriors),
made the earth, air, and ocean, resound ; and these mixed
with the roars of elephants, the neighing of steeds, the
rattle of the car-wheels, and the tread of the Rakshasas”
feet. And in the meantime there commenced a mighty
encounter between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, like that
which took place of yore between the gods and the Asuras.
And displaying their prowess, they* began to slaughter
monkeys with maces, and darts, and adzes. And the vehe-
ment monkeys (on their side) slaughtered Rakshasas with
trees and tops of crags as well as with their nails and teeth,
And a mighty sound arose of ‘Victory unto king Sugriva !’
and ‘Victory unto thee, O king’—each army taking the
name of its king. And then other dreadful Rakshasas that were
stationed upon the wall, dropping down, pierced the monkeys
with darts and éhindipdias. And (thereat) the monkeys,
flying into fury, descending to the earth and bounding,
brought down the Rakshasas with their arms. And that
encounter of the Rakshasas and the monkeys was mighty
and wonderful, and the ground became wet with flesh and
gore.


SECTION XLIN,


—_———


Ano as the high-souled monkeys and Rakshasas faught
on, their wrath vastly increased at sight of each other's
forces. And furnished with steeds in golden trappings ; and
elephants resembling flames of fire ; and cars appearing like
(so many) suns ; and shining armour,—the valiant Rakshasas
issued, making the ten cardinal points resound. The


* Rakshasas,
284


1226 RAMAYANA.


Rakshasas of terrific exploits were burning for victory on
behalf of Ravana.—And the mighty monkey-army also, eager
for victory, darted against the host of the Rakshas of dread-
ful deeds. Acd in the meanwhile, as either party assailed
the other, there took place single combats between the
Rakshasas and the monkeys. Aud as Andhaka had combated
with the Three-eyed (deity),* that Rakshasa, the exceedingly
emergelic Indrajit, fanght with Angada, son unto Vali,
Sampati, hard to bear, engaged with Prajangha; and the
monkey, Hanum4n, entered into conftict with Jambumili,
And Ravana’s younger brother, Bibhishana, fired with wrath,
encountered Satrughna, endowed with exceeding impetuosity.
And the highly powerful Nila engaged with Nikumbha. And
Sugriva—lord of monkeys~undertook Praghasa, and the
graceful Lakshmana was engaged with Virupaksha, And the
exceedingly irrepressible Agniketu and the R&kshasa—
Ragmiketu-and Mitraghna and Yajnakopa, were engaged
with Rama. And Vajramushthi encountered Mainda, and
Aganiprabha, Dwivida. And those foremost of monkeys
faught with those dreadful Rakshasas,—the heroic and
terrible Pratapana, incapable of being overcome in battle,
was combating with Nala of terrific force ; and that lusty son
of Righteousness, well-known as Sushena,—a mighty
monkey—battled with Vidyunmali. And other fearful
monkeys encountered other Rakshasas ; and many were the
encounters that took place. And great and fierce was the
engagement that took place between the heroic R&kshasas
and monkeys burning for victory, capable of making people’s
hair stand on end. And from the persons of the Rakshasas
and the monkeys there flowed a river of gore, having hair
for grass (growing on its banks),and the bodies of the warriors
for pieces of planks floating (adown the current). Indrajit,
growing enraged, with his mace dealt a blow at that tearec
of hostile ranks, Angada,—like him of an hundred sacrifices


* Siva, fabled to have three eyes.—T.


YUDDH4RANDAM. 1227


striking with his thunderbolt. Thereat, that graceful monkey,
Angada, gifted with yehemence, with his mace crushed his
car decked in gold, together with the steeds and the
charioteer. Samp&ti was pierced with three arrows by
Prajangha ; and the former (in his turn) slew Prajangha on
the edge of battle with an Agwakarna.* And Jambumili,
mounted on a car, possessed of prodigious strength, fired
with wrath, with all the access of force derived from his car,
wounded Hanum&n between his paps. Thereat, getting at his
car, Hanumin—son unto the Wind-god—with a slap speedily
crushed his adversary’s vehicle along with the Raksha. Then
the terrific Pratapana, roaring, rushed at Nala; and thereat
Nala, with his body pierced with sharp shafts by that swift-
handed Raksha, plucked out Pratapana’s eyes, and cast them
tothe earth, And that lord of monkeys, Sugriva, with a
Saptaparnat swiftly slew Praghasa, who appeared to be
devouring up the troops. And, tormenting the Rakshasa of
dreadful form with a shower of shafts, Lakshmana slew
Virupiksha with a single arrow. And the irrepressible
Agniketu, the R&kshas: Ragmiketu, Mitraghna and Yajoa-
kopa, with their arrows rendered Rama aflame. Thereat,
Rima, growing wroth, in battle severed the heads of those
four by means of four shafts, dreadfel, and resembling the
tongues of a flame. And Vajramusbti was slain in conflict
by Mainda with a clenched fist; and down came he to the
ground along with his car and horses, like a turret toppling:
(headlong). And Nikumbha in fight wounded Nila resem-
bling a mass of blue collyrium, with sharpened shafts,—as
the Sun pierceth clouds with his rays. Again with an hundred
arrows, that light-handed night-ranger pierced Nila in the
field; and Nikumbba Jaughed thereat. At this, even as
Vishnu did in battle, Nila with a wheel of his} car, cut off in


* Akind of tree,
+ A tree.
$ Nikumbha's.


1228 RAMAYANA,


conflict Nikumbha’s head together with that of his charioteer.
And Dwivida, possessed of the touch of the Vajra and:thunder-
holt, in the presence of the entire Rakshasa host hurled a
mountain-peak at him that was endowed with the splendour
of the thunder-bolt. And Aganiprabha in encounter pierced
that foremost of monkeys, Dwivida, with shafts resembling
thunder-bolts, Thereat, beside himself with wrath, with his
entire body wounded with arrows, Dwivida with a sé/a des-
troyed Acaniprabha along with his car and horses. And
Vidyunmali, mounted on a car, assailed Sushena with shafts
decked with gold, and began to shout momentarily. Seeing
him mounted on his car, Sushena—best of monkeys—taking
up a huge crag, swiftly brought his car down to the ground,
Thereat, endowed with lightness, that night-ranger, Vidyun-
mBli, at once extricating himself from his car, stood on the
ground with a mace in his hand. Thereupon, that foremost of
monkeys, Sushena, growing furious, taking up a gigantic
crag, rushed at the night-ranger. And as he was descending,
the night-ranger, Vidyunmali, with his mace swiftly hit at
the breast of Sushena~greatest of monkeys. Thereat,
without thinking at all of the terrific hit of the mace, that
best of monkeys in mighty conflict brought down that* upon
hist head. And, assailed with the crag, the night-ranger,
Vidyunmali, having his chest crushed, fell down to the earth,
deprived of life. And, like the celestials warring against the
Daityas, the heroic monkeys warred on and confounded the
valiant rangers of the night. And frightful was the field of
battle, with darts, and other arms ; and clubs, and javelins,
and lances, and other weapons ; and with broken cars, and
war-horses, and mad horses slain, and monkeys and
Rakshasas; and wheels and akshas,t and yokes and
standards,—broken and scattered over the ground; and


* The crag, which he had at first hit —T,
+ Vidyunmdii's.
+ A part of a wheel.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1229


swarms of jackals began to range on all sides of the monkeys
and the Rakshasas ; and Kavandhas® began to rise in that
terrific encounter, resembling the encounter of the gods and
the Asuras. Thus destroyed by the foremost of monkeys, the
rangers of night, beyond themselves with the smell. of
blood,—eagerly wishing for the setting of the Sun,t again
made active preparations for a renewal of the fight.


SECTION xtiv.


As the monkeys and the Rakshasas thus faught on, the
sun set, and the fatal Night came. And then commenced a
night-engagement between the dreadful Rakshasas and the
monkeys of fixed hostility, each party burning for victory.
And in that profound darknesss, the monkeys and the
Rakshasas began to slay each other, exclaiming,—'Thou art
a Rakshasa,’ and ‘Thou art a monkey.’ And in that army
there was heard a mighty uproar of ‘slain,’ ‘rive!’ ‘come!’
‘why fliest? And, dark-hued, the Raksbasas, equipped in
golden mail, in that deep darkness appeared like elevated
hills clad with woods of flaming medicinal herbs. And in
that limitless gloom, the Rakshasas, transported with wrath,
advanced with impetuous speed, devouring monkeys, And,
fired with terrible wrath, they,t bounding up, with their sharp
teeth tore up steeds caparisoned in gold, and standards
resembling venomous serpents. And the lusty monkeys in
battle agitated the Rakshasa host,—and, waxing furious, with


* Spectres having bodies without heads.
+ This was because, as intelligently remarks RAménuja, night-rangers
grow powerful af night—T.


+ i. ¢, the monkeys, as appears from the context—T.


1230, oe KAMAPANA,


their teeth pulled and bit elephants and the riders thereof,
and cars furnished with flags and standards. And Rama and
Lakshmana with shafts resembling venomous serpents,
slaughtered the foremost among the Rakshasas—both those
that were seen and those that were not.—And the dust of
the earth arising from warring combatants, and from the
hoofs of horses and the wheels of cars, choked up eye and
ear. And as the mighty encounter, capable of making
people’s hair stand on end, went on, there flowed a fearful
river of gore. And the sounds of kettle-drums and
Mridangas and Panavas, mingled with those of conchs and
car-wheels,—were wonderful (to hear). And the sounds of
steeds neighing, and Rakshasas (roaring), and monkeys,
rejoicing,y—were something tremendous. And, with able
monkeys slain; and darts and javelins and axes; and
slaughtered Rakshasas wearing forms at pleasure, lying
mountain-like,—the field of battle, seeming to have offerings
of arms representing flowers,—became difficult to recog:
nise, and inaccessible; and the earth was drenched with
streams of blood. And that Night, destructive to monkeys and
R&kshasas,—was dreadful, and difficult of being out-sped
by all,—like unto the Fatal Night of beings. And in that
profound darkness, the Rakshasas with great vivacity
attacked Rima with a shower of shafts. And the roars of
those beings as they advanced, sending up shouts in anger,
resembled the dashing of the Ocean at the time of the
universal dissolution. And in the twinkling of an eye, Rama
by means of six shafts resembling tongues of flames,
struck six of the night-rangers; vs., Yajnagatru, irrepressible
{in fight),—and Mahap&rcwa, and Mahodara, and the huge-
bodied Vajradanashtra,—and those two—Suka and Sarana.
And, pierced in their vitals with R&ma’s shafts, they, having
only their lives left to them, disappeared from the field. Then
in the twinkling of an eye, that Mahfratha rendered all sides
clear (of all gloom) by means of arrows resembling tongues


YUUDHAKANDAM. 1231


of fire; and those other heroic Rakshasas that were in front
of RAma, wero destroyed on approaching the place, like
insects approaching a fire. And with shafts plated with
gold lying in all directions, the night resembled one in
autumn decked with fire-flies. And in consequence of the
uproar occasioned by the Rakshasas, and the sounds of
drums, that night, already dreadful (in itself), became all the
more so. And on that sound attaining dimensions on ail
sides, it seemed as if the mount Trikuta, containing numerous
caverns, had been speaking. And huge-bodied Gol&ngulas
of equal lustre with darkness itself,* binding fast the
night-rangers with their arms, began to swallow them up.
And Angada was present in the encounter, for slaying foes.
And Indrajit, fairing sadly at the hands of Angada, abondon-
ing his vehicle, and having his horses as well as his charioteer
stain, vanished then and there. And that foat of Vali’s
son, worthy of being honored, all the celestials with the
saints and both Rama and Lakshmana lauded to the
height. All beings were acquainted with the might of
Indrajit in battle ; and, therefore, witnessing his discomfiture,
and seeing that high-souled one, they rejoiced exceedingly.
And, seeing the enemy vanquished, all the monkeys with
Sugriva and Bibhishana, experiencing high delight,exclaimed,
—“Excellent " “Excellent!” And, beaten by V&li's son
of dreadful deeds, Indrajit was fired with a mighty wrath.
And, being handted hard in battle, and’baving vanished from
the field, the heroic and wicked son of R&vana, who had
received a boon from Brahma, transported with passion,—
remaining invisible, began to discharge sharpened shafts
of the splendour of the thunder-bolt. And worked up into
tage, he in the conflict pierced Raghu's sons, Rama and
Lakshmana all over their bodies, with terrific arrows
consisting of serpents. And himself engirt with illusion, that
night-ranger, given to fighting in crooked


* Irony,


1232 RAMAYANA.


invisible to all creatures,—stupified the descendants of
Raghu in battle; and by means of his shafts bound the
brothers, Rima and Lakshmana. And then in the sight of
the monkeys, those heroes and foremost of meu were suddeuly
overpowered with shafts by the enraged (Indrajit). And
when the son of the Rakshasa monarch felt himself in-
competent to cope with them* openly, then that impious one,
resorting to illusion, bound those princes (by that means).


SECTION XLV.


Taen, anxious to ascertain hist course, the king’s
son possessed of prowess, and endowed with exceeding
strength, Rama, ordered ten of the monkey-leaders. And
that repressor of foes ordered V4&li’s son—Angada, the
vigorous Sarabha, Dwivida, Hanuman, the mighty S&nupras-
tha, Rishabha and Rishabhaskandha. Thereat with alacrity
those monkeys, weilding mighty trees, shot up into the sky,
and began to scour the ten cardinal points. And Rivana's
son, skilled in arms, resisted the impetuous march of those
vehement ones by means of a powerful weapon as well as
arms more forceful (than the force of their rush). And the
exceedingly vehement monkeys, cut and mangled with
nardchas, saw him in the dark like the sun enveloped in
clouds, And that conquerer in battle, Rivana’s son, with
shafts sorely pierced the persons of R&ma and Lakshmana.
And both Rama and Lakshmana had their bodies entirely
covered by the angry Indrajit with shafts turned into serpents,
And from their wounds blood began to gush out in streams ;


* Rama and Lakshmana.
+ Indrajit’s.


PUDDHARANDAM. 1233


and they looked like flower-crowned Kinsukas. Then that
one having red corners unto his eyes and resembling a mass
of crushed collyrium, R&vana’s son, said unto the brothers,
‘as he vanished,—“When I fight remaining invisible, even
Sakra—the ford of the celestials—cannot see or approach
se,—and who are ye? And I, with my soul surcharged with
wrath, shall, assailing them with showers of weapons
furnished with Kanka feathers, send Raghu’s sons to the
abode of Yama.” Having spoken thus unto the brothers—
Rama and Lakshmana, cognizant of righteousness—(Indrajit}
—pierced them with sharpened shafts, and shouted in joy.
And stretching his large bow, that one sable like unto a mass
of crushed collyrium again discharged terrific shafts in
battle. And that one versed. in the inner sense of things,
with whetted arrows pierced the vitals of Rima and
Lakshmana and shouted momentarily. And fast hound by
the shackles of shafts on the edge of battle, they* could not
attain respite for a moment. Then with their persons
pierced with shafts and darts, and resembling the flags of the
Great Indra let loose from the cords and trembling (in the
air)—and with their bodies bristling with arrows,—those
heroes and mighty bowmen—lords of the earth—tormented*
in consequence of their vitals having been pierced, dropped
down to the earth. And those heroes, bathed in blood, and
their persons covered with arrows,—pained and suffering
terribly, lay down as became heroes. And there was not so
much room unpierced in their persons as could be measured
by a finger; and they were wounded with arrows up to the
fore-parts of their hands.t And they being wounded by that
fell one capable of assuming shapes at will, blood violently
gushed out of their bodies like water from a spring. And Rama
fell first, pierced in the vitals with the shafts. And the same


* @. ¢. Rama and Lakshmana,
“t This sloke is rather obscure, and the Bengali translators have convenient
ly passed it by !—T.


155


1234 - RAMAPANS.


Indrajit who had formerly wrathfully routed Sakra,(now) pierc-
ed (Rama) with #4réchas knotted with gold,and having polish-
ed heads; swift-speeding ; and resembling dust carried about by
the wind; and half-sdrdchas ; and darts resembling anja/is ;*
and vatsadantas ;t and sinhadanshiras ;t and razors; and,
resigning his stringless bow decked in gold and curved in
three places,—with its part for grasping shattered—he§ lay
down like a hero. And seeing Rama—foremost of men—
down within arrow-range, Lakshmana despaired of his life.
And seeing his brother, Rama, having eyes resembling lotus-
petals and ever delighting in battle, himself the refuge of
others,—lying down in the field ; (Lakshmana) began to weep.
And the monkeys also, seeing him, were plunged in sorrow;
and they, their eyes flooded with tears, began to cry in
grief of heart. And when they had been bound and had laid
themselves down as become heroes, the monkeys stood
around them,—and, conversing with one another, they,
headed by the son of the Wind, were seized with extreme
sorrow.


SECTION XLVI.


Ano the rangers of woods, gazing at the earth and the
sky, at length cast their eyes on the brothers—R4ma and
Lakshmana. covered all over with arrows. And after that
R&kshasa had gone away having performed his work, like
the Godl| going away, after having showered,—there came


* The hands joined at the lower sides, with the palms hollowed. —T,
+ Weapons resembling the teeth of a calf.

= Weapons resembling the lion’s teeth

§ Rama.

§ Indra.


FUDDHARENDA#. 1335


to that place Bibhishana with Sugriva. And, mourning
Raghu's sons, there also came in all haste Nila and Dwivida
and Mainda and Sushena and Kumuda and Angada in
company with Hanum&n. And moveless; breathing low,—
covered with blood,—pierced all over with net-works of
shafts ; dumb; they* were lying on the field. And they were
sighing like serpents; and were inert; and deprived of
prowess; and washed in blood ; and looking like unto golden
standards, And as they lay moveless, as become heroes, the
leaders of monkeys environed them with tear-charged eyes.
And seeing the sons of Raghu lying, covered with showers
of shafts, the monkeys, with Bibhishana, were pained
(exceedingly). And the monkeys, surveying the sky as well
as all directions, could not see Ravana’s son in battle
enveloped with illusion. And then Bibhishana by means of
illusion saw his brother’s son staying before, hidden by
illusion, And Bibhishana saw that hero of incomparable
deeds, who had no compeer in the field and who had energy,
fame and prowess,—as he remained invisible in consequence
of the boon received from Brahma. And Indrajit, seeing his
own feat and them lying at length, spake in excess of joy,
gladdening all the Rakshasas,—“The brothers—Rama and
Lakshmana, possessed of great strength, who had slain Khara
and Dushana, are themselves slain with my shafts. And all
the celestials and Asuras assembled together with the saints,
are incompetent to emancipate these from the fetters of my
shafts. He for whom my father was exercised with anxiety
and tormented by grief, for whom my sire used to spend
nights without pressing his bed,—for whom this entire Lanka
had resembled a river turbulent in the rainy reason,—that
same evil sticking by the root of ail, hath been dispensed his
quietus by me. And like clouds of autumn, the prowess of
Rima and Lakshmana as well as that of all the rangers of
the woods, hath been rendered useless.” Saying this in
* Rama and Lakshmana.


1236 RAMAYANA.


the presence of all the Rakshasas, Ravana's son—destroyer
of foes—menacing the monkey-leaders, hit Nila with nine
arrows, and hurt Mainda and Dwivida each with three power.
ful shafts. And piercing Jambavan with an arrow in the
chest,’ that mighty bowman discharged ten at Hanuman.
Riyana’s son possessed of exceeding impetuosity,
pierced in the conflict with two shafts each Gav&ksha and
Sarabha of immeasurable vigor. And Ravana’s son, sammon-
ing celerity, pierced the king of Golingulas and VAli’s son,
Angada, with innumerable arrows. And the powerful son
of Ravana, endowed with might, piercing the foremost
monkeys with shults resembling tongues of flames, eet up
shouts in the field of battle. And tormenting the monkeys
with volleys of shalts and striking terror into them, that
mighty-armed one, bursting out into a laugh, said,—‘Let the
Rakshasas behold these brothers, lying fast bound with
dreadful arrows in front of the forces.’ Thus addressed,
those R&kshasas—wily warriors all—resembling masses of
clouds, witnessing that deed (of Indrajit), struck with
wonder and rejoicing (greatly), set up tremendous roars,
And thinking that Rama was slain, they honored Ravana’s
son. And seeing the brothers—Rama and Lakshmana~—
motionless, and lying inert on the ground,—they took them
for slain. And, experiencing excess of joy, Indrajit—
conquerer in conftict—entered the city of Lankd, rejoicing
all the Nairitas. Seeing the bodies as well as the limbs of
Rama and Lakshmana, covered entirely with arrows, fear
took possession of Sugriva. Thereat Bibhishana said unto
that ford of monkeys, staying in woe-begone guise, with a
tearful countenance, and his eyes wild with wrath,—“Do not
give way to fear, O Sugriva. Restrain thy rising tears t
This is the way of warfare: victory is not (always) sure.
But, O hero, if Fortune ultimately smile upon us, this stupor
sball go off from these high-souled and exceedingly powerful
ones, Therefore,O monkey, do thou cheer me, who am


VYUDDHARANDAM. 1237


forlorn.” Saying this, with his hand Bibhishana washed
Sugriva’s graceful eyes with water. And taking water,
the righteous Bibhishana by means of his knowledge,
washed Sugriva’s eyes therewith. And washing the face of
the intelligent monkey-monarch, Bibhishana spoke these
words, seasonable and sedate,—'O foremost of monkey-kings,
this is no time for being overcome with stupor. At this
hour, even immoderate affection may lead to destruction.
‘Therefore, casting off stupor, which tends to mar all work,
do thou bethink thee how thou mayst serve this army headed
by Rama. Or do thou protect R&ma so long as he doth not
regain consciousness ; and when the K4kutsthas shall have
regained consciousness, all our apprehension shall vanish.
This is nothing to Rama, and Rama is not dying. And
Lakshmi,* who is incapable of being attained by those that
are doomed, shail not forsake this one. Therefore do thou
comfort thyself, do thou also cheer up thy own forces,—
while I am engaged in composing all the troops. O best of
monkeys, these with distended eyes, come under the
governance of terror, are, stricken with panic, whispering
into each other's ears. But seeing me, let the forces rushing
about, cheered up,—as well as the monkeys,—cast off all
fear, like a wreath that hath been used before.” Thus
comforting Sugriva, Bibhishana—lord of Rakshasas—again
instilled spirits into the flying forces’ of monkeys. And
Indrajit—worker of mighty illusions—accompanied by his
troops, entered the city of Lank& and presented himself
before his father. And approaching Ravana and saluting
him with joined hands, he informed his sire of the welcome
tidings that Rama and Lakshmana had been slain, And
hearing that his foe had fallen, Ravana springing up in the
midst of the R&kshasas, with great joy embraced his son,
And scenting the crown of his head, (Ravana) with a delight
ed heart, asked (Indrajit as to all that had taken place). And
* The goddess of prosperity.


1238 RAMAYANA,


on being asked, he (Indrajit) truly related unto his sire how
(Rima and Lakshmana) had been rendered senseless and
lack-lustre by being fastened with shafts. Thereat, with
rapture surcharging his inmost soul, Ravana, hearing the
speech of the mighty car-warrior, banished his fear of
Dagaratha’s son,—and rising up, honored his son with glad
words.


SECTION XLVI,
a


Wren Ravana’s son entered Lanka, after- having
accomplished his purpose, the foremost monkeys protected
Raghava, surrounding him on all sides. And Hanum&n,
and Angada, and Nila, and Sushena, and Kumuda, and Nala,
and Gaya, and Gavaksha, and Panasa, and Samprastha—a
mighty monkey—and Jambavan, and Rishava, and Sunda,
and Rambha, and Satavali, and Prithu,—all forming them-
selves into array, and equipped with trees on all sides, and
remaining vigilant,—the monkeys kept gazing at all sides,
awry and upwards; and even when a straw stirred, they
thought it to be a R&kshasa. And Rfvana, on his part,
experiencing the height of exaltation, summoned the
Rakshasis engaged in guarding Sits —And thereat the
Rukshasis—Trijata and others—presented themselves at
his command. And then the lord of R&kshasas, delighted,
addressed then the R&kshasis, saying,—"Tell Vaidebi that
Rama and Lakshmana have been slain in battle by Indrajit.
And taking ber on Pushaka, show her (Rama and Lakshmana)
lying slain on the field of battle. That one depending on
whom she bad proudly set her face against me,—that
husband of hess, along with his brother, hath been slain in


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1339


conflict, And then Mithila’s daughter, her fear gone off
with ber anxiety, and herself losing all support,—Siti—
daughter unto Mithil&—decked out in all ornaments, shall
seek me. And today beholding Rama with Lakshmana,
come under the sway of Time, she, finding no other way,
shall desist from her present course. And seeing no other
resourse, that one of expansive eyes shall of herself seek
me.” Hearing those words of the wicked-minded Ravana,
the Rakshasis, saying,—‘‘So be it,”—went to where
Pushpaka was. Then taking Pushpaka, the Rakshasis at
Ravana’s command went to Maithili staying in the agota
wood. Then, taking Sit&, who was overcome with grief for
her lord, the Rakshasis, placed her on the car, Pushpaka.
And placing Sitaon Pushpaka along with Trijata, Ravana
took her all around (Lanka) crowded with ensigns and
standards, And the lord of Rakshasas jubilantly proclaim-
ed in Lank&,—“Raghava as well as Lakshmana have been
slain by Indrajit in battle.” And going about with Trijata,
Sit& saw all the monkey-troops slain. And she found the
flesh-eaters elated in spirits, and the monkeys afflicted with
extreme grief at the side of Rama and Lakshmana. Then
Sit& beheld both Lakshmana and Rama lying in the field,
senseless and bound with arrows. And those heroes
were lying on the earth, their mail torn, their bows cast off,
their bodies mangled.all over and thickly pierced with shalts.
And seeing those brothers,—foremost of heroes and best
of men—having eyes resembling white lotuses, and them-
selves like unto KumBras,—lying in the field,*—the fire-
sprung one, Sit, striken with grief, began to weep piteously.
And that black-eyed one of an excellent person,.Janaka’s
daughter—seeing them roll in the dust, broke out into
lamentation. And with her eyes shedding plentiful tears,


* Virdn navarshabhdn—heroes and best of men—occurs again,—teft out on
the score of redendancy.—T.


1240 RAMAYANA.


she seeing those brothers, endowed with god-like prowess,
concluded them to be dead; and overwhelmed with grief,
spoke as follows.


SECTION xivilb
— a


Ano seeing her husband, as well as the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana,—slaia, Sita, afflicted with grief, burst
into bitter lamentation. “The soothsayers had said that I
should have sons, and should never be a widow. But on
R&ma being slain, it seems now that those ones, possessed
of knowledge, had spoken untruthfully. And those also, who
having celebrated sacrifices and rites, had said that I should
become the queen (of R&ma),—on Rima being slain, seems
to-day to have spoken a falsehood, although they are
possessed of knowledge. And they also asserted that I
should be honored of the wives of heroic kings as well as of
my lord,—but on Rama being slain,they seem tohave uttered
a falsehood, although possessed of knowledge. And those
twice-born ones that in my hearing had said auspicious words,
on Rama being slain, seem to-day to have spoken a falsehood,
although they were possessed of knowledge. These lotus-
marks on the feet, betokening unto gentlewomen possessing
them, that they are to be installed ia the kingdom in company
with their husbands—who are kings,—are on me. And
those marks find [ none on me by which women of rare fortune
come by widowhood,—but I find that in me these good
tokens are nullified. Those marks that are pronounced
infallible by those versed in such knowledge, on Rama being
slain, are nullified in me. My hairs are fine, equal, and blue ;
my eye-brows touch each other ; my hips are devoid of down


YUDDHARANDA ™”. a24t


and round ; and my teeth are close. My temples, and eyes,
hands, feet, ankles, and thighs are equal. And my fingers are
furnished with round nails, and are plump and even in‘the
middle. And my breasts are close and firm and developed,
and have their nipples sunk. And my navel is depressed,
with high sides. And my chest is swelling. And my
complexion is like the hue of gems,—and my down soft.
And they said that 1 was furnished with twelve auspicious
signs. And my hands in the middle parts of my fingers
contain wheat-marks ; and in the spaces between the fingers,
have no uneven corners. And my feet also partake of the
general complexion. And my laugh is a gentle smile. And
those versed in marks of women knew that 1 was
possessed of such marks. And those Brahmanas skilled
in telling fortune said that I should be installed in the
kingdom along with my husband; but all that hath been
falsified. Having purified Janasthfna (of Rakshasas),obtained
tidings of me, and crossed the Ocean* incapable of being
agitated, those brothers have been slain in the footprint of a
cow! The descendants of Raghu had obtained Varuna and
Agueya and Aindra and Vayava and @rahmagiras weapons.t
Through iflusion have those lords of me, who am forlorn--
R&ma and Lakshmana, resembling Vasava bimself in battle,—
been slain. Coming in battle within ken of Raghava, a foe,
even if he be endowed with the fleetness of thought,—doth
not go back, living. There is nothing which is too hard for
Time; and the Destroyer is incapable of being overcome ;
inasmuch as Rama along with his brother Lakshmana hath
fallen in fight. And I do not so much mourn R&ma or the
mighty car-warrior—Lakshmana—or, for that matter, seli,—
as I do the wretched Mother-in-law of mine. She ever
thinketh of the period of the promise. ‘When shall I behold


* The commentator assigns a metaphorical sense te ocean,—but this is


hardly necessary.
+ And did they not remember this now ¥ completes the sense,—T.


156


1242 RAMAYANA,


Sita and Lekshmana with Raghava?’” As she was thus
lamenting, the Rakshasi, Trijats, said,—“O exalted lady,
do not weep thus. Thy lord liveth. And, O dignified one,
I shall unfold unto thee potent and probable reasons why the
brothers Rama and Lakshmana live. When their leader
falleth, the countenances of the warriors in battle are not
overspread with passion, or display cheerfulness and vivacity.
‘And, O Vaidehi, if those had lost their lives, this celestial
chariot, named Pushpaka, would not bave held thee. An
army that hath its heroes and chiefs slain—-becoming dispirit-
ed and drooping,rangeth the field, like a vessel on water that
hath lost its helmsman. But, O lorn one, these troops, be-
traying neither agitation nor anxiety, are guarding the
Kakutsthas. This I tell thee of them out of affection. Do
thou, at this conclusion bringing in joy, take comfort; and
behold the Kakutsthas unslain. This I tell thee from affection.
I never told thee untruths heretofore; nor, O Mithila’s
daughter, wil! I tell them unto thee now. Thou by virtue
of thy character conducive to delight, hast found an acess
into my heart. These even the celestials and Asuras with
Indra (at theie head) are incompetent to quell. Seeing
such sight, { speak to thee as to their being alive. And
behold, O Maithili, this mighty wonder! These are lying
insensible with arrows; but of these Grace hath not taken
leave. It generally happens that the faces of persons dead
and ‘gone, are unsightly to a degree. Therefore, O Janaka’s
daughter, leave off grief and sorrow and stupor. For the
sake of Rama and Lakshmana thou canst not today put a
period to thy existence.” Hearing her words, Mithila's
daughter—Sita—resembling the daughter of a celestial, with
hands joined, said,—"May this be so!” Then turning
away the car Pushpaka fleet as the mind, the distressed
Sitd entered Lanka along with Trijat8. Then in company
with Trijata, alighting from Pushpaka, she along with the
Rakshasis entered the agoke wood. And entering that


YUDDHsRANDAM. 1243


sporting-ground of the R&kshasa lord abousding in woody
tracts, Sit8, having beheld those princes and reflected on
them, became subject to a mighty grief.


SECTION XLIx.


Bound up terribly with shafts, Dacaratha’s sons, lying
down bathed in blood, sighed hard like unto serpents. And
all those foremost monkeys, along with Sugriva, possessed
of exceeding strength,—overwhelmed with sorrow, remained
surrounding thoso bigh-souled ones. In the meanwhile, the
powerful Raina, albeit fast bound by the shafts, awoke by
virtue of the exceeding toughness of his person, as well as
his might. Then, seeing his “brother, having a distressful
countenance, covered with blood, feeble, and fast bound by
the shafts,—RAma, greatly aggrieved, began to mourn, “OE
what use unto me is the recovery of Sita, or life either,
when to-day I see my brother vanguished in fight and lying
down in the field? Seeking in the world (of men), I may
light upon a woman like Sita; but never on a brother, or a
helper, or a warrior like unto Lakshmana. If that enhancer
of Sumitra’s joy have met with his end, my life I must
renounce in the sight of the monkeys. What shall I say unto
Kaugaly&: and what shall I say unto Kaikeyig And what
shall I say unto mother Sumitra, eager for a sight of her son?
And if I go (back) without him, how shall I soothe her, like
unto a cow reft of her calf; and trembling; and resembling
a mourning Kurari? And how shall say unto Satrughana
and the illustrious Bharata,—‘He went with me to the forest ;
but I come (back) here without him?’ I shall not be able to
bear the rebuke of mother Sumitra. Therefore even here


1244 RAMAYANA.


shalt I renounce my person; for certainly 1 dare not five.
Fie on me, who am wicked and base ; for me this Lakshmana,
brought down, lieth in the ficld of battle, tike one that is
without life. O Lakshmana, thou ever comfortest me when
Tam dispirited. But to day, having lost thy life, thou canst
not speak to me,who am afflicted. Thou, O hero, who hadst in
hattle slain innumerable R&kshasas lying around, hast (at
length) thyself been slain in the freld with shafts. And
lying down in the battle-field, bleeding, and covered with
arrows, thou appearest like the Sun when he bath gone up the
Setting-hill. And in consequence of shafts piercing thy
vitals, thou canst not speak ; but thy visible expression,
albeit thou art dumb, betokens pain. O thow endowed with
exceeding splendour, even as thou didst follow me into the
forest, will I follow thee unto the mansion of Yama. Thou,
having dear friends, and ever foltowing me, hast come by
this plight in consequence of my reprehensible conduct. }
do ‘not remember having heard any harsh speech from the
heroic Lakshmana, even when he had happened to be
exceedingly wroth. He that could discharge at one shot five
hundred shafts,—that Lakshmana is superior to KArttaviryya
himself in that weapon—the bow. He that with his arms
could resist the arms of Sakra himself,—that one worthy of
a costly couch—tieth down on the ground, slain. And-that
false babble shall now, without doubt, consume me ; for by me
hath not Bibhishana been made monarch of the Rakshasas,
Do thou, O Sugriva, this very moment retrace thy steps.
Bereft of thy strength through me, thou wilt be worsted by
Ravana. And, O Sugriva, placing Angada to the fore, do
thou, taking thy host as well as the equipage, in
company with Nila and Nala, cross over the Ocean. By
thee hath been achieved a mighty feat incapable of being
done by another in battle. And pleased am I with the king
of bears, and the lord of Golingulas ; and Angada hath quit
himself nobly, as also Mainda and Dwivida. And Kegarin


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1245


and Samp&ti have both faught terribly. And Gavaya, and
Gaviksha, and Sarabha, and Gaja,—and other monkeys
have faught as others are incapable of fighting, —determined
to lay down their lives (for me). But, O Sugriva, man
cannot overrule Destiny. Thou, my friend, fearing righte-
ousness,* hast done what lay in thy power. And, Ye
foremost of monkeys, ye also have acted as becometh friends.
Now, with my permission, go ye whithersoever ye are
minded.” Hearing R4ma’'s lament, the monkeys—those
dark-eyed and others—began to shed tears from their eyes.
Then Bibhishana, quieting the army, taking a mace in his
hand, swiltly went to where Raghava was. And seeing him
fast making his way, resembling a mass of dark collyrium,
the monkeys taking bim to be Ravana’s son,t began to run
away.


SECTION L


—


Tuten out spake the highly energetic and exceedingly
mighty king of monkeys,—“Why is this host agitated like
abark driven hither and thither by the wind ?” Hearing
Sugriva’s speech, Vali's son said,—"Dost thou not see both
those heroes—sons of Dagaratha—R&ma and that mighty
car-warrior-Lakshmana—covered with arrows? And (dost
thou not see) those high-sould ones lying in the field of
battle, covered with blood?” Thereat, the lord of monkeys,
Sugriva, spake unto his son,t Angada— 1 do not deem it


* Dharima-bhiru—fearing righteousness—is the epithet generally applied to
persons fearing not in fact righteousness, but unrighteousness, This may'be
taken as an idiotism in Sanskrit—T.
+ Indi Such was the fear he had spread by his redoubtable deeds [—T,
+ Hin step-son, for Sugriva had married Angada’s father's wife, after Rima
had slain V4li in Kishkindh&—T.


1246” . RAMAV ANS.


without cause. This may have come to pass through sheer
fear. These monkeys with sad faces, leaving their arms
behind them, are flying in all directions, their eyes distended
in affright. And they are not ashamed of each other, and
they do not cast their looks back. And they hug each other,
and go leaping over the fallen.” Inthe meanwhile, that
hero, Bibhishana, bearing a mace in his hand, (approaching),
greeted Sugriva as well as Raghava with blessings of victory.
And Sugriva, seeing Bibhishaua, capable of inspiring. fear
in the monkeys, spoke unto the high-souled sovereign of
bears, who stood by,—This is Bibhishana that hath come
hither, seeing whom the foremost among the monkeys, from
fear of Ravana’s son who, they apprehend, he is,—are fleeing
away,seized with a panic. Do thou at once stay these agitated
with fear and scampering all around; and proclaim,—'This
is Bibhishana, who hath come here.” Thus directed,
Jambavan—king of bears—restraining those that were
flying, composed the monkeys. Hearing the bear-king’s
words, and seeing Bibhishana, the monkeys, renouncing
fear, desisted (from their flight). Then the righteous
Bibhishana, viewing Rama’s as well as Lakshmana’s body
pierced with arrows, was exceedingly aggrieved. And wash-
ing their eyes with water, he, with his mind overpowered
with grief, began to weep and broke out into lamentation,—
“The Rakshasas, fighting in wily ways, have brought to this
pass these ones endowed with prowess and possessed
of every ‘perfection and gifted with might (of arm). And
with his guileful mind, that brother’s son of mine, wicked-
souled and an evil son (unto me},—hath deceived these ones
of straight prowess. Pierced with innumerable shafts, and
covered with blood, these are lying on the ground like
Salyakas*. Those depending on whose prowess, I had
sought eminence, those foremost of men, sleep here soundly
for renouncins their bodies. Living, today I am in distress :
* Atree,


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1247


and my desire of dominion is annihilated ; and my foe,
Ravana, hath his promise fulfilled and his aim crowned with
success.” As Bibhishana was thus lamenting, the lord of
monkeys—Sugriva—endowed with strength, embracing him,
nt of righteousness, thou


spoke unto him,—“O thou cogni:
wilt here in Lank& obtain empire: no doubt of this; and
Ravana along with his sons will be disappointed in their
expectations. Both these~Rama and  Lakshmana—are
under the agis of Garura; and, casting off their stupor: they
will in battle slay Ravana along with his adherents.” Hav-
ing thas soothed and comforted the Rakshasa, Sugriva
addressed his father-in-law, who was at his side, saying,—
Do thou along with numbers of heroic monkeys, taking
those repressors of foes, the brothers—Rama and Lakshmana
~—when they shall have regained their consciousness, repair
to Kishkindh3. And I, slaying Ravana along with his sons
and friends, shall bring back Mithila’s daughter, even as
Sakra recovered the lost Sri.” [Hearing the words of the
monkey-king, Sushena said,—"I had witnessed the war of
yore between the gods and the Asuras. Tlen the Danavas,
enveloping themselves, momentarily destroyed the deities,
albeit versed in arms and accomplished in weapons. And
they, their senses lost, and their lives departed, Vrihashpati
treated by means of his knowledge of mantras, as well with
medicines. Let Samp&ti, Panaca, and other monkeys
speedily hie to the Milky Ocean for the purpose of bringing
those medicines. And the monkeys well know that mighty
mountainous medicine—divine and capable of reviving the
dead,—and made by the deilies themselves—vigalyd. There
are {the mountains) namod Chandra and Drona: where
the ambrosia was churned, there is that supreme drug. And
those mountains have been placed by the deities in the mighty
deep. And, O king, let the son of the Wind-god go thither.”
In the meanwhile, the wind arosc, and masses of clouds
appeared along with lightning. And the wind blew, agitating


1248 RAMAYANA,


the waters of the deep, and shaking the mountains. And
mighty trees of the ocean-islands, broken dowa by the
terrible wing-raised wind, began to topple head-
jong into the salt waters. And the serpents dwelling
there were seized with affright ; and speedily all the aquatic
animats dived deep into the salt sea. And then in a moment
the monkeys saw Vinatd’s son,possessed of terrific strength,—
like unto a flaming fire. And seeing him come, the serpents
began to dart away,—those exceedingly powerful ones that,
turning into shafts, had bound those persons.* Then, touching
the Kakutsthas and saluting them, Suparna rubbed with his
hands their countenances furnished with the splendour of the
Moon. And their wounds, on being touched by Vinata’s son,
were (immediately) healed ; and the bodies of both speedily
became cool and shone with an excellent complexion. And
they attained immense energy and prowess ; and a double
share of strength, and of rational and perceptive powers, ani
of memory. And then raising them up, the exceedingly
energetic Garura, resembling Vasava himself, embraced both
joyfully. Andthen Rama addressed (Garura), saying,—“By
thy grace we have through means survived the mighty
calamity that had sprung from Ravana’s son; and we have
also speedily been rendered strong. And my heart is
delighted on having thee, like unio my father, Dagaratha, or
my grand sire, Aja. Who art thou, furnished with beauty,
and bearing wreaths and unguents (on thy person) ; clad in
stainless attire ; and adorned ia noble ornaments?’ Unto
him spake the exceedingly energetic son of Vinat& endowed
with great strenyth,—the lord of birds, with a pleased heart,
and his eyes wild with glee—“O K&kutstha, I am thy
friend—thy life ranging externally—Garutman. I am come
hither for aiding you. Neither the highly powerful Asuras, nor
the exceedingly strong monkeys, nor the celestials along with
the Gandharbas, having him of an hundred sacrifices at their
* Raéma and Lakshmana,


YUDDHAKANDAM. . ray


head are,—capable of delivering (any one) from these
dreadful arrowy bonds, which had been forged by Indrajit
of tortuoug deeds by help of illusion. These serpents
—offapring of Kadru—are sharp-fanged and venomous ; and
had bound thee as arrows through the potency of illu-
sion, O Rama having truth for prowess, thou art for
tunate,—along with that destroyer of foe in fight, Laksh-
mana, Hearing this, 1, summoning energy, have come
hither swiftly. And [, doing by thee as a friend, have from
affection at once set you free from these dreadful arrowy
bonds. But thou shouldst always be on thy guard. By nature
the Rakshasas have cunning shifts in fight and thou, who art
heroic and of a pure spirit, canst but rely on thy simplicity
alone for strength. ‘Therefore thou must not trust the
Rakshasas in the field of battle. By this one instance (thou
must know) that R&kshasas are ever deceitful in fight.”
Having said this, the wondrous mighty Suparna, embracing
Rima) tenderly (again), said,—"My friend Raghava, O thou
who even cherishest affection for thy foes, permit me thou.
1 shall go at pleasure. And, QO Raghava, entertain no
curiosity as to our friendship.* When, O hero, thou shalt
have achieved success in battle, thou shalt know all about
this friendship of ours. And with the surges of thy shafts,
making Lank& contain only children and aged, and slaying
thy foe, Ravana, thou shalt recover Sita.” Having spoken
thus, Suparna, endowed with fleet vigor, having rendered
Rama hale in the midst of the monkeys,—having gone round
them and embraced them also,—~that one possessed of
prowess,—set out, covering up the sky, like unte the wind.
And seeing Raghu’s sons rendered hale, the monkey-leaders


set up leonine roars, and began to flourish their tails. And
then beat the kettle-drums and the deums struck up. And
conchs were cheerfully blown ; and shouts were sent. And
others struck at their arms with their hands. And the


* ie. hem it happened.


137


1350 RAMA? ANA.


monkeys, accustomed to battle with trees, uprooting them,
stood by hundreds and thousands. And emitting tremendous
roars and thereby frightening the night-rangers,the monkeys,
eager for encounter, approached the gate of Lanka. And
that mighty and dreadful din raised by the monkeys,
resembled the terrible rumbling of the clouds at midnight
about the end of Summer,


SECTION LI.


Tren Ravana heard the tumult raised by the highly
energetic monkeys roaring in company with the Raks!
And hearing that low and solemn noise—that prodigious
uproar—Ravana said in the midst of his counsellors,—“From
mighty roars that are heard of in innumerous delighted
monkeys,—resembling the roar of clouds,—it is evident,
beyond a doubt, that there is great rejoicing there. And the
salt Ocean is vexed with these thundering noises. The
brothers—Rama and Lakshmana—have been fast bound with
sharp shafts; and here this uproar is exciting my alarm.”
Having spoken thus unto his ministers, the lord of the
Rikshasas addressed the Nairitas present there, saying,—
“Do you speedily acquaint yourselves with the cause of
rejoicing that hath arisen of these monkeys on this mournfu’
occasion.” Thus accosted, they hurriedly mounting up on
the wall, surveyed the forces maintained by the high-souled
Sugriva as well as those exalted ones—Raghu’s sons—
emancipated from their terrific arrowy fetters and ariser
(now).” Thereat, with their hearts wrought up, grim-visager
Rakshasaa descending from the wall, appeared before the
Rakshasa-lord with pale faces. And then with woe-begone


YUDDHAKANDAM. tase


faces, those R&kshasas, skilled in speech, faithfully informed
Ravana in full of that unfortunate circumstance, "Those
brothers—Rima and Lakshmana—who had in battle been
bound up in arrowy fetters by Indrajit,—and whose arms
lay moveless,—having been emancipated from the arréwy
bonds,are seen in the field of battle ; and those ones like unto
the foremost of elephants in strength, seem like elephants
that have snapped their fetters.” Hearing those words of
theirs, the exeedingly powerful lord of the Rakshasas was
wrought up with anxiety and anger, and his countenance lost
its complexion. “Indrajit, having routed them in conflict,
had bound them by means of irrisistible and terrible arrows,
resembling venomous serpents, and like unto the Sun
himself,—which bad been conferred on (Indrajit) as boons.
But if my enemy,having actually been bound by the weapons,
can have been liberated, all this strength of mine I see placed
in peril. And those shafts resembling Fire in fierceness,
which had in battle deprived my foes of their lives,—have
forsooth been rendered fruitless.” Having said this in high
rage, Ravana, sighing like a serpent, addressed a Rakshasa,
named DhumrSksha, seated in the midst of the Rakshasas,—
“O thou of dreadful prowess, surrounded by a mighty force,
do thou march forth to compass the destruction of Rama
along with the monkeys.” Thus accosted by the intelligent
lord of the Rakshasas, Dhumraksha, turning about, issued
out of the abode of the king. And speedily sallying forth
from the gate of (R&vana’s) residence, he said unto the
general of the forces,—“Do thou speedily move off thy
forces. Why should a warrior linger ?” Hearing Dhumriksha’s
words, the general of the forces, following them, at the
command of Ravana forthwith made the army ready. And
those powerful and dreadful night-rangers, bursting with
high spirits,—with bells tied to their arms,—set up shouts,
and surrounded Dhumraksha. And bearing various weapons
in their hands, and wielding darts and clubs, and


1253 RAMAYANA,


equipped with maces and bearded darts and rods aud
iron bludgeons and parighas and dhindipdlas and lances
and nooses and axes,-—those terrific Rakshasas sallied out,
roaring jike unto clouds. And others, accoutred in armour,
with cars; adorned with banners; furnished with golden
networks, and mules having various faces, and extremely
swift steeds, and lusty elephants in rut,—tiger-like Nairitas
incapable of being subdued, even as tigers.—sallied out
(thereafter), And then Dhumraksha himself ascended a
superb car, bearing faces of deer and lions decked with
gold—and sending forth aloud clatter. And the highly
powerful Dhumraksha, surrounded by Rakshasas, cheerfully
issued out of the Western Entrance, where Hanuman was
posted. And thereat, fell fowis of the air forbade that
exceedingly dreadful Rakshasa of a fearful form, as he went
out ascending an excellent car, yoked with mules,and sending
sharp sounds. And an exceedingly terrific vulture alighted at _
the crest of the car; and forming themselves into lines, vul-
tures began to drop duwn about the top of the banner. And
emitting a frightful cry, (a headless trunk) dropped down before
Dhumraksha. And that god* showered down blood ; and the
earth shook. And the wind blew awry with a sound
resembling thunder. And every side, covered with darkness,
appeared dim. And witnessing those dreadful inauspicious
omens at the outset, fraught with fear unto the Rakshasas,
Dhumrliksha was greatly aggrieved; and the R&kshasas
marching before him, were stupified. And then as that strong
and fearful one, eager for encounter, surrounded by in-
numerable night-rangers, issued out (of the city), he beheld |
that monkey-host, protected by the arm of R&ghava,—
resembling the deep at the time of the universal dissolution,


* Indra—cloud-compeller.


YUDDHAKENDAM. 1253"


SECTION Lil.


Sreinc the Rakshasa—Dhumr&ksha of dreadful prowess
—issue out, the monkeys, rejoicing’ greatly, eager for
encounter, set up roars. And then there took place a terrific
conflict between the monkeys and the RAkshasas, charging
each other with fearful trees, and darts, and maces, And
the Rakshasas began to scatter the dreadful monkeys on all
sides; and the monkeys (on their part) felled the Rakshasas
with trees. And the Rakshasas, growing enraged, began
to pierce the monkeys with straight speeding sharp shafts
winged with Kanka plumes. And riven by the Rakshas
with dreadful clubs and bearded darts, daggers and maces
and terrible and curious bludgeons and grasped javelins,—=
the exceedingly powerful (monkeys), their anger aroused,
began with alacrity to perform deeds of intrepid valour, And
those monkey-leaders, their bodies pierced with shafts and
their persons riven with darts, took up trees and crags.
And those monkeys, endowed with terrific vehemence,
sending up shouts, and proclaiming their respective names,
set about tossing the brave. Rakshasa ranks. And that
conflict between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, waged
with diverse rocks and innumerable trees, waxed exceedingly
furious. And some among the R&kshasas feeding on gore
-~on being agitated by the monkeys burning for victory,—
began to vomit‘blood. And some were severed along their
flanks ; and, some, slain with trees, were heaped up; and
some were crushed with crags; and some were torn with
teeth, And some being broken down by means of broken
standards, and some by means of fallen swords, and some
crushed down by cars,—the rangers of the night suffered
sorely. And (anon) the earth was covered with huge
elephants measuring mountains, and mountain-tops, and


1354 RAMALANA.


steeds crushed, and the riders thereof,—all borne down by
the monkeys. And bounding again and agaio, the vehement
monkeys endowed with terrific prowess, with theic finger-
nails tore up the R&kshasas by the mouths. And with woe-
begone faces, and with hair dishevelled, (the Rakshasas),
stupified with the smell of blood, saught the earth. And
other R&kshasas endowed with dreadful vigor, waxing
wond rous wroth, dealt the monkeys slaps with hands having
the touch of the thunder-bolt. And, gifted with greater
impetuosity, the monkeys felled the impetuous (Rikshasas)
with blows, and feet and teeth; and some were slain with
trees. And seciag the forces fleeing away, that foremost of
R&kshasas—Dhumraksha—flying into fury, began a terrific
conflict with the monkeys desirous of encounter. And some
of the monkeys, sore assailed with prdgas, began to bleed;
and some, wounded with maces, dropped down to the
ground. And some were beaten hard with bludgeons; and
some were cleft with Shindipdias. And some, on being
iled with bearded darts, became insensible and lost their
lives. And some among the monkeys lay slain on the
ground, drenched in blood. And some, fleeing away from
the field, were slaughtered by the infuriated Rakshasas, And
some, having their breasts pierced, lay on their sides. And
some were riven with tridents; and the entrails of some
had come out. And that mighty and dreadful encounter of
the Rakshasas and the monkeys, was waged with countless
weapons and rocks and trees. And that battle hecome a
musical entertainment* mellifluous with bow-string for Vind,t
having the neighing uf chargers for. its measure, and with


* The reader has already perceived that the carrying out of a simile to
a number of details is a characteristic as much of VAlmiki as of his rivalin
the epic sphece—Vyfsa, But the comparisons are never on all fours, as in
the case before us.—T.

+ A classical Hindu musical instrument, having metallic strings, with a
palr of gourds at one end for the sounding-board. Vide Yontra-Kece by Sir
Saurindra Mohan Tagore, Mus-Dac—T.


YUDDHAKINDAM. 1355,


the cries of Matdas* for its strains, Then in the field,
Dhumraksha bow in hand, laughing, pursued the monkeys in
all directions with showers of shafts. And seeing the forces
hard beset by Dhumr&ksha and distressed thereat, the Wind-
god's offspring, waxing enraged, seizing a huge crag,
approached (the Rakshasa). And with his eyes doubly
reddened in wrath, that one, like unto his sire himself in
prowess, brought down the crag upon Dhumr&ksha’s car. And
seoing the crag, (Dhumr&ksha) upraising his mace hurriedly,
leapt down in vehemence, and stood on the ground, And
having shattered his car, that crag fell down to the earth,
And thereat letting go the car furnished with wheels, Kuvaras
and a face, as well as a banner; in which Dhumr&ksha
had left his bow,—Hanum&n—son unto the Wind-god—laid
about him right lustily for destroying the Raksbasas,with trees
having branches long and short, And thereat some Rakshasas
with their heads shattered, lay drenched in blood; and
others, struck with trees, dropped down to the earth. And
then Hanuman—son unto the Wind-god—charged in fult
career against the R&ikshasa army ; and, taking a mountain-
peak, he rushed against Dhumr&ksha. And as Hanumfn
was descending, the powerful Dhumr&ksha, upraising a mace,
aud giving out a shout, made towards him speedily. And
then Dhumr&ksha enraged, brought down that mace studded
with innumerable pricks, on the head of Hanum{a fired with
wrath. And thus assailed with the mace of fearful impetu-
osity, the monkey endowed with the strength of the wind,
without at all heeding that blow, let fall a mountain-top
right against Dhumriksha’s head. And on being assailed
with the mountain-peak, Dhumr&ksha, having his entire body
mangled, suddenly fell to the earth, like unto a toppling hill.
And seeing Dhumraksha slain, those night-rangers that
survived the carnage, in extreme agitation began to pour
into Lank&, attacked by the monkeys. And that hig!


* A species of elephants.


-souled


1256 RAMAYANA,


offspring of the Wind-god, having slain his foes, and come
under the influence of fatigue incident to his slaughtering
his enemies,-—having caused rivers of gore to flow (in the
field),— experienced the excess of joy on being honored of the
monkeys


SECTION ut).


Heaainc Dhumriksha slain, Rivana—-lord of the
Rakshasas—overwhelmed with a mighty rage, began to sigh
like a serpent. And collied with passion, and sighing hot
for a long time, he addressed a cruel Rakshasa—the exceed-
ingly strong Vajradanshtra,*—"Go thou, O hero, Go out,
environed by the Rakshasas. Slay Dagaratha’s son—R&ma—
and Sugriva along with the monkeys.” Therevpon hastily
answering “So be it,” that foremost of the R&kshasas skilled
in illusion, marched forth surrounded by many a leadert of
armies, furnished with elephants and steeds, mules and
camels,—with his mind concentrated ; and adorned with
innumerable variegated flags and banners. And tien decked
out with curious deyuras and a tiara, and wearing armour, he’
rushed out with his bow in his hand. And then going round
his flaming vehicle, adorned with pennons and garnished
with gold, the kingt ascended the same. And equipped with
slender swords and curious tomaras and smooth maces and
bhind:pdias and bows and darts and pattigas and scimitars
and discuses and clubs and sharpened axes, the multiform
infantry march bearing arms in their hands, And all those
powerful and flaming R&kshasas wore variegated raiments.


* Lit.—the thander-toothed.
+ Valai—forces—is interpreted leaders by the commentator.
+ Vajradanshtra.—T.


PUDDHARANDAM. 1357


Aad heroic elephants in rut resembling mountains in motion,
marched, being led by those well-skilled in battle carrying
femaras and hooks in their hands. And mighty steeds
bearing auspicious marks, marched, ridden by heroes. And
that entire R&kshasa army, as it marched forth, resembled
clouds in summer roaring with lightning. And (the R&k-
shasas) sallied forth through the Southern Entrance, where
that leader of herds—Angada—was stationed. And as they
went out, evil omens appeared. From the cloudless yet fierce
sky meteors began to shoot. And throwing up flames from
their mouths, dreadful jackals began to emit cries. And fright-
ful beasts betokened the destruction of the Rakshasas in battle,
And warriors began to tumble down in an ominous way.
‘Witnessing these evil omens, the exceedingly powerful and
energetic Vajradanshtra, assuming patience, set out, eager for
encounter. And seeing them flee away, the monkeys,
burning for victory, set up tremendous shouts, filling all the
ten cardinal points. And then there came on a terrific
encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas, dreadful, of
terrific deeds, and wishing for each other’s death. And
warriors fraught with high spirits, springing up, dropped
down to the earth, their bodies and hands riven, and all their
persona bathed in blood. And some approaching each other,
with bludgeons in their hands, without turning away from
the field, discharged various weapons at each other. And
there were heard sounis of trees and rocks and weapons,—
mighty and dreadful and capable of striking terror into the
heart. And dreadful and mighty were the sounds of car-wheels,
and conchs and trumpets and drums, And some, casting
off weapons, engaged in a hand to hand combat by means of
slaps, and kicks, and bones, and trees, And some Rakshasas,
having their bodies broken, were killed by means of thighs.
And some were crushed with crags by Danavas invincible
in battle. And Vajradanshtra, resembling the noose-handed
Destroyer, frightening the monkeys, ranged in that field
158


1258 RAMAYANA.


fatal to people. And R&kshasas, possessed of strength ;
equipped with various weapons, transported with passion,
slew the monkey-forces. And then in the conflict the proud
Wind-god’s son, influenced by twofold wrath, spread havoc
among the Rakshasa ranks, like the Fire at the universal
dissolution, And the energetic Angada possessed of the
‘prowess of a lion, with his eyes coppery with wrath, upraising
a tree, began to spread terrible destruction among the
Rikshasas, even as a lion destroyeth tiny deer. And
attacked by Angada there, the Rakshasas of dreadful vigor,
with their heads riven, felldown like unto trees that have
been uprooted. And the earth became frightful (to behold),
being covered with variegated cars and standards and steeds
and the bodies of monkeys and of Rakshasaa and streams of
blood. And-adorned with chains, and Xeyuras, and attires,
and umbrellas, the field of battle looked like an autumnal
night. And agitated by Angada’s impetuosity, that mighty
army of Rikshasas began to shake, even as water trembleth,
moved by the wind.


SECTION Liv,


Biome his own army destroyed by the might of
Angada, the exceedingly - powerful Rakshasa—Vajradanshtra
—-was overcome with rage, And stretching his dreadful
bow of the splendour of Sakra’s thunder-bolt, he began to
shower shafts among the monkey-ranks. And the foremost
among the heroic Rakshasas also, stationed on cars, furnished
with various arms, warred on in the encounter. And the
heroic monkeys also—foremost of their kind—with rocks in
their hands, faught around in united strength. And in that


PUDDBARANDAM. 1359


conflict, the R&kshasas began to incessantly shower aywéas
of arms among the flower of the monkey-army. And the
_monkeys,—pre-eminently valiant, and resembling mad

elephants, kept showering over the-Rakshasas mountain-trees

and mighty rocks, And then took place a hot contest among

heroic warring monkeys and Rakshasas, eager for encounter.

And some, with their heads unbroken, had their arms and

legs torn ; and thir bodies pierced with weapons, and laved

in blood. And monkeys and Rakshasas lay down in the

field,—thronged with numbers of Kankas, and vultures; and

swarming with flocks of jackals. And striking affright

unto the timid, on the earth started up (spectral) headless

tranks,—with their arms and heads torn, and their bodies

riven all over. And monkeys and R&kshasas began to drop
down to the earth, And the army of night-rangers, being
sadly handled by the monkey-hosts, broke up at every point
in the very sight of Vajradanshtra. And seeing the
Rakshasas, distressed with fright and harassed by the’
monkeys, the powerful Vajradanshtra, with his eyes crimson-
ed with choler, entered the arena, bow in hand,—frighten~
ing the monkey-forces. And he began to pierce the monkeys
with straight-speeding shafts winged with Kanka feathers ;
and he pierced simultaneously seven, eight,nine, fivesmonkeys
(in the field). And the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra,
transported into a towering passion, began to cleave the
hostile ranks. And thereat terrified, the monkeys, with
their bodies cut with arrows, rushed towards Angada, like
creatutes resorting to the Creator. And finding the monkey.
ranks disordered, Vali's son in a rage cast his eyes on Vajra-
danshtra, who also was eyingjhim. And Vajradanshtra and
Angada faught fiercely with each other over and over again ;
ranging the field like a tiger and amad elephant*, Then
(Vajradanshtra) with hundreds and thousands (of shafts)


* Harimattagajdviva—tit, Hike @ lion and a mad elephant. The ——
mentator however, remarks, that the contest of a Jion with an elephant is in.


1760 RAMAYANA.


resembling tongues of flames, pierced the powerful son of the
monkey in the vitals. Thereupon Vali’s son of mighty strength
and tremendous prowess, with his body covered all aver with
blood, hurled a tree at Vajradanshtra. And seeing the tree
in full career, the Rakshasa without betraying any agitation,
severed it in pieces ; and the tree, thus assailed, fell to the
earth. And seeing that feat of Vajradanshtra, that foremost
of monkeys, taking up a huge crag, hurled it fat his foe) and
sent up shouts, And seeing this descend upon him, that
powerful one, calmly leaping down from his vehicle, stood on
his feet on the ground. And the crag discharged by Angada,
coursing on in the field, dashed to pieces the car along with
the wheels and, the Auvara as well as the horses. And then
the monkey, taking up another prodigious peak crowned with
trees, let it alight on Vajradanshtra’s head. Thereat vomitting
blood, Vajradanshtra, deprived of his senses, for a moment
overcome with stupor, stood embracing his mace, sighing.
And then the night-ranger, recovering his senses, with his
mace, in high rage hit at the breast V4li's son staying in the
field. And thereupon, giving up his mace, he entered into
a boxing encounter (with Angada). And hitting each other
there, they both—the monkey and the Rakshasa,—began to
vomit blood, and were overcome with fatigue consequent on
the thrashing each sustained ; and they endowed richly with
prowess, appeared like Ang&raka and Budha.* Then the
exceedingly energetic Angada—best of—monkeys—uprooting
a tree, stood there, covered with flowers and leaves. And
(Vajradanshtra) took a shield composed of ass’s hide,t and
a sword broad and sightly, covered with bells, and graced
with a leathern sheath. And the monkey and the
Rakshasa displayed curious and graceful movements, -And


compatible in the nature of things, for even an elephant dreaming of a lion,
gives up the ghost !—T.

* The asteriams so called.

+ What could this weapon be like 9—T.


YUDDHARANDAH. 1361


attacking each other, they gave shouts, eager for victory.
And with blood flowing from their wounds, they looked
beautiful like blossoming Kingukas. And warring, both,
overcome with fatigue, went to the ground on their knees.
Anon in the twinkling of an eye, that powerful monkey
Angada—started up, with his eyes glowing,—like unto a
serpent that hath been smitten with a rod. And (at length)
with his stainless and sharpened sword, Vali’s son, endeued
with exceeding strength severed Vajradanshtra’s huge head.
And the graceful head of that one having his body covered
with blood, cut off by the sword, falling to the ground with
its eyes rolling, was severed in twain. Seeing Vajradanshtra
slain, the Rakshasas, overwhelmed with fear and exceedingly
agitated, in pitiful plight, with woe-begone faces and heads
hung in shame,—fled towards Lank&, attacked {all the while)
by the monkeys. Having compassed Vajradanshtra’s
destruction, the powerful son of V&li, endowed with
exceeding strength, in the midst of the monkey-army
experienced great joy on being honored by the monkeys,
like the wielder of the thunder-bolt—the thousand-eyed
(Deity)—surrounded by the celestials. |


SECTION Lv.


FHearinc Vajradanshtra slain by the son of Vali, Ravana
said unto the general of his forces, standing before him with
joined hands,—"Let invincible Rakshasas of dreadful
prowess, march forth, placing before them Akampana, skilled
in all weapons and arms. He is capable of chastising foes
as well as of protecting his own and leading them; and he
is excellent in warfare. And he is always desirous of my


1262 RAMAYANA, : ‘


prosperity, and always loveth warfare. He will conquer the
Kakutsthas, as well as Sugriva endowed with exceeding
strength, and, without doubt, slay all the other dreadful
monkeys.” Taking Ravana’s command, that highly powerful
one endowed with fleet vigor, marshalled those forces. Then
equipped with various arms, the foremost of R&kshasas,
having dreadful eyes (jn their heads), and of dreadful forms,
marched forth, urged on by their general. And, ascending
a large car, adorned with burnished gold, Akampana,
possessed of the splendour of clouds,* and cloud-hued,
and furnished with a voice resembling the roar of clouds,
went out, environed by Rakshasas of terrific forms. And
Akampana, resembling the sun in power, was incapablet
of being shaken in fight by the very gods, and of being
beheld by them.t And as, burning for battle, he rushed
out in wrath, the steeds drawing his car suddenly lost
their energy. And the left eye of that one delighting in
encounter, began to throb. And his countenance grew pale,
and his voice faltered. And in a fair day, it looked foul with
the wind breathing roughly. And fierce and frightful beasts
and birds hegan to emit cries. And that lion-shouldered
one like a tiger in prowess, without heeding these ominous
occurences, marched forth into the field. And as that
Rakshasa was setting out along with the Rakshasas, he set
up mighty roars as if agitating the deep. And the mighty
army of monkeys was seized with trepidation at that sound,
And then there took place a mighty encounter of the
Rakshasas and the monkeys equipped staying ii fight with
trees and rocks; who had given up all concern for their
selves in behalf of Rama and Ravana. And each side desirous


* There isa pun here on the word Abampana—tit—one incapable of being
shaken —T. .

+ Possessed of a person measuring, according to the commentator, a mass of
clouds. I give the apparent sense, which answers.—T.

+ Monkeys.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1263


of slaying the other, the monkeys and the Rakshasas were ex-
ceedingly strong and heroic and like unto mountains. And each
party storming at the other, in that conflict were heard loud
cries emitted by those swift-speeding ones in anger. And fear-
ful was the dust red-hued that was raised incessantly by the
monkeys and the Rakshas ; and it enveloped the ten cardinal
points. And in the field of battle, each enveloped with that
dust raised, pale as silk, could not be discovered by the other.
And in consequence of that dust arising, neither standard,
nor ensign, nor shield, nor steed, nor weapon, nor car could
be seen. And the fierce cries alone of those roaring and
rushing were heard in that dreadful battle ; but their forms
were not visible to the sight. And in that conflict in the
dark then monkeys enraged slew monkeys, and R&ékshasas
Rakshsasas. And monkeys and Rakshasas slaying (indis-
criminately) friends and foes, made the earth wet with
blood, and miry. And then with showers of blood the dust
was layed ; and the earth was covered with corpses. And
Rakshasas and monkeys fast slew each other vigorously with
trees and darts, maces and grdcas, rocks, bludgeons and
tomaras, and by means of their arms resembling bludgeons,
coped with their adversaries appearing like hills. And
in the encounter monkeys slew Rakshasas of dreadful
deeds. And in their turn R&kshasas, wrought up with
passion, bearing in their hands prdgas and fomaras
destroyed monkeys wielding dire arms. And that leader
of the force—Akampana—growing wroth, inspired with
cheerfulness all the Rakshasas endowed with dreadful vigor.
And the monkeys forcibly snatching away the weapons (of
the Rakshasas), began to rive the Rakshasas with mighty
trees and giant crags. In the meanwhile those heroes among
the monkeys—Kumuda, Nila and the exceedingly exasperat-
ed Mainda, summoned the utmost impetuosity they were
masters of. And those foremost of monkeys and redoubtable
able warriors without much ado began to spread quite a


1264 HaMALANA.


carnage in the van of the Rakshasa army, and by .means of
various arms terribly beat the Rakshas:


SECTION LVI.


Ayo witnessing that mighty exploit of the foremost of
the monkeys, Akampana waxed furious with wrath, And
transported with passion, he, twanging his mighty bow,
seeing that feat of his foe, addressed his charioteer saying,—
“O charioteer, swiftly conduct thou the car to that same
place. These powerful ones are slaying innumerable
Rakshasas in fight. And all those vigorous monkeys of
@readful deeds stay before me, armed with trees and rocks.
Those, pluming themselves overmuch on their martial
worth, [intended to slay in battle. And all this Rakshasa
force appeared to be harassed by these.” Then ona car
drawn by moving steeds, Akampana from a distance
attacked the monkeys with showers of arrows. And
thereat the monkeys could not so much as maintain their
ground in the field~and how could they fight? And broken
by the arrows of Akampana, they began to fly. And the ex-
ceedingly strong Hanuman, seeing his kindred come under
the masterdom of Death and follow the course pursued by the
shafts of Akampana, advanced (to the conflict). And seeing
that mighty monkey, all those heroic prime monkeys together
surrounded (Hanumfn) in the field. And those best of
monkeys, seeing Hanum&4n stay, grew strong by relying on
that strong one. And éven as the great Indra showereth down
rain, Akampana showered shafts on Hanum4n resembling a
mountain-summit in grandeur. And without casting a
thought on the showers of arrows poured on his person, that


PUUDHAKANDAM. 1365


monkey ‘gifted with exceeding strength, set his heart -on
compassing the death of Akampana. And laughing, that
exceedingly energetic offspring of the Wind-god rushed after
that Raksha, as if making the Earth herself tremble. And
the form of that one roaring and flaming up in energy, was
irresistible, like unto the appearance of a flaming fire. Aad
thinking that he was unfurnished with any arms,that foremost
of monkeys, waxing wroth, vehemently rooted up a hill, And
taking that huge hill, the Wind-god’s son endowed with
prowess, sending up a tremendous roar, began to whirl it
with a single arm. And as of yore Purandara had in
encounter pursued Namuchi with the thunder-bolt, (Hanuman)
pursued that best of R&kshasas—Akampana. And Akampana,
seeing that uplifted crag, from a distance cut it off with
mighty crescent-shaped shafts. And finding that mountain-
top severed by the shafts of the Raksha and scattered in
pieces, Hanuman was seized with a mighty wrath. And that
monkey, wrought up with rage and pride, grasping an
Agwakarna elevated like unto a hill, at once uprooted it.
And taking that broad-shouldered Agwakarna, that one
furnished with high splendour, with great glee whirled it
above the ground. And thereat rushing amain vehemently,
{Akampana) speedily broke the trees.* And (seeing this),
Hanuman, transported with passion, rived the earth with his
kicks. And Hanuman slaughtered elephants, and the riders
thereof, and cars with their riders, and dreadful Rakshasas,
and footmen. And seeing the enraged-Hanuman resembling
the Finisher armed with trees and destructive, the Rakshasas
began to fly fast. And seeing that one enraged, terrific unto
the Rakshasas, the heroic Akampana was agitated greatly
and sent up shouts. And Akampana pierced Hanuman
endowed with exceeding prowess with four and ten shafts,
sharpened and capable qf cleaving the bodies of people.
And thus covered with iron arrows and whetted darts, that


‘* Why plural ? So it is, however, in the text.—T.
159


1266 KAMLYANA,


hero-——Hanumin—looked like a bill covered with trees, And
that huge-bodied one endowed with wondrous prowess and
great strength, appeared like a flowering Acoka or a fire’
without smoke. And then uprooting another tree, (Hanum&n)
summoning up his best impetuosity, swiftly hit Akampana—
foremost of Rakshasas—on the head. And slain with that tree
by that high-souled monkey-chief wrought up with passion,
that Rakshasa fell down and died.* And seeing that fore-
most of Rakshasas—Akampana—slain {and lying) on the
ground—the R&kshasas were extremely aggrieved, and
(appeared) like trees in an earthquake. And those R&kshasas
defeated, teaving their arms behind, made for Lank& in fear,
pursued by the monkeys. And with their hair flowing loosely,
(the Rakshasas), affiicted with affright, and despirited and
beaten, fied fast, with the water of fatigue running down their
persons. And crushing down each other, they entered the
city in a panic, momentarily casting their looks behind them.
When the Rakshasas had entered Lanka, the exceedingly
mighty monkeys, assembled together, paid homage unto
Hanumin. And Hanum&n, gifted with strength, honored
the seniors each as he deserved in consideration of his
lineage. And the monkeys eager for victory shouted with
might and main, and began to drag the Raksbasas with the
view of taking their lives. And that mighty monkey—son
unto the Wind god—having destroyed the Rakshasas and
arrived (in the midst of the host),attained heroic glory,—even
as did Vishnu, having slain that destroyer of enemies—the
mighty and dreadful Asura possessed of exceeding strength,
-~stationed in the van of the forces. And then the deities
and Rama himself and the highly powerful Lakshmana, and
also the monkeys headed by Sugriva, and Bibhishana
endowed with great strength, honored that monkey.

* This sentence, “And slain......and died” reads foolish, But the original is
answerable for—in logical parlance—this identical proposition —T.


FOUDDHARANDAM. 1267


SECTION UvVIt


‘Hearne that Akampana had been killed, the lord of
R&kshasas, overwhelmed with anger, with his face somewhat
fallen, cast his eyes on his counsellors. And then pondering
and reflecting for a while, in the forenoon he went round the
city of Lank& for inspecting the barracks. And the king
surveyed the city guarded by the Rakshasas, covered with
innumerable barracks, and crowned with ensigns and
standards. And seeing the city beseiged, Ravana—lord of
the Riikshasas—seasonably spoke words of welfare unto
Prahasta skilled in fight,—"Save battle,deliverance find 1 none
for the city suddenly beleaguered and put to straits. And
this strain must be borne by these versed in warfare~me
or Kumbhakarna or thee—my general—or Indrajit or
Nikumbha.* And therefore do thou from this place, speedily
taking this force, march to where the monkeys are, for
securing victory (in the encounter). And as soon as thou
settest out, the monkey-forces, hearing the roars of the
foremost Rakshasas—speedily setting themselves in motion,
—sball flee away. And volatile and haughty and of fickle
minds, the monkeys will not be able tu bear thy shouts; even
as elephants are incapable of bearing the roaring of a lion.
And on that monkey-army running away, Rima in company
with Sumitra’s son, deprived of his power and shorn of
support, shall, Q Prahasta, come under thy subjection. In
this matter, thy being slain is uncertain, but victory is
certain. Now do thou, as thou weighest our welfare, declare
thyself for or against this course.’ Thus addressed by
Ravana, Prahasta—general of the forces—said unto the
‘Rakshasa-chief ; like Uganas addressing the lord of Asuras,


* Grammatically faulty such is the sentence in the criginal—T.


1268 c KAMATANA,


—"O king, before this we had deliberated together with wise
counsellors, and then we disputed with each other in our res-
pective views. And I had declared myself for giving up Sit&
as fraught with our welfare; and we saw war involved in
witholding her. I have ever been honored by thee variously
with gifts and regard and soft speech. And what is thy good
for which I shall not be at the pains? My life 1 do not care
to keep,—nor yet my sons or my wife. Behold t for thee will
J offer up my life into the sacrificial fire of conflict.” Having
said this unto his master—RAvana—the general, Prahasta,
addressed his generals staying before him, saying,—“At
once bring up the mighly host of Rakshasas. To-day in the
field of fight will I entertain the flesh-feeding fowls of the
forest with the bodies of the foes slain with my resistless
shafts!’ Hearing his speech, the bighly powerful leaders
arrayed the army in that abode of tlre Rakshasa, And ina
moment Lank& swarmed with heroic and terrific R&kshasas
equipped with various arms,—as if with elephants,—as well
as with people worshipping Fire and bowing down unto
Brahmanas. And the perfumed breeze blew, Jaden with the in-
cense of sacrificial offerings. And the Rakshasas, inspired with
martial ardour, put on diverse garlands, consecrated with
scriptural formule; and donned on their armour, And
furnished with their bows and wearing their armour, the
Rakshasas, on seeing king Ravana, leaving (their vehicles),
stood, surrounding Prahasta. Then greeting the monarch,
Prahasta, furnished (with all appliances of battle),—winding
his dreadfal trumpet, ascended his car ; having all sorts of
weapons; yoked with wondrous fleet steeds; driven by a
competent charioteer,—excellently furnished; sending up
sounds resembling the rumbling of mighty masses of cloud,—
appearing like the very Sun or Moon; invincible with a
serpent-standard ; having a defence as well as a portion
exceedingly handsome; netted with gold all round; and
seeming to be laughing in grace. And then, ascending this”


¥UDDH4KANDAM. 1269


car, Prahasta, whom Ravana bad entrusted with authority,
surrounded by a vast host, swiftly went out of Lank&, And
then there were heard the sounds of kettle-drums, resembling
* the roars of Parjanya,—and the sounds of musical instruments,
as if filling the Earth. And on that general of the forces
marching, sounds of conchs were heard (all around) ; and the
Rakshasas of dreadful forms and huge bodies, going before
Prahasta, advanced, emitting tremendous roars, And
Narantaka,* Kambhahanu, Mahdnada,t and Samunnata,
Prahasta's counsellors all of them—-went on, surrounding
him. And he went out by the Eastern entrance, environed
by this exceedingly dreadful array, resembling troops of
elephants. And resembling the Destroyer—Yama himself—
Prahasta in rage went out surrounded by that mighty
host resembling the sea. And at the tumult raised by
their exodus, as well as the roars of the R&kshasas, all
creatures in Lanka began to cry in preternatural tones.
And swarming under the cloudless welkin, birds feasting on
flash and gore began to gyrate at the right hand of the car.
And dreadful jackals, emitting live flames from their mouths,
set up cries. And stars began to shoot from the firmament ;
and the winds to ruffle. And enraged at each other, the
planetary bodies were shorn of their brightness. And clouds
emitting sharp sounds,showered down blood upon the car, and
those marching in front were washed therewith. And alighting
at (he topof the standard,a vulture set up cries,facing the south,
and began to prick both its sides,--thereby depriving (Prahasta)
of his grace. And from the bands of his charioteer and his
driver conducting the steeds,never given to turning away from


* Lit, destroyer of men. Almost all the names of the R&kshasas are thus
significant names, This assigning of names, embosoming some harmonising
image, has by Sir Francis Palgrave, justly been considered as betokening a
high poetical faculty.

+ Lit.-loud.throated.

} Lit —tofty.


1270 RAMAYANA,


the field, the goad began todrop again and again. And
the auspiciousness that was bright and rare when the army
set out, was clean gone in a moment,—and the steeds began
to stumble on even ground, And as Prahasta of renowned
worth and valor marched, the monkey-army equipped with
various arms, presented themselves before him. And loud
was the tumult that was raised by the monkeys. And mighty
was the din that was heard of those, uprooting trees and
taking up ponderous crags, of the Rakshasas roaring and the
monkeys storming in both the exhilarated armies of Rakshas
and wodd-rangers,—of vehement and able (warriors) eager for
slaying each other, and challenging each other to fight. And
like an insect falling into a flame, the wicked-minded Prabasta,
for obtaining victory, increasing his impetuosity entered into
that host of the monkey-king.


SECTION -Lvit.


Ssews Prahasta sally, ready for encounter, that chastiser
of foes—Rama—with a smile said unto Bibhishana,—*Who is
this huge-bodied one that armed with impetuosity, advanceth
to the encounter? And what is his power and prowess like?
O mighty-armed one, tell me this concerning this powerful
night-ranger.” Hearing Raghava’s words,Bibhishana answered,
—In Lanka this is the general of the lord of Rakshasas—
the R&kshasa named Prahasta, surrounded by a third of the
forces. He is possessed of prowess and is of distinguished
gallantry, And that mighty army of strong monkeys,
wrought up with wrath, and roaring at Prahasta, saw him
dreadful and of terrific prowess and huge-bodied,—surround-
edonall sides by the R&kshasas,—and setting up roara,
marching. And the Rakshasas, eagerly desirous of victory,


YUDDHAKANDAM. aa7r


pursued the monkeys, wielding swords and darts and risit1s,
and javelins and shafts and maces and clubs and bludgeons
aod prdgas and various axes and curious bows, And the
monkeys on their part, eager for encounter, took up flowering
trees and hills and huge and broad crags. And each party
approaching the other, great was the encounter that took
place. And innumerable (monkeys and R&kshasas) kept
showering rocks and arrows. And many R&kshasas in
conftict slew many a powerful monkey, and the monkeys on
their part slaughtered many a Rakshasa. And some were
pierced with darts and with (other) powerful weapons ; and
some were wounded with bludgeons ; and some were hewn
with axes. And some rendered senseless, dropped dewn to
the earth ; and some hit with weapons, had their breasts riven.
And some, severed in twain with swords, dropped to the earth
lifeless, And monkeys were hewn in their sides by heroic
R&kshasas. Ard numbers of R&ksbasas all around were
beaten to the ground by infuriated monkeys with trees and
mountain-peaks. And some smitten sore with slaps having
the touch of the thunder-bolt, began to vomit blood from
their mouths, with faces and eyes turned pale. Aud great
was the uproar that arose in consequence of Rakshasas and
monkeys emitting distressful cries and sending forth leonine
roars. And monkeys and R&kshasas wrought up with wrath,
engaged in treading the path of heroes,—looking terrific with
their faces moving about,—performed deeds of intrepid
courage. And Nar&ntaka and Kambhahanu and MahSnida
and Samuunata—all counsellors of Prahasta—set about
slaughtering the rangers of the woods. Of these doing swift
execution among the monkeys, Dwivida, taking up a
mountain-peak, slew one-—namely Narintaka. And then the
monkey, Durmukha, rising up afresh, armed with a mighty
tree, killed the light-handed R&kshasa—Samunnata. And
Jambavaa endowed with energy, waxing enraged, uplifting
‘a giant crag brought the same down on Mahfndda’s breast.


1378 RAMAYANA.


And there speedily assailed by Tara, with a mighty tree, the
powerful Kumbhahanu gave up the ghost in the conflict. And
not brooking that feat, Prahasta, mounted on a car, taking
a bow in his hand, fell to spreading a dreadful havoc among
the rangers of the woods. And then there the two hosts
mingled into almost a vortex ; and the sounds that arose from
those infuriated ones of immeasurable might, resembled the
toar of the ocean. And in terrific encounter the enraged
R&kshasa irresistible in battle drove the monkeys to sore
straits with showers of arrows. And the earth was covered
quite with the terrible bodies of monkeys and Rakshasas ;
and it looked as if covered with mountains. And the earth
drenched with streams of gore looked as if swarming
with blossoming pa/dépas in the month of spring. And
as leaders of elephant-herds cross a lotus-tank covered
with fotus-dust, those Rakshasas and choice monkeys
crossed that river flowing in the field of conflict incapable
of being crossed; having for her banks hosts of heroic warriors
slain ; for her mighty trees broken arms; for her volume of
waters showers of blood ; coursing to Yama resembling the
Ocean; with livers and spleens for her vast slime; with
scattered entrails for her moss; with riven bodies and heads
for her fish; limbs for her lawns; swarming with vultures
for her swans; with Kankas for her cranes; filled with fat
representing her foam; with the roars (of warriors) for her
sounds,—incapable of being crossed by cravens,—and resem-
bling a real river swarming at the end of the rains with
cranes and swans. Then all of a sudden Nila saw Prahasta
stationed on his car, discharging vollies of shafts and
harassing the monkeys therewith. And mounted on a sun-
bright vehicle, that leader of the army—-Prahasta—sceing
Nila advance towards him amain in the encounter, like the
wind in the sky scattering a mighty mass of clouds,—
rushed towards Nila. And that leader of forces—Prahasta
—foremost of: bowmen, stretching his bow, began tg shower


UDDHAKANDAM. 1273


arrows on Nila. And having pierced Nila sore and wounded
him, those shafts sought the earth like enraged serpents.
And that mighty monkey—Nila—endowed with energy,struck
with those sharpened shafts resembling flames,—uprooting
a tree, assailed therewith the irrepressible Prahasta—who was
rushing against him. And thereat, that foremost of R&kshasas,
on being attacked, flaming up into fury and uttering roars,—
poured showers of arrows on the monkey-leader. And not
being able to resist the arrowy vollies of that wicked-minded
Rakshasa, (Nila) bore them, even as a bull beareth with
closed eyes a fast-descending autumnal shower. Andin the
very same way did Nila with his eyes closed suddenly stand
the mighty arrowy buffet of Prahasta incapable of being
withstood. And wrought up with rage, the exceedingly
strong and mighty Nila with a giant Sé/a slew the steeds of
Prahasta, And then his soal surcharged with wrath, Nila
swiftly shattered the bow of that wicked-minded one, and
then shouted again and again. Qa being bereft of his bow,
Prahasta, general of forces, taking a terrible mace, leapt
down from his car. And the redoubtable leaders endowed
with activity, bearing hostility to each other, their persons
bathed in blood, stood {on the ground) like two elephants
(with their temples) riven, And they kept tearing each ather
with their teeth like a lion and a tiger, and also stri
like a lion and a tiger. And endowed with victorious vigor,
those heroes, never knowing to desist [rom fight, were eager
for fame, even like Vritra and Vasava (fighting). And then
Prahasta putting forth his dearest effort, hit Nila om the
temples with a mace ; and the blood began to flow. And
then the mighty monkey, with his person deenched in blood,
—wrought up with passion,discharged a tall tree at Prahasta’s
breast. And without caring for that hit, he, taking up
a mighty mace, furiously rushed against the monkey—
Nila, And witnessing that enraged (hero) rushing against
him with exceeding impetuosity, that redoubted monkey


160


4274 R4AMAPANA,


endowed with vehemence, took up a tremendous crag. And
in the encounter Nila at once let that crag alight right on the
head of Prahasta, eager for encounter and fighting with the
mace. And hurled by that foremost of monkeys, that huge
and terrific crag then shattered Prahasta’s head in pieces.
And then bereft of life and shorn of nerve and devoid of
sense,he suddenly dropped down to the earth like a tree whose
roots have been severed. And even as fountains flow from
the sides of a hill, blood flowed profusely from the person of
that one, whose head had been riven. On Prahasta being
slain by Nila, that mighty army of Rakshasas,never trembling
(from fear),—retreated towards Lankd. And like waters
rushing (through a breach in) a dyke, the Ra&kshasas
could not stand their ground, on their leader being sl
And on that head of the hosts being killed, the Raksh:
growing dispirited, repairing to the residence of the lord of
Rakshas, remained plunged in thought, without speaking
anything. And plunged in that sea of sorrow, they seemed
as if they had been bereft of their senses. And then the
higbly powerful and victorious Nila, leader of forces, on being
extolled with gracious offices, and on being joined by Rama
and Lakshmana, looked exceedingly exhilarated.


SECTION LIX.


Ano on the leader of the Rakshasa host being slain in
battle by the foremost of monkeys, that army of the R&kshasa
monarch, resembling the ocean in violence,—furnished with
dreadful weapons, began to scamper away. And going to
the lord of the Rakshasas, they apprised him of the dealth of
his general at the hands of the Fire-god’s offspring. And
hearing those words of theirs, the Rakshasa lord was over+


YUDDH«RANDAM. 8275


come with rage. And hearing that Prahasta had been killed
in battle, (he), exercised with passion, with his heart
influenced with grief, addressed those foremost of the
Rakshasa hosts, even as Indra addresses the chiefs among
the celestials, saying —That foe should no longer be dis-
regarded that hath slain along with his followers and elephants
that leader of my hosts that had destroyed the forces of Indra
himself. Therefore, without taking thought, will I, for com-
passing the destruction of the foe, myself march to that marvell-
ous fteld of fight. And to-day, even as a flaming fire burneth
down a forest, will I with showers of shafts burn up that
monkey-army, and Rama and Lakshmana.” Saying this, that
enemy of the sovereign of the immortals ascended a flaming
vehicle of dazzling sheen yoked to rows of excellent steeds,—
displaying itself gloriously and having a glowing body, And
eulogized with sacred hymns, the sovereign of the R&kshasa
talers then set out to the sounds of conchs and trumpets and
fanavas ; and in the midst of those produced by persons
striking at their arms, with their hands, and of the sounds
defiance, and leonine roars. And like that lord of the im-
mortals— Rudra—surrounded by ghosts, the foremost of the
Rakshsa monarchs was surrounded by bands of flesh-feeding
(Bakshas) resembling cliffs and clouds,—with eyes glowing like
fire. And at once issuing from the city, that one endowed with
high energy saw that fierce array of monkeys, extended as the
ocean ora mighty mass of clouds,—with arms upraised with
rocks and stones. And seeing that terrific host of Rakshasas,
that eminently auspicious one, followed hy the forces, having.
arms resembling the lord of serpents—Rima—spoke unto
Bibhishana, foremost of those bearing arms,—“Whose is this
force furnished with various ensigns and standards —and
equipped with rdcas and swords and darts and other arms,
——consisting of intrepid (Rakshasas), and having elephants
resembling Mahendra* itself.” Then hearing Rama's speech,


* The moantain sa named,


1276 KAMALANA.


Bibhishana, possessed of the prowess of Sakra himself, ia-
formed R&ma anent that foremost of hosts consisting of that
flower of high-souled Rakshasas,saying,—"O king,him do thou
know to be Akampana, who, possessed of a high soul, is on
the back of that elephant,—whose face looks like the sun new
risen, and who approacheth making the’head of his elephant
tremble (with the splendour of his person). And that one is
named Indrajit—foremost by virtee of the boon (that he hath
obtained), who ascending a car and having a lion for his
ensign,—twangeth his bow like the very bow of Sakra
displayed,—and who with his terrific round teeth appeareth
like an elephant. And that one of a gigantic person is named
Atikaya, that, like unto the Setting-hill of Vindhya, fur-
nished with the bow and stationed on a car,—highly heroic,
stretcheth his bow of unparalleled proportions. And that high-
souled hero is named Mahodara that, furnished with right
coppery eyes resembling the sun new risen, and ascending
a car resonant with the sound of bells, shouteth shrill.
And that one having the vehemence of the thunder-bolt is
PigSicha, that, mounted on a steed in variegated golden
trappings, and having the aspect of a mass of evening clouds,
or a mountain,—(appeareth) with a prdga furnished with
effulgence. And that one is the famed T7régiras,t that,
grasping a whetted dart endowed with the splendour of
lightning and having the speed of the thunder for its minister,
approacheth, riding a bull—the best of his species—and
having the appearance of the Moon himself. And that one
tooking like a mass of clouds, that, having a broad and beauti-
ful breast and a banner surmounted with the king of serpents,
goeth in collected carriage, stretching his bow is Kumbha.
And that one is Nikumbha of wondrous valorous deeds (in


* This meaning is the commentator’s.
+ Some other than the celebrated hero slain by Réma atthe very outset of
his sojourn in Dandaka,—T.


YUDDHARANDAM. . 12977


battle) that, grasping a flaming and smoky* bludgeon
embellished with gold and diamonds,cometh—a very banner of
the entire Raksha host. And that one is Narfntaka, fighting
with mountain-peaks,—that appeareth before us, mounted
on a car flaming like fire, furnished with pennons and
equipped with bows and swords and shafts. And that crusher
of the hauteur of even the celestials,—that surrounded by
various spectres of dreadful forms having faces of tigers, or
camels, or powerful elephants, or deer, or horses,—and with
their eyes rotling,—where the white umbrella resembling
the Moon,—shineth, graced with slender ribs—the high-
souled sovereign of Rakshas appeareth like Rudra himself
environed by spectres,—the sovereign of the Rakshas decked
with a diadem, with his countenance graced with pendulous
ear-rings,—with a person resembling that monarch of
mountains—even Vindhya himself,—that humbler of the pride
of Indra the Great and Yama,—shineth like the Sun.” Then
R&ima—repressor of foes—answered Bibhishana, saying,—
“Alas! Ravana—lord of the R&kshasas—is of exceeding
glowing splendour; and Ravana shineth in glory, and is in-
capable of being gazed at like the Sun himself. And his grace,
being enshrouded in his own splendour, I cannot view plainly.
And the persons of celestials appear splendid as doth
the person of the Rakshasa-chief. And all the warriors
of that high-souled one are like mountains and fight with
crags; and all are equipped with flaming weapons. And
environed by glowing ghosts of dreadful forms and fierce-
looking and furnished with material tenementst,—the king of
Rakshasas appeareth imposing like the Destroyer himself.
And by luck it is that to-day the wickea-minded one hath
come within the range of my vision ; and to-day will I vent


* On account of lapises set on it.

+ Having, according to the commentator, goodly persons, But dehavadet
is literally having dodies ; and this sense, with reference to spirits, I fancy,
fits in with the context.—T.


278 RAMAPANA.


my wrath incident to the ravishment of Sits.” Having said
this, Rama endowed with prowess, ever followed by
Lakshmana, stood, taking up his bow and pulling out
a powerful shaft. And then that high-souled ‘lord of
Rakshasas addressed that mighty host, saying,—“Do ye
casting off fear stay at ease, at the gateways, high ways, and
the edifices (in Lank4). Taking note of this lapse,—vis., that
ye have all come hither with me, the wood-rangers in a body,
subduing the empty city incapable of being withstood,—shall
suddenly put (all) to straits.” Then leaving those counsellors,
(Ravana), on the Rakshas having departed agreeably to his
injunction, dived into that ocean of monkeys, like a mighty
fish diving into the waves of over brimming deep. And
seeing the lord of R&kshasas, furnished with flaming a bow
and arrows,—suddenly rushing,—the king of monkeys, uproot-
ing a mighty mountain-top, darted against the sovereign of
the Rakshas. And taking up that mountain-peak having its
sides covered with innumerable trees, he hurled it at the
night ranger. And seeing it descend swiltly, (Ravana) in
battle severed the same by means of gold-knobbed shafts,
And on that gigantic peak furnished with fair sides filled.
with trees, falling to the earth, severed in pieces,—the lord of
R&kshasas took up an arrow, resembling a mighty serpent
and having the splendour of the Destroyer himself. And
taking that shaft endowed with the vehemence of the wind,
flaming like a fire aglow, and having the impetuosity of the
great Indra's thunder-bolt, (Ravana) hurled it in rage to
compass the destruction of Sugriva. And even as the fierce
dart discharged by Guha* had pierced Krauncha,t that shaft
shot by Ravana, rushing in violence at Sugriva possessed of
a person having the touch of Sakra’s thunder-bolt, pierced it.
Thereat, agonised by the shaft, that hero, with his senses
bewieldered, dropped down to the ground with shrieks. And


.* The generallissimo of the celestials.
+ The mountain so named.


_ FUUDHAKANDAM., : 1379


seeing him down on the earth bereft of his senses, the
Yatudhanas were filled with rejoicing. And then Gavaksha
and Gavaya, Sushena, Rishabha, Jyotimukha and Nala, up-
rooting crags and magnifying their bodies, rushed against the
lord of Rakshasas. And the lord of Rakshasas with hundreds
of shafts having sharpened heads, rendered their strokes
fruitless. And then be rived those foremost of monkeys with
showers of arrows having variegated golden knobs, and
covered those fierce monkey-ranks with networks of arrows,
And on being sore assailed and falling in consequence, those
heroes, the monkeys, pierced with terrific arrows, and
distressed with the shafts of Ravana, emitting cries, sought
the shelter of Rama worthy of being sought. Then the
high-souled and excellent bowman—R4ma,—taking his bow,
at once sallied forth, And thereat, Lakshmana, approaching
Rama, with joined hands addressed him words couching
prime import. “O noble one, | alone am fit to compass the
destruction of this wicked-minded one. J will slay him. Do
thou, O master, permit me.” To him replied Rama of
exceeding energy, having truth for his prowess,—'Go then,
© Lakshmana, and put forth thy utmost exertions in the
encounter. Ravana is forsooth endowed with mighty energy,
and his prowes in battle is wonderful. Without doubt, when
enraged, he is incapable of being borne by this triple world.
Do thou keep an eye on his shortcomings as thou shouldst
watch thine own failings. Being always on the alert, thou
must with thy eyes as much as thy bow protect thyself.”
Hearing R&ghava’s speech, Sumitr4’s son, embracing R&ma,
and saluting him and paying him his respects, went forth to
battle. And (going unto the field), he found Ravana,eadowed
with arms resembling the trunks of elephants,—wielding his
dreadful and flaming bow, and covering with showers of
arrows those monkeys, whose bodies had been swarming with
shafts. And seeing Ravana,the exceedingly powerful Hanuman
son unto the Wind-god—resisting that downpour of


1230 Kam strana.


arrows,charged him vehemently. And coming at his car, the
intelligent Hanuman, uplifting his right arm and terrifying
Ravana, said,—"Incapable of being slain by gods, Dinavas or
Gandharvas, Yakshas or Rakshasas,—Fear bath (at last) found
thee, coming even from monkeys. This my upraised right
arm furnished with five fingers, shall rob thee of thy soul long
resident (in thy body).” Hearing Hanum§n’s speech, Ravana
possessed of dreadful prowess, with his eyes reddened in
wrath, said these words,—°Strike thou swift maugre fear ;
and acquire lasting renown. And, O monkey, having (at
first) taken the measure of thy might, will I finish thee.”
Hearing Rayana's words, the offspring of the Wind-god
said,—"(First) remember thou thy son—Aksha—slaughtered
by me!" Thus addressed, the exceedingly erfergetic lord of
the Rakshasas possessed of prowess dealt a slap unto the
offspring of the Wind-god. And struck with his slap, be
shook momentarily. And staying for a moment and calling
up fortitude, that magnanimous one administered a slap unto
the fue of the immortals. And hit by the high souled
monkey, the Ten-necked one trembled, as trembleth a
mountain duriffg an earthquake. And witnessing Ravana
struck with a slap (by Hanum&n saints and Siddlias and
celestials and the Asuras shouted in glee. Then attaining
a little respile, Ravana said,—Well done, O monkey. In
prowess thou art a foe I pride in.” Thus addressed by
Rivana, the Wind-god’s son said,—"Fie on my prowess,
seeing that thou breathest yet, O Ravana. Strike at
the same time, O perverse one. Why dost thou bluster?
And then my blow shall despatch thee to the mansions of
Yama.” And at the speech of the Wind-god’s son, his ire
fiamed up. And then that one endowed with prowess,
clenching his right fist carefully, let it alight amain on the
monkey's chest. And hit at his spacious chest, Hanuman
shook over and over again. And seeing the mighty
Hanumin overwhelmed, that powerful car-warrior ascended


YOULDHARANDAM. 128


on his car, approached Nila. And the powerful lord of
R&kshasas—-the Ten-necked one—made that general of forces
—Nila—aflame with dreadful shafts entering into the vitals,
resembling snakes. And assailed with shafts, Nila—leader
of monkeys—with one arm took up 2 mountain-top and
hurled it at the lord of Rakshas. And the energetic and
high-minded Hanumin, attaining respite, eager for encounter,
secing (the fight between the R&kshasa and the moukey),
wrought up with rage, said.—“It is not meet for me to attack
Ravana~lord of Rikshasas—engaged with Nila.” And the
highly powerful Ravana, by means of seven shafts with
sharpened points, hit at the mountain-top ; and shivered in
pieces, it fell (to the earth). And seeing that mountain peak
shattered, that general of the monkey-forces—slayer of hostile
heroes—flamed up in wrath like the fire at the universal
wreck, And ig that encounter Nila discharged Agwakarna
trees, and Sé/as, and mangoes in full flower, and various
other trees. And Ravana, getting at the trees, severed them
{by means of his arrows), and poured on the Fire-god’s son
terrific showers of shafts. And assailed with fearful showers
of arrows as with a mass of clouds, that one endowed with
eminent strength, decreasing his dimensions, dropped on the
top of Ravana’s banner. And seeing the son of the Fire-god
descend on the top of his banner, Ravana was fired with ire,
and Nila shouted (thereat). And seeing the monkey (now)
at the Lop of the banner, and (now) at the end of his bow,
and (now) at the crest of his tiara, Lakshmana and Hanuman
and Rima were struck with astonishment. And also Ravana
endowed with exceeding energy, astonished at the lightness
of the monkey, took up a wonderful flaming fiery weapon,
And the monkeys seeing Ravana bewildered, and delighted
thereat, set up shouts. And Ravana enraged at the shouts
of the monkeys, with his heart overwhelmed with agitation,
could not address himself to any affort. And then taking a
Gery shaft and setting the same on his bow, the night-ranger


162


1282 RAMAFANA.


gazed at Nila. And the exceedingly energetic lord of the
R&kshasas said—“O monkey, by virtue of thy skill in
illusion, thou art furnished with lightness. But, O monkey,
if thou canst, preserve thy life. Thou transformest thyself
into many shapes. Yet this shaft of mine discharged from
my weapon, shall deprive of thy life thee that art preserving
it.’ Having said this, the mighty-armed Ravana—lord of the
Rakshasas—fixing his shaft on his bow, shot it at the general.
And Nila, struck at the chest with that arrow, which had been
shot (hy Ravana), burning, suddenly fell down to the earth,
And by virtue of the greatness of his sire and also of his own
energy, he went to the earth on his knees, but was not
utterly deprived of life. And seeing the monkey deprived
of bis senses, the Ten-necked one, eager for encounter,
riding acar emitting a rattle resembling the rumbling of
clouds, darted against Sumitrf’s son. And entering into the
arena of fight and posted there flaming, the powerful lord of
the Rakshasas, baffling (the foe), kept stretching his bow.
And as that one of immeasurable prowess kept stretching his
bow, Sumitra’s son of unflagging mettle, addressed him,
saying,—“O lord of night-rangers, do thou to-day try me in
encounter. Thou ought not to strive with the monkeys.”
And hearing Saumitri’s speech uttered in a full voice, as well
as the terrific twangs of his bow-string, that Raksha—the
king—approaching Sumitra’s son staying in the field, spoke
unto him wrathfully,—"O Raghu’s son, by my luck hast thou
of perverse sense, finding thy fate come within the range
of my ken, This very instant, tormented with the springes of
my shafts, thou wilt repair to the regions of Death.” Thereat,
Sumitra’s son, without being overwhelmed with wonder (on
witnessing R&vana’s prowess), addressed that one furnished
with large and sharp teeth,—setting up roars,—"O king,
those who are (really) endowed with prowess,do- not storm. O
prince of sinners, in vain thou vauntest. O lord of Rakshasas,
I know thy prowess and strength and energy and vigor, Here


YUDDHARANDAM. 1283


am I stationed, bow and shafts in hand. Come thou. What
is the use of vain-glorious self-laudation ?” Thus accosted,
the Raksha monarch, growing wroth, discharged seven shafts
furnished with knobs. Thereupon Lakshmana split them up
with sharp-pointed arrows having variegated golden knobs.
And they suddenly severed like powerful serpents cut off,
Lanka’s lord came under the sway of passion, and discharged
other whetted arrows. And Riima’s younger brother poured
showers of arrows from his bow ; and, planting himself at his
post, cut off those arrows (of his adversary) by means of
tazors, and crescents, and excellent £arnes and darts. And
seeing his arrowy net-works rendered ineffectual, that enemy
of the celestials—the king—was seized with wonderment, and
again shot sharpened arrows. And Lakshmana also,resembling
Indra the Great, setting on his bow sharpened, sharp-pointed,
flaming, and luminous shafts, endowed with the dreadful
vehement impetus of the thunder-bolt, discharged (them), to
compass the destruction of the lord of Rakshas. And thereat
the Rakshasa sovereign cut off those whetted arrows; and
smote Lakshmana in the forehead with an arrow resembling
the Fire of Dooms-day in energy,—which had been conferred
on him by the Self-create. And Lakshmana, tortured with
Ravana’s arrow, shook, loosely holding his bow; and then
recovering his consciousness after undergoing extreme agony,
he severed the bow of the foe of the foremost of celestials.
And having cut off Ravana’s bow, Dagaratha’s son hit (him)
with three sharp-pointed arrows. And the king smarting under
the shafts, with much ado regained his consciousness. And
the enemy of the immortals of terrific power with his bow
severed, and himself hit with shafts, and his body covered
with fat,and himself washed in blood, took up a dart conferred
on him by the Self-create. And the sovereign of the
R&kshasas and their lord in that encounter hurled at Sumitra’s
son the dart resembling smoking fire, sending up living
flames,and striking terror into the monkeys. And as it coursed


1184 Haiti rans.


on, Bharata’s younger brother resisted it with arrows resemb!-
ing a sacrificial flame. Yet the dart pierced into the broad
arm* of Dagaratha’s son, And smit with the dart, that hero
of the Raghu race, although possessed of sirength, was
aglow. And the king at once with his arms seized that one,
who had been deprived of his senses. But he that could with
his arms wield Himav&n or Mandara or Moru or the triple
world’ itsef along with the immortals, could not (for all his
strengthtift up Bharata’s younger brother. And hit at his
chest by the dart of Brahm&, Sumitr3’s son remembered that
he was verily a portion of Vishnu himself. And pressing hard
Sumitra's son—that humbler of the hauteur of the Daityas,
that thorn in the sides of the celestials—could not move him
(from his place). And then the Wind-god's offspring waxing
wroth rushed at Ravana, and overwhelmed with rage smote
athis chest with his clenched fist resembling the thunder-
bolt. And boxed (by Hanum4na), Ravana—tord of the
Ra&kshasas—went down to the ground on his knees, and
shook and dropped to the earth. And blood gushed out in
streams from his mouths and eyes and arms; and staggered
and senseless, he sat down on the platform of his car, And
he was rendered insensible with his senses lost ; and he knew
not where he was, And seeing Ravana endued with terrific
prowess, rendered insensible in the encounter, saints and
monkeys and gods with the Asuras set up shouts. And then
the energetic HanumSn taking Lakshmana racked by Ravana,
with his arms brought him before Raghava. And albeit
incapable of being moved by the foes, (Lakshmana), on
account of the friendship of the Wind-god’s offspring as well
asthe high reverence in which he was held by Hanum4n,
became extremely light to the monkey. And then that dart,
renouncing Sumitra's son vanquished in fight, again sought
its place in Rfvana’s car. And the exceedingly powerful
Ravana, recovering bis consciousness in that dread encounter,


* Bhujaniaram is vague. It may also mean the chest,—T.


YUDDH41RANDAM. 1385


took up whelted shafts and seized a mighty bow. And that
finishey of foes—Lakshmana—reeovered the exercise of his
senses, and had his entire person perfectly healed,—-on his
recalling that he verily was a part and parcel of Vishnu
himself. And witnessing the mighty army of the monkeys
and the redoubted heroes brought down in the conflict,
R&ghava rushed at Ravana. Thereat drawing near to him,
Hanum&n said unto him,—‘It behoveth thee to chastise the
foe ascending my back, even as Vishnu chastiseth the
enemies of the immortals, riding Garutman.” Hearing the
words spoken by Hanuman, Righava at once got up on that
gigantic monkey; and that master of men beheld Ravana in
battle. And seeing him, that highly powerful one darted
against Ravana, even as the enraged Vishnu had rushed
against Virochana’s son,* upraising his weapons. And he
sharply twanged his bow-string sounding like the terrific
crash of thunder ; and then in solemn tones, Rama addressed
the lord of Rakshasas, saying,—“Stay, stay, having done me
such wrong. Repairing whither, shalt thou, O powerful
Rakshasa, attain respite? Even if thou shouldst seek Yama
or Indra or the Sun—son unto Vivagwin—or the Self-sprung
orthe Fire-god or Sankara himself,—or go to the ten cardi-
nal points in ten portions,—yet shalt thou not, so resorting,
attain deliverance. And (Lakshmana), going forth to the fight,
hath been wounded with the dart and hath suddenly been stupi-
fied. But, O king of the Rakshas,to-day in conflict Death shall
claim for his own thee and thy sons and grandsons. By me
with my shafts have been slaughtered four and ten thousand
Rakshas residing in Janasthana, wielding excellent weapons.”
Hearing Raghava’s words, the exceedingly strong lord of the
Rakshasas, overwhelmed with a mighty wrath, recalling en-
mity agone, with burning shafts resembling the fire of Doom
hit in encounter the exceedingly impetuous offspring of the
Wind-god, who was bearing Raghava. And although struck


* The Asura—Vali.


1286 RAMAPANA.


and resisted by the Rakshasa with arrows, the energy of that
one, endowed by nature with prowess—increased greatly.
And the exceedingly energetic Rama, on seeing that fore-
most of the monkeys wounded by R4vana, was mastered by
wrath. And R&ma, closing with his enemy, by means of
whetted arrow-points severed in pieces his car together with
the wheels and the steeds, the banner, the umbrella, and the
majestic streamer, as well as with the charioteer and the
thunder-bolts and darts and swords. And then as the reverend
Indra cleaveth Meru with his thunder-bolt, (Raghava) swiftly
smote on Ravana’s spacious and shapely chest with a shaft
resembling Vajra and the thunder holt, And—that the king
hero—who had not smarted nor shaken under the impetus
of Yajra and the thunder-bolt,—assailed with the arrow of
Rima and agonised in consequence, shook and lost hold of
his bow. And seeing him overwhelmed, Rima took up a
flaming half-moon, and with the same at once severed the
sun-bright tiara of the high-souled sovereign of the Rakshasas,
And Rama in the encounter addressed the lord of Rakshasas,
resembling a serpent bereft of venom, shorn of his splendour,
like unto the sun shrouded (in mist),—-without his wonted
grace, and having his entire tiara riven—saying,—"Thou hast
(in battle) performed high and dreadful deeds,—and hast also
(in the conflict) slain my foremost heroes. And therefore [
know thou art fatigued. And for this reason it is that I wilt
not with my shafts bring thee to the door of Death. Go thou,
I know* that thou art worn out with fight. Therefore, O king
of night-rangers, enter Lanka. Having a little respite, do
thou depart on thy car along with thy bowmen. Afterwards,
mounted on thy car, shalt thou behold my power’. And
thus addressed, the king, with his pride and joy defeated,
with his bow severed, and his steeds and charioteer killed,
himself smarting under shafts,—and having his crown splii


* ¥dndmi—it. I know, The commentator says that here this word
means J permit, But the literal sense answers.—T,


EUDDHAKANDAM. 1287


tered,—speedily entered Lanka. And on that foe of the
deities and the D&navas—the puissant lord of the night-
rangers—entering (into Lanka), Rima rendered the monkeys
along with Lakshmana hale in that fierce confiict. And
at the break-down of that foe of the immortals, the celestials
and the Asuras, the ghosts and the Cardinal poiats,and all the
mighty serpents together with the oceans and the creatures
inhabiting earth and water, felt exceedingly delighted.


SECTION Lx’


Ano entering the city of Lank&, the king afflicted with
the fear of R&ma’s arrows, with his pride humbled, was
undergoing great torments. And overpowered by the high-
souled Raghava, the king resembled an elephant defeated by
alion ora serpent defeated by Garura. And remembering
Raghava’s arrows resembling a comet risen at the universal
wreck, and of the splendour of live lightning, the Rakshasa-
chief was aggrieved. And seated on a superb golden
seat, Rama, eying the Rakshasas, spoke,—‘Forsooth all
the austere asceticism I have performed gocth for
nothing, for although resembling the redoubtable Indra, I
have been overcome by a mortal. And this dire speech of
Brahma also reverts to my remembrance,—'Know thou that
thy fear cometh from a human being. Thou art incapable of
being slain by deities and Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas,
R&kshasas and serpents. But thou hast not asked for im-
munity from men.’ And I deem even this son of Dagaratha
asthe occasion of my fear. And I was formerly cursed by
that lord of the Ikshw&ku line—Anaranya—saying,—‘O
worst of Rakshasas, a person shall spring in my race, who,


2288 ‘ REMAPANA,


O wicked-minded one, shall slay thee in battle along with
thy sons and courtiers and forces and horses and charioteers.’
And I was also cursed by Vedavati, who was formerly out.
taged by me. And she is (perchance) born as the exalted
daughter of Janaka. And what had also been uttered by Uma
and Nandigwara and Rambh& and Varuna’s daughter,* hath
come to pass.t And taking note of this, ye should strive
(to the uttermost.) And let the Rakshasas be posted at the
gateways, highways, and the walls. And do ye wae up that
destroyer of the pride of the deities and the Danavas—
Kumbhakarna,endowed with unparalleled gravity,overwhelmed
with the curse of Brahm&.” And seeing himself worsted and
Prabasta also slain, that Raksha endowed with dreadful power
issued his orders to that fearful force. “Do ye vigilantly
guard the gates and mount the wall. And do ye wake up
Kumbhakarna come undor the sway of slumber. And
deprived of his senses through lust, he sleepeth secure, And
the Rikshasa sometimes sleepeth nine, seven, ten, or eight
months away. Of measureless might he hath slept for nine
months. And foremost of all the R&akshasas in fight, that
long-armed one shall speedily slay the monkeys as well as
the princes. He is a very baoner in battle, and the crown of
all the Rakshas. But intent on common pleasure, Kubha-
karna, with his senses stupified, sleepeth ever. I have been
worsted in fierce fight by Rama; but on Kumbhakarna being
awakened, my grief shall go. If he doth not help me in such
high peril, what shall I do with his strength resembling the


© Punjikasthala,

+ Punjikasthala cursed Ravana that ke should come by death if he should
use violence on a woman against her inclination. Ravana had of been curset
by Rambhé herself, but by Nala Kuvera im Aer Interest. ‘Thy head shall b
sundered in seven when thou forcest a female against her will’ Um’ ba
cursed Ravana that for a woman he should meet with death on the shaking o
the peak of Kailtsa—Nandigwara had cursed him that as he had slighte:
and scoffed at him, he should find his fate at the hands of the monkeys, bein
emanations of himself.—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1289


strength of Sakra himself?” Hearing the speech of
the lord of the Rakshasas, the Rakshasas, bestirring them
selves, went to the abode of Kumbhakarna. And desired by
Ravana, those feeding on flesh and blood went off hurriedly,
taking perfumes and wreaths and a mass of food. And
entering Kumbhakarna’s charming cave having a wide
gateway, measuring a yoyana breathing around perfumes
of flowers,—those highly powerful ones, pushed off by
Kumbhakarna’s breath, with the utmost energy they could
summon up stood their ground and entered the cave. And
then entering that charming cave having floors paved with
gold and gems, those Nairitas endowed with great strength,
saw that one of dreadful prowess, lying down, And then
they together set about waking up the slumbering Kumbha-
karna looking like a bill extended,—and sunk in profound
slumber ; with his body having its down standing on end;
lying down ; like a sighing serpent ; rolling people* with hi:
powerful breath,—reposing ; possessed of dreadful prow
having a huge nose; of a person vast as the nether sphere ;
lying stretched at length ; smelling of fat and blood; decked
with golden angadas ; and waring a diadem endowed with the
splendour of the Sun. And (they) saw that subduer of
enemies and foremost of Nairitas—Kumbhakarna. And then
they piled up Meru-like animals for conferring rare gratifica-
tion, and heaps of deer and buffaloes and boars. And the
Ra&kshasas made an astounding heap of rice. And then the
enemies of the immortals put up before Kumbhalarna jars of
blood and various kinds of food, and smeared that repressor
of foes with excellent sandal, and made him inhale perfumes
and the aroma of wreaths. And they made (the place) rife
with the incense of dhupa, and extolled that smiter of
enemies. And then the Yatudl4nas roared around here and


* Aninstance of the material sublime unsurpassed in all literature.
Kumbhakaroa himself is the emblem of the material as contrasted with the
spiritual typified by Réma—T.


162


3290 RAMAYANA.


there like clouds. And they winded conchs beaming
moon-like. And they incapable of being beaten shouted
in full chorus, And the night-rangers shouted and struck
at theie arms with their hands and began to pull him.
And for rousing Kumbhakarna, mighty was the din that
they raised. And hearing those loud sounds of conchs and
drums and panavas; and those proceeding from persons
striking at their arms with their hands ; and leonine roars—=
rushing on all sides and riving the very heavens,—birds
suddenly dropped down. And when the high-souled Kumbha-
karna sleeping soundly did not awake at that terrific tumult,
the Rakshasas took up Bhushandis* and maces. Aud then
the Rakshasas, drawing near, smote Kumbhakarna sleeping
sweetly in the chest with mountain-peaks, maces and clubs,
But the Rakshasas could not stay before Kumbhakarna owing
to the hurricane heaving at his breath. Then tightening
their clotht (about their waist), those R&akshasas of dreadful
prowess sounded mridangas and panavas, conchs and
kumbhas. And ten thousand R&kshasas together surrounded
that one resembling a heap of dark-blue collyrium and fell
to rousing him. But albeit assailed with shouts and smit
with weapons, he did not wake up. And when they succeeded
not in rousing him, they more than ever exerted themselves.
And then they smote him with horses and camels, aod mules
and snakes, rods and lashes and hooks, and with might and
main sounded kettledrums and conchs and mridangas. And
they struck his body with innumerable huge blocks of
wood. And summoning up their dearest energy, they dealt
him biows with maces and clubs. And at that mighty uproar,
entire Lanka was filled with her woods and hills; yet he
did not wake up. And then they simultaneously sounded a
thousand kettle-drums beaten with sticks of polished gold.


* A variety of the mace.
+ Another reading is, Tatah prapuritdh gérham—then densely filling the
cave.—T.


FOUDDHARANDAM. tagt


And coming under the sway of the curse,* when that one sunk
in slumber did not wake up, the night-rangers were wrought
up with wrath. And overcome with choler, they endowed with
dreadful prowess addressed themselves vigorously to awaken-
ing him ; and others put forth their energy. And others smote
the kettle-drums, and others set up loud cries. And others
cut off his hair, and others bit bis ears. And others poured
into his ears a thousand vessels of water. But Kumbhakarna
come under the spell of a mighty slumber did not wink. And
others—strong ones—armed with poniards(éutas) and maces,
made their poniards and maces alight on his person, And
struck with sataghnis bound with cords,t that huge-bodied
one did not wake up. And then when a thousand elephants
rushed against his body, recovering his consciousness, he
awoke. And assailed with mountain-peaks and trees descending
on his body, he, without minding those tremendous blows,—on
sleep having been dispelled, suddenly got up, yawning,—
suffering the pangs of hunger. And then that night-ranger
resembling an elephant or a serpent or a mountain-peak,
casting about his arms superior in force to the thunder-bolt
itself, and opening his deformed mouth like unto that of a
mule, yawned (again and again). And as he yawned, his
mouth resembling the subterraneous regions, looked like the
Sun stationed at the summit of Meru. And that night-
ranger possessed of unwieldly strength woke up, yawning,
And the breath that he breathed resembled a storm raging in
a mountain, And then as he sat up, Kumbhakarna’s form
appeared like that of the Destroyer himself at the universal
wreck,—intent upon consuming allereatures. And the large
eyes of that one, resembling alive flame and endowed with
the splendour of lightning, appeared like a pair of glowing
planets. And then they pointed unto him all those heaps of


* Brabmé had cursed him, as will appear afterwards.—T.
+ What does this mean ?


1292 REMAPANA.


edibles, various and profuse,—bears and buffaloes,—and that
powerful (R&kshasa) fell to. And hungering, he fed on flesh
and athirst, drank blood. And then that enemy of Sakra
drank vesselfuls of fat and blood. And concluding that he
was replete, the night-rangers came up; and bowing down
their heads, stood circling him on all sides, And then with
his eyes discolored and drooping from drowsiness, he casting
his eyes around, addressed those night-rangers, And that
foremost of Nairitas cheered all those Nairitas ; and surprised
athis having been roused —spoke unto the Rakshasas,—
“Why, being honored, have I been awakened by you? Is it
well with the king? Or hath any fear sprung up herep Or
hath a mighty fear presented itself forsooth from among
others ; for which I have been speedily awakened by you?
This very day will I uproot quite the fear of the sovereign of
the Rakshasas. I will split up the great Indra himself,—-or
make [ire himself give up his heat. One doth not awaken
my like for a light cause. Therefore do ye give the real
truth of the cause of your awakening me.” Thereat a
minister of the king, named Yupaksha, with joined hands said
unto that humbler of foes—Kumbhakarna—wrought up with
wrath, who was thus speaking,—"No fear anywise springs to
us from the Deities. But, O king, a great fear doth cross
us, coming from a mortal. And never fear so cometh unto
us anywise from Daityas or Danavas, as it hath arrived from
aman, O king. This Lanka hath been hemmed in by
monkeys resembling mountains. And terrific is the terror
that cometh even from Rama scorched with fire springing
from the ravishment of Sit&. Ere this by a single monkey
was this splendid city burnt down. And the prince Aksha
hath beeu slain along with his following and elephants. And
that thorn in the sides of deities, that lord of the Rakshasas—
Pulasta’s son bimself—hath been set free in conflict by Raghava
endowed with the splendour of the Sun,—saying—='Go thou.’
And what had been done unto the king by neither the gods


PUDDHARANDAM. 1293


nor the Daityas nor yet the Danavas, hath been done
by Rima; and he hath been set free, having come to a pass
imperilling his life.” Hearing YupSksha’s speech and hearing
of the defeat of his brother, Kumbhakarna, with his eyes
whirling, spoke unto him, saying,—“To-day, O Yup&ksha,
after vanquishing in battle the monkey-army together with
Lakshmana and Raghava, shall 1 see Ravana, And I chall
regale the Rakshasas with the flesh and blood of the monkeys,
and mysclf drink the blood of Rama and Lakshmana.”
Hearing his words as he haughtily spoke thus with his spirit
of insolence magnified by much, that foremost of the Nairita
soldiers, Mahodara, with joined hands observed,—“O long-
armed one,having at first heard Ravana’s words and considered
their justice or otherwise, thou wilt afterwards defeat the
foe in fight.” Hearing Mahodara’s words, the exceedingly
energetic and mighty (Kumbhakarna) surrounded by the
Rakshasas, prepared to depart. And having roused from his
slumbers that one of terrific prowess having dreadful eyes,——
the R&kshasas speedily arrived at the residence of the
Ten-necked one. And presenting themselves before the
Ten-necked one seated on a superb seat, all the night-rangers
spoke with joined hands,—"O lord of the Rakshasas, thy
brother, Kumbhakarna, hath been roused. Shall he march
from there; or wilt thou see him come here?” Thereat,
Ravana, pleased, spoke unto those R&kshasas who had
Presented themselves,—"I wish to see him here, and do ye
honor him fittingly.” Thereat, saying ‘So be it’, the Rakshasas,
directed by Ravana, going back, spoke unto Kumbhakarna,-—
“That foremost of all the Rakshasas—the king—wisheth to
see thee. So mind thou going, and gladden thy brother.”
And the irrepressible Kumbhakarna possessed of prodigious
prowess, learning the mandate of his brother, saying,—'So
be it’—rose up from his bed. And washing his face, and
having bathed, that one, feeling refreshed and enjoying
exceeding exhilaration of spirit,—wishing to drink, urged (the


1294 RAMAPANA.


Rakshasas) to bring the nerve-conferring draught. And then-
the Rakshasas, at the command of Ravana speedily procured
wine and various kinds of viands, And having drunk two
thousand vessels (of wine), he prepared to go. And slightly
swolen and flushed, Kumbhakarna, attaining access of strength
and fire, waxed wroth,and resembled the Doom and Destroyer
—Yama himself. And striding to the residence of his
brother backed by the Raksha force, Kumbhakarna shook
the earth with his tread. And illuming the highway with
the splendour of his person, like the thousand-rayed (Sun)
discovering the earth with his rays, (Kumbhakarna) went on,
engirt around by joined hands resembling wreaths,—like
Satakratu* going to the abode of the Self-sprung. And
suddenly seeing that slayer of foes of immeasurable
prowess, resembling a mountain-summit,—walking along
the highways, the wood-rangers stationed outside (the
monkey-camp), along with the leaders of bands, were seized
with affright. And then some sought the shelter of Rama,
worthy of being so sought ; and some, stricken (with panic),
dropped to the earth ; and some, suffering (from fear), fled to.
the carindal points ; and some through stress (of apprehen-
sion) lay down on the ground. And seeing that ofie
resembling a very mountain-peak, decked with a diadem,
seeming to touch the Sun himself with his energy, of colossal
altitude, and wonderful to behold—the wood-rangers, tor-
mented with fright, began to scamper on all sides,


© Lit, him of am hundred sacrifices—an appellation of Indra—T.


YOUDDHaKANDAM. 1295


SECTION LX?


Axo then the exceedingly energetic Rima possessed of
prowess, taking his bow, saw Kumbhakarna, having a buge
body and decked with adiadem. And seeing that foremost of
R&kshasas looking like a mountain ; filling all the heavens as
formerly N&ryana had done; resembling clouds charged with
rain; and adorned with golden angadas,~—the mighty army of
Monkeys began to run away at the top of its speed,
Seeing the army scamper and the Rakshasa swelting, Rima
struck with surprise, said unto Bibhishana,—'Who is that
tawney-eyed one, decked with a diadem, and looking like a
hill? And in Lank& the hero appeareth like a mass of clouds
embosoming lightning. And alone he seemeth like an ensign
of the Earth; and seeing him the monkeys dart away hither and
thither. Tell me who he is,—whether a Raksha or an Asura.
The like of him mine eyes bad never before lighted on.”
Accosted by the king’s son—R4&ma of untiring deeds—the
exceedingly wise Bibhishana said unto Kakutstha,—"“By whom
in battle Vivasgwata’s offspring*® and Vasava himself had been
vanquished, this is he—the wondrous powerful Kumbhakarna
son unto Vigravan. No Rakshasa is there that equalleth this
one iu size. O Raghava, this one in battle hath brought down
Danavas and Yakshas and Serpentst and flesh-feeders and
Gandharvas and Vidy&dharas and Pannagast by thousands.
The immortals themselves thinking the dart-handed and fierce-
eyed Kumbhakarna possessed of great strength, as the Des-
troyer himself,—were overwhelmed with stupor and were
foiled in their exertions to slay him. The exceedingly power
ful Kumbhakarna is mighty by nature: the strength of other


* Yama—aon of Vivagwata or the Sun.
+ Bhujangdh :—semi-divine serpents.
$ Semi-divine serpents.


1296 REMALANA,


redoubtable Rakshasas is owing to boons obtained by them.
As soon as this high-souled one was born and was a babe, he
began to devour up countless creatures by the thousand.
And on these having been devoured, creatures, afflicted with
affright consequent on those having been eaten up, sought
the shelter of Sakra and told him what had happened. And
thereat the great Indra, waxing wroth, smote Kumbhakarna
with the whetted levin. And hit at with Sakra’s thunder-
bolt, that high-souled (hero) shook, and in wrath set up roars.
And hearing the roars of the R&kshasa—Kumbhakarna—as
be kept crying, creatures, seized with fear, were greatly
agitated. And thereat, enraged with the great Indra, the
mighty Kumbhakarna plucking a tusk of Airfvata, hurled it
at Vasava’s chest. And with blood overflowing his person,
Visava looked as if aflame. And thereat, all of a sudden the
gods and the Brahmarshis and the Da&navas were dispirited.
And then they informed the lord of creatures touching the
ravages of Kumbhakarna, and informed the gods about
Kumbhakarna’s devouring up creatures, destroying asylums
and outraging others’ wives. “If this one devour creatures
constantly, in a short space the world would be empty of
any.” Hearing Vasava’s speech, the Great-father of all
called up* the Rakshasas and saw Kumbhakarna (before him),
And seeing Kumbbakarna, Prajapatit was seized with
exceeding great fear, And then, pacifying Kumbhakarna,
the Self-sprung addressed hitn, saying—‘Forsooth for com-
passing the destruction of creatures, hast thou been begot by
Paulasta.[ Therefore from this day forth, thou shalt lie down
as one dead.” Stricken with the curse of Brahma, Kumbha-
karna fell down before the Lord. Then, extremely agitated,
Ravana said—*Thou hewest down a golden tree when about
to bear fruit. O lord of creatures, thou ought not to curse


* By reciting a certain scriptural formula.—T.
t Lit—lord of creatures.
$ Vigrava.


¥YUDDHAKANDAM. 1297


thus thine own grandson. Thy words will never go for
naught ; sleep he will, without doubt, But do thou appoint
a time for his sleeping and one for his awaking.”’ Hearing
Ravana's speech, the S#if-sprung said,—“Having slept for
six months, he shall wake for one day. And for a
single day, that hero, coming under the influence of hunger,
shall range the earth, opening his mouth wide open, and
devouring people like a fire that hath spread far and
wide. And now king R&vana struck with terror at thy
prowess, encompassed with peril, hath waked up Kumbha-
karna. And that hero possessed of dreadful prowess,
wrought up with bigh wrath, sallying forth from his
camp, rusheth about, eating up monkeys. And soon as the
monkeys see Kumbhakarna, they fly away. And How
can they resist in battle the enraged Kumbhakarna? Do
thou tell the monkeys this is an uplifted engine. Thus
assured, the monkeys shall take heart.” Hearing Bibhishana’s
words informed with reason and tending to the good (of the
monkeys), Raghava then addressed general Nila, saying,
“Let you, monkeys, equipped with weapons and holding hill-
tops in your bands,—and furnished with mountain-summits
and trees and rocks, stay, occupying the highways and the
bridges.’ Thus instructed by R&ghava, that powerful
monkey, Nila—general of the forces—accordingly issued his
orders to the monkoy-hosts. And then Gavaksba and Sarabha
and Hanuman and Angada, themselves endowed with the
splendour of mountain-summits, taking up mountain-tops,
drew towards the gateway. And hearing Rama's words,* the
heroic monkeys inspired with intrepidity, fiercely fell on the
foe with trees. And then that dreadful army of morkeys,
upraising crags aud holding trees in their hands, appeared
like mighty masses of scowling clouds bordering a mountain.t


* Namely, “that is an uplifted engine.”
+ This is apt, seeing that Lanké was situated on a bill.—T.


163


1298


SECTION LXi.


Aino that tiger-like Rukshasa possessed of prowess,
(still) under the influence of slumber, strode along the picture
esque highway. And that exceedingly unconquerable one,
surrounded by thousands of R&kshasas, went on, showered
with blossoms from the houses (standing by). And then he
saw the grand and graceful residence of the lord of the
R&kshasas, having golden networks and sun-bright to behold.
And entering the mansion of the Rakshasa sovereign, like
the sun entering into a mass of clouds,he saw his elder brother
seated ata distance; even as Sakra sees the Self-sprung
seated. And Kumbhakarna surrounded by numbers of
Rikshasas, entered his brother's abode, making the very earth
tremble with his tread. And arriving at the abode and
passing the entrance, he saw his superior anxiously seated on
the car, Pusphaka, Seeing Kumbbakarna come, the Ten-
necked one, exceedingly rejoiced, raised him up and drew
him near himself. And then the exceedingly mighty
Kumbhakarna saluted the feet of his brother and said,——“What
dost thot say?” Thereat, delighted, Ravana, springing up,
again embraced (his brother). And embraced (by his brother),
and duly greeted by him, that brother (of R&vana)—
Kumbhakarna seated himself on a shining and superb seat.
And seating himself on that seat, the wondrous powerful
Kumbhakarna, with his eyes reddened in: wrath, addressed
Ravana, saying,—'O king, why, honoring me, hast thou
awaked me? Tell me, whence springeth thy fearg And
who shall be a ghostp’* -Thereat, Ravana, waxing wroth,
and with his eyes rolling in rage, said unto Kumbhakarna,
seated,—“O highly powerful one, thou hast slept away a long


* Having been slain by me.


YOUDDHAKANDAM. 1299


space of time. And having been asleep, thou dost not know
the great fear of mine springing from Rima. This graceful
son unto Dagaratha possessed of strength, along with
Sugriva, having crossed the ocean, is destroying our race.
Alack! see in own Lank&, woods and forests have been
flooded with an ocean of monkeys coming without any ado
by the bridge (which they have constructed). Those
Rakshasas that were prime, have been slain in battle by the
monkeys ; but I find no destruction of the monkeys in fight.
Nay, the monkeys have never been before even vanquished
(by the R&kshasas) in battle. And therefore hath this fear
sprung up (in my heart), Save me from this, O exceedingly
powerful one. Do thou now destroy these. It is for this
that I have roused thee. Do thou, favoring me, whose
exchequer is emply, save this city of Lank&, having only
young folks and the aged left. And, O long-armed one, do
thou perform thy dearest acts in bebalf of thy brother. And,
O subduer of enemies, 1 had never before said so unto my
brother. In thee is my affection and great is the probability
of thy succeeding. In the wars of the celestials and Asuras,
O foremost of Rakshasas, countless were the celestials that
thou as an antagonist badst beaten. Therefore, O thou of
dreadful strength, summon thy entire energy. Him find I not
among all beings, who is thy peer in prowess. And, O lover
of battle ! O dear unto friends, as thou likest, do this beloved
good office, this prime benefit, unto me. By thy own energy,
smite the hostile hosts, even asa mighty and strong wind
(scattereth away) autumnal clouds.


1300 KAMNLPANS.


SECTION Lx


——


Heaaine the lament of the kisg of Ra&kshasas,
Kumbbakarna, laughing, said —“That evil which on the
occasion of the conclave we had seen, hath befallen thee, who
hast passed by what was fraught with thy good. Even asa
sinner reapeth perdition, verily hath the fruit of thine
unrighteous act found thee. At first, O mighty king, thou
didst not ponder over this course of conduct ; nor, from pride
of prowess, didst thou at all take note of the evil thereof,
He that docth last what should be done first, and first what
should be done last, is ignorant of what is prudence and what
not. Acts not performed in harmony. with season and place,
like unto acts performed counter to season and place, are the
occasions of misery, and resemble clarified butter poured
into fire that hath not been sanctified. He staycth well in
the path that, in consultation with his counsellors,ascertaineth
the five ways touching the three kinds of action.* The king
that aided by his own intelligence as wetl as his counsellors
acteth after reflection in consonance with the science of
polity, that distinguisheth his friends from his foes), and, O
lord of the Rakshasas, that seasonablyt pursueth righteous-
ness, or profit, or desire,—or any two, or all these cumbiied,
truly hath understanding.f But the king or the heir-


* The five ways are (1) the means of commencing an act (2) person, thing
and wealth, (3) division of season and place, (4) providing against mischance,
(5) success, The three kinds of action are treaty, war, efc, All this is
nebulous; and the commentator is sadly reticent over this extremely important
passage.—T,

+ Religion is to be sought in the morning, profit in the afternoon, and
desire at night,—so the commentator—T.

t One is at sea in the midst of these formless generalities. The tantalized
intellect makes a desperate attempt to grasp the bady of the shadow seeming
substance, bat the empty air mocks his pains. A translator, however, is fast
bound to the oar and must pull on, will be, nif he—T


YUDDHARANDAM. 1301


apparent, that, having heard what is prime among the three,
doth not understand, hath spent his time in vain on his
erudition. He that, controlling his own self, consulteth
with his counsellors seasonably touching gift, forbearance,
difference and prowess, as well as virtue, profiit and desire,—
doth not in this world come by calamity. Perceiving the fair
fruit (of a line of action) accruing to him here, a king should
act in consultation with counsellors endowed with intelli-
gence and versed in the import of things. Not understand.
ing the sense of the scriptures, persons possessed of beastly
intelligence, —entering into the heart of their counsellors,—
are inspired with a desire of speaking out of sheer volubility.*
Albeit uttered heedfully, the speech of those that are ignorant
of learning and the knowledge of the sense of things,—and
who are intent upon attaining abounding affluence,—should
not be acted upon. And those—spoilers of business—who
from recklessness talk of pernicious as if profitable—should
certainly be rejected as counsellors. Some counsellors—
destroyers of their masters—joining intelligent enemies (of
their lords), act in a way opposed to their interests in this
world. Their lords, at the hour of consultation, by their:
behaviour should know these counsellors—enemies in the
guise of friends—who have been won over (by the opposite
paity). Even as the fowls of the air enter the hole in the
Krauncha,t enemies find an easy entrance into the short-
comings of him that is ficklef and that rusheth into act
without heed. He that disregarding his foe, omitteth to
guard himself, cometh by disasters and loseth his place. Even
what had been advanced by thy beloved§ and my younger


* The sense is obscure, and the commentator does not help me—T.

+ The hole indented by Skanda the celestial generailissimo in the mountain
named in the text —T.

+t Chapela—fickle. The commentator, however, reads between the lines.
According to him the epithet means—ke that ts pleased with speech immediately
agreeable, But the received sense answers—T.

§ RAvana’s principal queen, Mandodari.


1302 REMATANA.


brother, is fraught with our welfare. Do thou now what thou
wishest." Hearing Kumbhakarna’s words, the Ten-necketl
one knit up his brows, and, wrought up with wrath, said
unto him,—"I am worthy of being honored by thee, like thy”
superior. What needs this verbal travail ? Do thou what is fit.
Vain is the mention now of what I did either through stupor
or delusion or pride of prowess. Now bethink thee of what
is proper. Do thou through thy prowess assuage the sorrow
of mine springing froni‘my impolitic conduct, if thou cherishest
any feeling for me,if thy strength stayeth,and if thou deemest
this business of mine as by far more momentous unto thee.
He is a friend that succoureth one fallen in distress and is
undergoing affliction ; ard he acts friendly that helpeth a
person lapsing from the path of morality.” As he was
speaking thus in words sedate yet severe, Kumbhakarna,con-
cluding that Ravana was delighted, made his remarks mildly.
And seeing his brother extremely sorry, Kumbhakarna,
pacilying him, gently said,—“O king, intently hear my words,
O repressor of foes! O lord of R&kshasas, banish this
sorrow, and casting away thy wrath, return thou to nature.
And, O king, so long as I live, thou must not suffer thy heart
to fare thus. Him will I slay for whom thou grievest. But
whatever condition thou mayst be in, [ must tell what is for
thy welfare; and therefore from sentiment of friendship as
well as from fraternal affection [ have spoken thus unto thee,
Oking. And what a friend from affection should do at a
time like this, I shall do the same. See the havock I spread
among the foes in fight. And, O long-armed one, behold, on
Rama having been slain by me on the edge of battle along
with his brother, the monkey-army in headlong flight. And
to-day seeing Rma’s head brought by me from the field, be
thou, © long-armed one, happy ; and let Sita be overwhelmed
with woe. And let those Rakshasas in Lank& who have had
their kindred slain (in battle), see that dear sight—Rama
slain (in fight). And to-day shall I slaying the enemies in


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1303


battle, wipe the tears of those who mourn their friends slain
are overwhelmed with grief. To-day behold the lord of
monkeys—-Sugriva—resembling a mountain or a mass of
clouds lighted up by (the living) sun,—lying stretched on the
field. But why, O sinless one, albeit comforted by these
Rikshasas eager for slaying Dagaratha’s son, as well as by
me,—dost thou persist in thy sorrow? R&ghava forsooth
shall slay thee after slaying me. But, O lord of Rakshasas,
I cannot come by grief* (at Raghava’s hands). O repressor
of foes, do thou now command me, O thou, of unparalleled
prowess, thou needst not thyself face the foe in fight. [shall
abolish thy foes endowed with redoubted might. If even
Sakra himself, and Yama, and the god of Fire, and the god
of Wind, and Kuvera, and Varuna—shall range themselves
against me, them shall I encounter in fight. Purandara
himself is seized with fright at sight of me, having a body
measuring 2 mountain,—equipped with sharpened spears,—
furnished with sharp teeth,—and setting up shouts. And who
wishing to save himself shall be able to stay before me as I
casting away my weapons keep pounding my enemies with
celerity ? No need of the dart, or the mace, or the sword, or
whetted arrows, 1 shall with my bare arms alone slay (Rama)
along with the thunderer himself, If Raghava bear the impetus
of my blows, then shall the volties of my shafts drink his life-
blood. Why, O king, while I remain, dost thou burn in
anxiety? And I am ready to sally out for compassing the
destruction of thine enemies. Cast off all terror of Rama I
shall slay in battle Raghava and Lakshmana and the exceeding-
ly powerful Sugriva and the Raksha-destroying Hanuman, -
who made Lankd blaze. I shall cat up the monkeys present
in the encounter. And signal is the celebrity that [ shall
confer on thee. And, O king, if thy fear springs from Indra


* Santdpam gackchheyam—come by grief. According to tha commentator
santdpa means fear; and the sense is: J entertein uo fear (on account of
Réma)—T.


1305 RAMAFANS.


or the Self-create, even the immortals shall measure their
lengths on the earth when I am wrought with rage. An!
shall subdue Yama himself and devour the God of Fire. And
I shall bring down the very welkin garnished with stars. And
1 shall slay Satakratu and drink up the abode itself* of
Varuna. And I shall crush the mountains and rive the earth.
And to-day let all creatures as they are being eaten up,
witness the prowess of Kumbhakarna, after he hath slept for
along time. Even the celestial regions do not suffice for me
as my fare, I go for securing felicity ushuring in pleasures
plenteous flowing from the destruction of Dagaratha’s son.
And slaying Rama along with Lakshmana, I shalt eat up all
the foremost of monkey-bands. Make merry,my king ; to-day
drink V&runi. Enjoy pteasures, banishing sorrow. And
to-day on my having despatched R&ma to the mansion of
Yama, Sit& shail come under thy control for good.”


SECTION txiv.


oe


Hreaaine the speech of the huge-bodied, long-armed and
mighty Kumbhakarna, Mahodara said,—‘O Kumbbakarna,
although sprung in a noble line, thou art wondrous haughty
and of a vulgar form; and thou art not everywhere
competent to discern thy course. It certainly cannot well

. be that the king cannot distinguish between proper and
improper ; but thou hast from thy youth upwards been insolent ;
and thy joy is in talking perenially. But the foremost of
the Rakshasas is versed in place and increase and injury,—
and knoweth the duties touching season and place,—and how
to advance his own party and lower that of the foe. But what


* Ocean.


YUDDHAKANDAM.” 1305


person ever acteth according to what is proposed feebly* by
one having strength, yet of inferior intelligence, and who
hath never respected the aged? And thou art not naturally
competent to understand what thou thyself sayest touching
the opposed virtue, profit and desire. Verily action is the
spring of all ageacies of happiness or misery ; and it is only
those that act either well or ill that reap the results of their
acts. Virtue,t and interestt bring about emancipation as
well as heaven and prosperity. But evil cometh from
unrighteousness and harms spring therefrom.§ People reap
the fruit of their acts in this world or the next ; but the fruit
of desire is reaped readily. Therefore should a king set about
attaining his desire. And this also had we advised thee with
our soul. And what is the harm that one should display his
prowess before a foe? Dost thou show the reasons for thy
taking the field alone? But I shall point thee out what is
improper and unreasonable in this (proposed) course. How
shalt thou alone vanquish that Raghava who formerly routed
in Janasthana innumerable Rakshasas possessed of exceeding
strength ? Dost thou not to-day in the palace behold those
prowerlful Rakshasas that had been beaten in Janasthdna,—
cowed down in fear? Alas! thou wishest to awake Rama,—
son unto Dagaratha—knowing full well that he resembles an
enraged lion or a sleeping serpent. But whom doth it behove


* Vaktum acakyam—incapable of saying. But what sense can be attached
to—"What man acteth according to what is wof advanced by one having
strength......aged 2” I therefore venture to render the passage—ferbly
proposrd—i.e. proposed with vascillation or half-heartedly—T.

+ The maxims enunciated by this counsellor are hardly all of a piece,
‘The text may have been tampered with —T.

¢ Artha means sacrifices, gifis, &c., which are capable of being performed
with wealth, ‘Sacrifice, gift, and asceticism purify the pious.’ The Lord's
word.—T.

§ Dharma,remarks Ramanuja, is here used for contemplation and recitation
of scriptural formula performed without regard to happiness as the fruit of
those actions. This is what hath been termed wishhtm dharma—disinterested
piety. —T.


164


1306 RAMAYANA,


to confront him ever flaming in energy, difficult of being
approached when enraged,—and unbearable even like Death
himself? On approaching the foe, this whole host itself shall
be imperilled ; and therefore, my child, thy marching alone
doth nowise recommend itself.to me, Who is there that, albeit
weak bent on renouncing his life, wisheth to bring under
subjection a foe that is powerful,—as if he would act with
reference to one that is inferior ? O foremost of Rakshasas,
why dost thou wish to fight with him whose peer there is
none among men, and who is equal to Indra amd Vivagwata
himself ?” Having said this unto Kumbhakarna wrought up
with wrath, Mahodara addressed that destroyer of creatures—
Ravana—in the midst of the Rakshasas,—“Having already
obtained Vaidehi, why dost thou delay ? It thou wishest it,
Sita shall come under thy control. Ihave perceived a way
as to how Sita may smile upon thee. Do thou listen ; and
should it please thee, act thou accordingly. Do thou proclaim
it about that I and Dwijibha and Sanhradi, and Kumbhakarna
and Vitardana—those five-~are marching for compassing the
destruction of Rama. And we, marching out, shall battle
with Rama, potting forth our uttermost. And if we succeed
in securing victory, no expedient need we resort to (or
bringing Sit& round), But if our foe live after fight and we
also having faught the fight, then shall we do what I conceive
in my mind, We shall come hither from the field, bathed in
blood, and having our bodies cleft with arrows marked with
the name of Rama. And we shall give out that both Rama
and Lakshmana have been eaten up by us. And then we
shall hold thy feet, saying —‘Do thou gratify us. Then, O°
king, de thou through Gajaskandha publish it all round that
Rama hath been slain along with his brother and the army.
And, © repressor of foes, (pretending to be) well pleased, do
thou dispense—viands, and servants, and ‘objects of enjoy-
ments, and wealth unto thy retainers; and unto the many
heroes and warriors distribute wreaths and attires and


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1307


unguents. And do thou (simulating) delight, drink. And on
this report—name that Rama hath been eaten up by the
‘Rakshasas along with his friends,—having spread round and
round and entering (the agoka wood), and soothing and
pacifying Sit& in solitude, allure her with corn and riches and
gems, By this deceit, O king, working powerfully through
Sit4’s sorrow, she, albeit unwilling, shall, having lost her lord,
come under thy contrel. Losing her charming husband, she
from despair and female frailty, shall come under thy sway.
Having formerly been brought up in happiness, she, although
worthy of felicity, (ultimately) had come by misfertune. And
now finding happiness to- be in thy custody, she shall
unreservedly come over to thee. In my opinion this is the
properest course to follow. As soon as thou seest Rama,
evil shall befall thee. Remain here. Do not wish (to go to
the field). By refraining from fight, thou shalt acquire great
good, And, O lord of people, by conqucring the foe without
battle, thou without losing thy forces and putting thyself to
peril, thou, O lord of earth, shalt attain fame and high reli-
gious merit, and prosperity and renown for ever and for ever,


SECTION LxXv.


Taurus addressed, Kumbhakarna rebuking Mahodara, said
unto that foremost of Rakshasa—his brother—R&vana,—
“Even I shall remove thy great fear Ly slaying the wicked-
minded Rima. On thy foe having been slain, attain thou
ease. It is not for naught that the heroes roar, like unto
clouds containing no rain.* Behold thou their roaring
resulting in action in the field! Heroes do not vaunt; but


* £¢. autumnal clouds and which roar but do not pour—T.


1308 - RAMAYANA,


without boasting of their prowess in speech,they perform feats
difficult of being achieved. O Mahodara, what thou sayest
is ever acceptable only to kings that are incompetent, and
foolish, pluming themselves on their knowledge. Al! the
affairs of the monarch have been wrecked by you—cravens in
fight,~sleek-tongued,—following the king (fawning) ye have
made Lank& contain only the king, the treasury is lean ;
and the forces have been slain. By the king ye have done
like foes in the guise of friends. For repairing in mighty
conflict the wrong that ye have perpetrated, I am about to
set out for battle for routing the enemy.” Thus addressed
by the intelligent Kumbbakarna, the lord of R&kshasas;
laughing answered,—"Sure this Mahodara is affrighted at
Rama. And therefore, my child, O thou versed in warfare,
he doth not relish battle. Like thee have I none either in
friendship or strength. Therefore, O Kumbhakarna, go for
destroying the foe and securing celebrity. I have waked thee
up that wast lying down, in order that thou mightst destroy
the enemy. O subduer of fues, perilous is the time for the
R&kshasas. Go forth, grasping thy spear, like the nvose-
handed Destroyer himself. Do thou devour up the monkeys
as well as the priuces possessed of the energy of the Sun
himself, On seeing thy form, the monkeys shall flee away ;
and the breasts of Rama and Lakshmana shall be riven,”
Having spoken thus unto Kumbhakarna endowed -with
prodigious might, that foremost of R&kshasas—the exceed-
ingly energetic Ravana—felt as if he had received life over
again. And well acquainted with Kumbhakarna’s might, and
knowing his prowess, the king felt delighted, like the
cloudless Moon.” Having been thus accosted, that highly
powerful one, went out cheerfully." And hearing the king’s
speech, he made ready for fight. And he took a whetted
dart, destructive to foes on account of its impetuous


* He did not, however go yet awhile——T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1309


vehemence ; entirely made of black iton ; flaming ; decorated
with garniture, of shining gold ; looking like Indra’s apanz ;
ponderous as the thunder-bolt ; capable of destroying gods
and D&navas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Pannagas; adorned
with festoons of crimson flowers ; and belching forth flames.
And taking that huge dart decked with the blood of foes ;
the wondrous energetic Kumbhakarna spoke unto Rivana,
saying,—*I shall go alone: let this mighty host remain here.
To-day hungry and enraged, I shall devour up the monkeys.
Hearing Kumbhakarna’s words, Ravana said,—“Go thou,
surrounded by the forces bearing darts and maces in their
hands. The monkeys are high-souled, heroic and well-skilled
in battle ; and if they find thee alone or unwary, they may
slay thee with their teeth. Therefore do thou exceedingly
irrisistible, go, environed by the forces; and destroy the
entire party of the foes, who are bent upon doing harm unto
the Rakshas.”’ Then starting up from his seat, the exceed-
ingly energetic Ravana hung on Kumbhakarna’s neck a
wreath stringed with gems in the centre. And Ravana
also decked that high-souled one with angadas, and finger-
fences, and noble ornaments, and a chain resembling the
Moon. And Ravana adorned his person with garlands
gorgeous and fragrant, and set ear-rings to his ears, And
adorned with golden angades and Keyuras and other
ornaments of gold, the large-eared Kumbhakarna appeared
like a fire fed full of sacrificial libations. And with his great
dark girdle he seemed like the Mandara fastened by the
serpent on the occasion of the churning of the sea. And
donning on his impenetrable golden mail,splendid like lightn-
ing, and shining in its own brilliance, Kumbhakarna appeared
like the monarch of mountains enveloped with evening clouds.
Having all his limbs adorned with ornaments, and bearing a
dart in his hand, the Rakshasa resembled N&rfyana in elation
of spirits, when he covered heaven and earth and the nether
regions with three paces. And then embracing his brother


1g10 RAMELVANA,


and going round him and bowing down the head uuto him,
that exceedingly powerful one went out. And Ravana sent
him with choice benedictions, while he caused kettle-drums
and conchs to be sounded and forces equipped with excellent
weapons, to accompany Kumbhakarna. And _high-souled
mighty warriors followed that foremost of heroes with
elephants and steeds and chariots sending out rattle resembl-
ing the rumbling of thunder. And mounting serpents and
camels and asses and lions and leopards and deer and birds,
(R&kshasas) followed the grim Kumbhakarna endowed with,
tremendous strength. And strewn with blossoms, and, with
an umbrella beld over him, that exceedingly terrible enemy
of the Deities aud the Danavas, wielding a dart in his hand,
—went out, maddened with the smell of blood. And
countless fuotmen wondrous powerful and mighty and dreadful
and fierce-sighted R&kshasas,carrying weapons in their hands,
went in his wake, The Rakshas measuringwalch many a
vyéma and red, eyed, and resembling masses of dark-blue
collyrium,—-went out upraising darts and swords and
sharpened axes and bhindipdlas and parighas and maces and
huge /dlaskandhas and irrisistible Ashkapanis. And the
oxceedingly energetic Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious
strength sallied forth, assuming another form terrific and
dreadful to behold. And the gigantic huge-faced and fierce
Kumbhakarna, measuring an hundred bows in breadth and
six hundred in altitude, having eyes resembling car-wheels,
and resembling a towering hill, or a mountain burnt,—
marshalling the Rakshas, said with a complacent countenance,
—"Like fire consuming insects, shall I to-day, wrought up
with wroth, burn up one by one the bands of the flower of
the monkey-forces, But the wood-ranging monkeys have
not transgressed anywise unto the like of us. That species
is the ornament of the gardens attached to our residences.
The cause of the seige of the city is Raghava along with
Lakshmana. He teing slain, all are slain. Therefore shall


FUBDHAKANDAM 1331


I slay him in battle’? As the Raksha—Kumbhakarna—was
speaking thus, the R&kshasas sent up terrific shouts, as if
making the very sea shake. As the intelligent Kumbhakarna
sallied out speedily, dreadful were the omens that presented
themselves on alf sides. Clouds containing meteors and
lightning looked dark like asses, And the earth shook with
her‘oceans and woods, And fierce jackals began to cry,
opening their flaming mouths. And birds began to wheel at
the left. And as he marched a vulture alighted on his dart.
And his left eye throbbed and his left arm shook. Anda
meteor dropped down wilh a tremendous crash, And the
sun was bedimmed, and the air did not blow, enhancing
pleasure. But without heeding these mighty omens that
took place, capabale of making people’s down stand on end,
Kumbhakarna went out, urged on by the force of the Finisher,
And leaping over the wall with his legs, that one resembling
a mountain saw the wonderful array of the monkeys,
resembling clouds. And seeing that foremost of Rakshasas
resembling a hill, the monkeys began to disperse in all the
ten cardinal directions like clouds driven by the wind. And
seeing that terrific host of monkeys scattering in all directions,
like clouds broken through (by winds), Kumbhakarna
possessed of the splendour of clouds, from joy, emitted roars
like clouds. Hearing those terrible shouts like unto the
roaring of clouds in the welkin, innumerable monkeys dropped
to the earth even as sé/a trees that have their roots severed.
And issuing forth for destroying the foe, the high-souled
Kumbhakarna, equipped with a tremendous bludgeon, struck
extreme terror into the monkey-ranks, like unto the Lord
armed with the Fatal rod at the Universal wreck.


1gtz RAMAYANA,


SECTION LxvE-


__


Hawine teape over the wall, the exceedingly powerful
and gigantic Kumbhakarna resembling a mountain-summit,
speedily went out of the city. And then he sent up a mighty
shout making the sea resound, and as if drowning the roar of
the thunder and riving mountains. And seeing that fierce-eyed
one, incapable of being vanquished by Maghavan or Varuna or
Yama, the monkeys began to fy away. And seeing them
scamper, the king's son—Angada—said unto Nala and Nila
and Gavaksha and the mighty Kumuda,—"Forgetting your
lineage and prowess, whither do ye, exercised with fear,
fly,—like inferior monkeys ? Ye amiable ones, desist. Why
should ye save yourselves? This Raksha doth not come to
fight,—this is only a great phenomenon to affright. We
shall by our vigor destroy this fearful phenomenon of the
Rakshasas that hath presented itself. Therefore, let the
monkeys desist. Cheered with much ado, the monkeys
rallying, took up trees and advanced to the field of fight.
And ceasing from flight, the woud-rangers waxing enraged,
began to assai! Kumbhakarna, like unto elephants in rut.
And the exceedingly strong* Kumbhakarna, attacked with
towering mountain-peaks and crags and trees with flowering
top, did not shake. And countless crags descending on his
person, were shattered ; and trees with flowering tops, being
broken, fell down to the earth, And incapable of containing
himself (through rage), Kumbhakarna on his part fell to
agitating the ranks of the powerful monkeys, even as a fire
breaking out burneth down a forest. And many a prime
monkey, crimsoned and drenched (with blood) lay down (on
the ground); and many, resisted dropped to the earth, like
trees bearing coppery flowers. And without looking before


* Makavalth—plu—evidently a misprint for makavalak—sing.—T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1313,


or after, the monkeys bounded and rushed. And on being
attacked by the Rakshasa with ease some of those heroes
dropped into the deep, and some entered the wilderness.
And some ran by the same way by which they had crossed
the ocean; and some with pale faces darted into downs,
And some of the bears ascended up trees, and some took
shelter in mountains, And others dropped* down ; and some
ranon. And some fell down to the earth, and some lay
insensiblet as if dead, Seeing the monkeys break down,
Angada addressed them, saying,—"Stay we shall fight, Desist,
ye monkeys. Going round this Earth place find I none where
ye may rest. Stop ye all. What is the need of preserving
your lives. Ye poltroons, if ye fly away leaving your arms
behind, your wives shall deride you ; and that is more painful
to honorable persons than death itself. Born in long and
noble lines, whither go ye, suffering from fear, like abject
whnkeys ? When renouncing your prowess, ye fly away in
fear, forsooth ye are base. Where now is gone that talk of
yours anent your nobility and the welfare (of your king)
which you had held in society. He that liveth, despised (of
all), hear the reproach of being a craven. Therefore do ye
follow the way frequented by the worthy, and cast off fear.
We will either lie down on the earth, being slain in conse-
quence of our shortness of days, and thus attain the region
of Brahma incapable of being attained by dastards; or
achieve renown by slaying the foe in fight and slain in battle,
we shall enjoy the wealth of the region of heroes. Like an
insect coming to a gluwing and flaming fire, Kumbhakarna,
seeing KAkutstha, shall not away hence living. If we save
our lives by flight, and if the many are brought down by one,
we shall lose our fame utterly.” As Angada decked in golden
angadas was saying this, the monkeys, flying away spake
unto that hero words not worthy of being spoken unto an


” For fighting, remarks the commentator.
+ Supish—sleeping ; but here, I presume, it means senseless,—T,


165


134 aaa ALANA.


hero,—‘Great is the havoc that the Rakshasa—Kumbhakarna
hath spread amongst us. ’Tis not the time to stay: life is
dear unto us.” Having said this the monkcy-bands darled
to the ten cardinal points; as they saw that dreadful and
grim-eyed one approach. And as those flower of the forces
were onthe flight, those heroes were made to desist by
Angada with words of comfort and hope pointing to the
future, On being cheered by the intelligent son of Vali, all
the monkey-bands stood expecting his commands.—


SECTION exvir.


Avo having desisted on hearing the words of Angada,
those huge-bodied ones, regaining calmness, became (again)
intent on fight. And attaining energy at the exhortation (of
Angada), and summoning up their prowess, they stayed in
the field agreeably to the words of the powerful Angada.
And inspired with spirits, the monkeys, determined to face
their fate, rushed into the conflict, and, casting away all care
for their lives, entered into a furious fight (with the foe),
And speedily upraising trees and gigantic crags, the huge-
bodied monkeys charged Kumbhakarna. Thereat the mighty
Kumbhakarna possessed of a prodigious person waxing wroth,
taking up his mace let the same alight on the enemies.
And attacked by Kumbhakarna, seven, eight hundreds and
thousands of monkeys measure their lengths on the earth,
Aod casting about his arms, he rusheth on, devouring sixteen,
eight, ten, tweaty or thirty. Aad he devoured (the monkeys)
like Garura swallowing up serpents. And then cheered up with
much ado, the monkeys meeting together, and taking trees
and rocks in their hands, stood their ground in the van of


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1315


battle. Then uprooting a crag, Dwivida—foremost of
monkeys—resembling an extended mass of clouds rushed
against (Kumbhakatna) having the aspect of a mountain
summit. And uprooting it, the monkey hurled it at
Kumbhakarna. And without descending on him, the crag feil
down amidst the army, and smashed steeds and elephants and
cans and choice chargers. And then taking another
mountain top, Dwivida hurled it at other Rakshas. And
smit with the impetus of the peak, Kumbhakarna had his
chargers and his charioteers slain; and the terrific field
overflowed with the blood of Rakshas. And Rakshasa
car-watriors by means of arrows resembling the Destroyer
himself, cut off the heads of the foremost monkeys who had
been setting up roars. And the high-souled monkeys also,
uprooting giants trees, destroyed cars and horses and
elephants and camels and Rakshasas.—And remaining in the
sky, Hanum&n discharged at Kumbhakarna’s head mountain-
peaks atid rocks and various trees. And all those mountain-
tops he cut off with his dart; and the mighty Kumbhakarna
also baffled the shower of trees—Then grasping his
sharpened spear, Kumbhakarna darted against that terrific
array of monkeys. And as he charged them, Hanuman
armed with a mountain-peak, stood before him. And waxing
enraged (Hanuman) vehemently smote Kumbhakarna with
a gigantic crag. And overpowered by that, Kumbhakarna
experienced great torments, and his body was covered with fat
and blood. And then as Guha bad pierced Krauncha with his
fierce dart, Kumbhakama the mountain-like smote the Wind-
god’s son in the chest with his dart resembling lightning or
like a glowing mountain-summit. And having his mighty cheat
pierced in the mighty encounter, Hanuman, overwhelmed, and
vomitting blood,—transported with wrath, set up roars re-
sembling the roaring of the clouds at the universal disruption,
And then, beholding bim in torments, the Rakshas suddenly
rejoiced, emitted shouts; and the monkeys aggrieved and


1316 RAMArANA,


overcome with fright, began to fly Kumbhakarna in battle.
And then the powerful Nila, arranging his forces, discharged
a mountain-peak at the intelligent Kumbhakarna, And
secing it descend, he dealt it a blow; and struck by the blow,
the mountain-top was shattered in pieces; and dropped to
the earth glowing and shooting living flames. And then
Rishabha and Sarabha and Nila and Gavaksha and
Gandhamadana—these five terrific monkeys—rushed against
Kumbhakarna, And in the encounter those mighty monkeys
began to sorely assail the huge-bodied Kumbhakarna with
crags and trees and slaps and kicks and blows. But those
blows seemed to him like touches* and did not at all pain
him, Then he fastened the vehement Rishabha with his
arms. And agonised on being fastened with Kumbhakarna’s
arms, that foremost of monkeys, the dreadful Rishabha, felt
down to the earth, vomitting blood by his mouth, And then
the enemy of Indra smit, Sarabha with blow, and Nila,
inthe conflict with his thigh, struck a slap at Gavaksha.
And suffering great pain in consequence of the blows (dealt
by Kumbhakarna those monkeys), deprived of their senses
and bathed in blood, dropped down to the earth like
Kingukas that have been cut down. And on those high-
souled and mighty monkeys falling down, thousands of
monkeys rushed at Kumbhakarna. And ascending a mountain-
summit, those foremost of monkeys,t possessed of the
splendour of a mountain-peak, sprang upon him and tore
him with their teeth. And those foremost of monkeys
attacked the long-armed Kumbhakarna with their claws and
teeth and blows and arms. And then with thousands of
monkeys on him that extraordinary one that fearful Rakshasa
—resembling a bill,—looked like a mountain with trees on
it. And like Garura eating up serperts, that wondrous


© Like the feel, remarks RAmAnuja, of wreaths, unguents, ete—P.
+ Plavaganshavdh—foremost of the monkeys occurs twice—one is left out
in the transiation,--T.


FUDDHAKANDAIA 1317


strong one, wrought up with rage, devoured those monkeys,
seizing them with his arms. And cast by Kumbhakarna into
his mouth resembling the nether regions the monkeys
emerged from his nose and ears. And eating up the monkeys,
that foremost of Rakshasas resembling a hill, growing wroth,
and fired with rage,* began to break the monkeys down.—
And transported with passion, that Rakshasa, making the
earth miry with flesh and blood, spread among the monkey-
ranks like unto the fire at the time of the Universal dissolution.
And in that encounter, Kumbhakarna armed with his dart
in his hand, resembled the thunder-handed Sakra, or the
noose-handed Destroyer himself, And as a conflagrationt
burneth up a withered forest in the summer, Kumbhakarna
burnt that host of the monkeys. And thus beaten (by
Kumbhakarna), those monkeys, with their ranks destroyed,
the monkeys,t racked with anxiety, began to cry in unnatural
tones. And having innumerable monkeys slain by Kumbha-
karna, the monkeys, aggrieved and their hearts riven with
sorrow, sought the shelter of Raghava. Seeing the monkeys
broken in the terrific encounter, the son of the thunder-
handed,§ darted impetuously against Kumbhakarna. And
taking up a mighty crag, he momentarily setting up roars,
and thereby terroizing all the Rakshasas—followers of
Kumbhakarna, he discharged the mountain-peak right against
Kumbhakarna’s crown.—And struck with that mounta
peak, Indra’s enemy—Kumbhakaroa—flamed up in fierce
wrath, And the loud-throated Kumbhakarna, terrifying all
the monkeys vehemently darted against the enraged son
of Vali; and then that wondrous strong one hurled his dart


* Sankrudha—inturiated, and Kradha, angered—this pleonasm is in the
text.—T.

+ The text has p¢eaka—fire—T.

+ Plavangamdh and vanarah—both mean monkeys. One is left out.—T.

§ The thunder-handed is Indra—his sonia Vali; and VAli’s son is Angada,
who is meant in the text—T.


1318 MAMAYENA.


at Angada. And aa the dart descended, that foremost of
monkeys endowed with strength,* and skilled in battle,
evaded the weapon from his fleetness. And then swiftly
springing up, he slapped (his antagonist) in the chest. And
thereat that one resembling a hill, lost his senses, And
recovering his senses, that exceedingly strong R&kshasa,
dealt a blow at Angada; and the latter dropped down
senseless. And on that powerful monkey falling down
insensible, Kumbhakarna, taking his dart, rushed against
Sugriva, And seeing the exceeding stout Kumbhakarna
approach, the heroic king of monkeys—Sugriva—sprang up;
and taking a mountain-top that one possessed of great
strength darted against the mighty Kumbhakarna, And
seeing that monkey, Kumbhakarna, stretching his limbs, stood
before the lord of monkeys. And seeing Kumbhakarna, with
his hody laved in the blood of monkeys; and eating up
mighty monkeys, Sugriva addressed him, saying,—"Thou hast
felled heroes done deeds difficult of being performed, and hast
devoured the warriors; and thou hast thus attained renown.
But let go now the monkey-army. What shalt thou do with the
ignoble ? Do thou, O R&kshasa bear the descent of this
mountain.” Hearing those words of the monkey-king instinct
with strength and fortitude, that terrible Rakshasa—
Kumbhukarna—said,—‘O_ monkey, thou stormest, because
thou art the grandson of Prajipatit and the son of the king
of bears ; and because as such thou art endowed with fortitude
and prowess.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s speech, Sugriva
whirling that mountain-peak, suddenly let it go; and with
that rock resembling Vajra or the thunder-bolt, smote
Kumbhakarna in the chest. And on coming in contact
with his wide breast, that mountain-peak was at once
shattered in shivers. And thereat the monkeys grew


* Valavdn—strong occurs twice.
+ Rikshorajes—the father of Sugriva, was produced from the yawning of
Prajipati or Brahm&.—T.


YODDH4KANDAM. 1319


dispirited and the Rakshasa’s ranks shouted in joy. And
struck with the mountain-summit, Kumbhakarna was fired
with weath ; and roared, expending his face. And then,
whirling his dart resembling lightning displayed, he hurled it
for compassing the destruction of the master of monkeys.
Then swiftly bounding up, the Wind-god’s son, resisting that
whetted dart fastened with golden chains,—with his hands
violently snapped it in twain. And placing the same on his
thighs, (Hanum&n) snapped that ponderous and terrible dart
composed of black iron, and thereat the monkeys waxed
delighted. And seeing the dart severed by Hanuman, the
monkey-army, growing delighted, set up countless shouts and
rushed in all directions. And the R&kshasa was seized with
fear and turned away (from the field.) And the monkeys
excessively delighted, set up loud shouts, and finding the dart
broken, poured forth thanks to the Wind-god’s son. Then
thé mighty-minded lord of Rakshasas seeing the dart thus
severed, uprooted a peak from the Malaya and with it smote
Sugriva. The king of monkeys struck with the mountain-
peak fell senseless upon the field, and the demons finding
him in this plight shouted out in great joy, Then
Kumbhakarna coming to the wonderfully mighty master of
monkeys, took him up and stole away from the field, as a
violent gust of wind stealeth away a patch of cloud. Kumbha-
karna, who resembled a mountain in loftiness of stature,
while taking him away like a mass of cloud appeared like
Sumeru overtopped with lofty peaks. Thus the lord of
Rakshasas went on hearing thanks (from the Rakshasas) and
shouts from the lords of the heavens, wondered at the capture
of the foremost of monkeys. Thus taking him captive, that
mighty one resembling Indra in puissance, thought his death
would destroy the entire host of the opponents together with
Raghava. Then Hanumaa,the shrewd son of Maruta, finding
the whole host of monkeys scattered in all directions, as well
as Sugtiva captured by Kumbhakarna bethought himself—


3320 RAMAYANA.


‘What ought to be done by me now that our king has been
captured ? I will doubtless do as befits me now-—let me assume
the shape of a mountain and kill the Rakshasas. Let me kill
the mighty Kumbhakarna, splitting his body with my strong
fist and thus relieve the master of monkeys—thus let the
whole host of monkeys become delighted. Or, even when
captured by the whole host of gods or Asuras or serpents
he is mighty enough to extricate himself. Meseems, the
lord of monkeys struck with dart in battle by Kumbhakarna
has not yet recovered his senses, Else in a moment he
would do the needful for himself as well as the monkeys,
Should the relief of the mighty-minded Sugriva come from
me, I should be incurring his displeasure and it would
certainly lead to the loss of his reputation for ever; then I
must wait a moment and see his own might displayed by
himself when relieved. Meanwhile let me cheer up the
monkey-host.” Thinking thus within himself, Hanuman, that
son of Maruta, began to stay the mighty host of monkeys.
In the meantime Kumbhakarna entered Lank& with Sugriva
trembling, being honored with the showering of beautiful
flowers from the sky, the buildings on the main roads and the
town-gate, Then the mighty one (Sugriva) slowly recovered
his senses with the shower of fried paddy and sweet scent
and the sprinkling of water as well as with the coolness of
the streets. Then that mighty-minded (Sugriva, caught in
the arms of the powerful Rakshasa, having with difficulty
come to his senses and surveying around him the streets of
the town bethought himself:—“When thus within the grasp
of the enemy how can | take revenge? Or let me do what
will be acceptable and advantageous to our army.” Then
advancing all on g sudden, be with his nails and sharp teeth
cut off the ears and nose of that lord of the enemies of the
gods and split both his sides with the blow of his feet. And
Kumbhakarna losing his ears and nose and having his sides
split with nails and teeth grew angry, and becoming all


YUDDHARANDAM. 13a


covered over with blood, threw Sugriva to the ground and
pressed him. Thus pressed upon the ground with main
force and severely struck by the enemies of gods, he flew to
the skies like a ball-rolling, and once more joined Rama.
The mighty Kumbhakarna having lost his nose and ears
and drenched in blood, appeared like a mountain covered all
over with streamlets. That huge-bodied R&kshasa, younger
brother of Ravana, terrible in appearance, resembling a mass
of deep black collyrium, and covered all over- with blood,
appeared like an evening cloud; and (once more) made
up his mind to appear in battle. Sugriva having thus
escaped, that dreadful enemy of the king of the celestials
in wrath again rushed to battle; and finding himself
destitute of arms took up a fearful mace. And then that
mighty-minded one, the Raksha Kumbhakarna, issuing out
of the city began to devour the terrific host of monkeys, as
doth the mighty fire eat up people at the end of a Yuga..
On entering the mighty host of monkeys,the hungry Kumbha-
karna, hankering after flesh and blood,ate up the monkeys,and
with them,devoured many a Rakshasa and Pisicha by,mistake.
Thus, as Death devoureth creatures at the end of a Yuga, he
destroyed the mighty monkeys. And he in wrath,taking up with
one hand the monkeys along with the R&kshasas, hurriedly
threw them into his. mouth,—one,two three,or many at a time.
And blood and fat flowed copiously down his body; and though
struck by the monkeys with peaks of mountains, the mighty
one devoured all those monkeys. And the monkeys as they were
being devoured, saught the shelter of Rima. And Kumbha-
karna wrought up with wrath, chased amain hundreds of
monkeys, eating up seven, eight, twenty, or thirty. And
fastening (the monkeys) with his arms, he, devouring them,
rushed on. And resembling the Destroycr of prodigious
dimensions at the end of a Yuga, that one furnished with
extremely sharp teeth, having his body covered with fat,
marrow and blood, and coiling entrails about his ears, began


166


1323 RAMALANA,


to discharge darts. And at this moment, that subduer of
hostile hosts and captor of the capitals of foes—Sumitra’s
son—Lakshmana, growing enraged, entered on an encounter
with the enemy. And Lakshmana endued with prowess
shot seven shafts at Kumbhakarna’s body ; and next, taking
up other arrows also discharged them (at his antagonist).
And thereat that Rakshasa, smarting under the wounds
inflicted by that weapon,* cut it off (by means of a weapon).
Thereupon grew enraged the powerful Lakshmana—enhancer
of Sumitra’s joy. And then as the wind overspreadeth
evening clouds, he with his shafts covered hist shining and
graceful mail entirely made of gold. And smit with arrows
dight with gold, that one resembling a mass of dark-blue
collyrium appeared beautiful like the ray-furnished Sun
surrounded by clouds. Then that dreadful R&kshasa voiced
like masses of clouds, scornfully addresséd the enhancer of
Sumitra’s felicity, saying,—"'By dauntlessly fighting with me,
who have without ado brought down the Destroyer himself in
battle, thou hast established thy heroism. Even by staying
before me, who am equipped with arms in this encounter, and
who in mighty conflict resemble Death himself, thou
deservest to be honured. What shall I say of thy fighting ?
Not even that tord—Sakra himself—mounted on his Airfvata,
and engirt by all the immortals,—had . ever before stayed
before me in the field. But to-day, O Sumitr4’s son, albeit a
boy, thou hast gratified me with thy prowess. Now taking
thy leave, I wish to go to Raghava. And as I have been
well pleased in battle with thy vigour and strength and
enthusiasm, I now wish to slay RAma alone, who being slain,
all are slain. On R&ma being here slain by me, the rest
remaining in the encounter—them shall I undertake with my
all-crushing vigour.” When that Raksha had spoken thus,


* But Lakshmana had sot discharged a single weapon only against Kumbha-
karna.—T.


+ Kumbhakarna’s,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1323


(Lakshmana), Sumitr&’s son,present in that contest, answered
him laughing in terrible words,saying,—"That thy prowess is
incapable of being borne by Sakra and other celestials,
true, It is not otherwise, O hero. To-day I myself have wit-
neased thy prowess, Yonder is Dagaratha’s son—Rama—stay-
ing like a moveless mountain.” Hearing this,that night-ranger
—Kumbhakarna—possessed of immense might, disregard-
ing Lakshmana and passing beyond Sumitra’s son, rushed
against Rama, making the earth tremble, Thereat Dagaratha’s
son, Rama, employing a terrific weapon, discharged sharp-
ened shafts at Kumbhakarna’s breast. Thereat flames mixed
with live embers shot out from the mouth of that enraged
one suddenly rushing (against Rama),—as Rama pierced him
(with his arrows). And on being frightfully pierced by Rama’s
weapons,that foremost of R&kshasas,roaring wrathfully darted

inst Rama, and pursued the monkeys in the conflict. And
those shalts adorned with peacock’s plumes, alighting on
( Kambhakarna’s ) chest, his mace, escaping bis hand,
dropped to the earth ; and all his (other) arms also were scat-
tered on the ground. And when that exceedingly powerful
one saw himself deprived of ali his arms, he began to spread
a huge havoc by means of his clenched fists and hands.
And with his body entirely covered with arrows and bathed
in blood, he began to bleed like a hill overflowing with
fountains. And fired with wrath and maddened with blood,*
he rusheth ou, devouring monkeys and Rakshasas and bears,
And that redoubtable one possessed of dreadful prowess,
resembling the Reaper himself, whirling a mighty mountain-
peak, hurled it aiming at Rama. Thereat Bharata’s elder
brother, the righteous Rama, ere that prodigious peak had
alighted, severed the same by means of seven straight-
speeding shafts wrought with gold. lntent on finishing
Kumbhakarna, the virtuous Lakshmana, revolving many a
means, (at last) spoke unto Rima,—"O king, this one


* Perbaps with the smeil of blood —T.


1334 RAMAYANA.


knoweth not monkeys and Ra&kshasas,—maddened with the
smell of blood, he eateth up his own as well as his enemies.
Now let the foremost monkeys, putting forth their best,
mount on him; and let the leaders of bands according to
their rank, stand surrounding him. And then to-day this
wicked-minded Rakshasa, oppressed with a mighty weight,
will no longer be able to eat up any more monkeys.” Hearing
the words of the intelligent prince, those exceedingly
powerful monkeys with alacrity ascended Kumbhakarna.
And Kumbhakarna mounted by those monkeys, waxing
exceedingly enraged, shook them vehemently, even as mad
elephants shake the drivers thereof. And Raghava seeing
them shaken, and concluding the Rakshasa to be wroth,
furiously sprang forward, taking his bow. And with his eyes
crimsoned with choler, the gentle Raghava, as if burning up
the R&kshasa with his eyes, rushed forth vehemently, sum-
moning up all his impetuosity, thereby cheering up the leaders
of bands that had been sore tried by the might of Kumbha-
karna. And equipped with an excellent quiver and arrows,
Rama cheering up the monkeys sprang forward, taking a
bow, resembling a serpent; terrific; having a stout string;
and embellished in gold. Then surrounded by exceedingly
invincible monkey-bands, that highly powerful hero, followed
by Lakshmana, marched forth. And he saw the redoubtable
and high-souled Kumbhakarna, with his body drenched in
blood, and with blood-shot eyes ; rushing against all, like unto
an infuriated elephant of the cardinal points; pursuing the
moukeys ; wrought up with wrath; environed by R&kshasas;
appearing like the Vindhya or the Mandara; decked with
golden angadas; bleeding from his mouth; like clouds
pouring showers ; licking at the corners of his mouth laved
with blood; smashing the monkey-ranks; and resembling
Yama the Destroyer. And that best of persons, seeing that
foremost of R&kshasas having the splendour of a living fire,
stretched his bow to its full bent. And fired with wrath at


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1325


the twang of his bow, that foremost of Rakshasas, inflamed
with wrath,—not brooking that report, rushed against
Raghava, Thereat, the gentle Rima, endowed with arms
resembling the body of the sovereign of serpents, in that
encounter addressed Kumbhakarna, like unto an elevated
cloud and possessed of the splendour of a mountain,—as he
darted forward, saying,—“Come, O king of Rakshas! Let
no grief be thine! Here I stay, taking my bow in my hand.
Know me for the destroyer of the race of the Rakshasas—
thou who in a moment shalt be deprived of thy senses.”
Kowing that this was Rama, (Kumbhakarna) laughed in
frightful accents; and then, wrought up with wrath, rushed
against the monkeys in the encounter. And as if ig the
breasts of all the monkeys (present),the exceedingly energetic
Kumbhakarna, laughing {rightfully and in a terrific manner,
—resembling the rumbling of clouds, addressed Raighava,
saying,—''Take me not for Vir&dha, or for Kavandha, or yet
for Khara. fam vot Vali or M&aricha. I am Kumbhakarna,
that am come. Behold my dreadful and mighty mace entirely
made of iron. By help of this | had formerly brought down,
deities and Danavas, It doth not behove thee to scorn me
in that my nose hath been severed. I do not feel any the
smallest torment in consequence of my ears and nose having
been cut off. O tiger of the Ikshw&ku line, O sinless one,
do thou witness the prowess that is in my frame. And
thereafter, when thou shalt have displayed thy prowess and
power, shall I devour thee up.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s
words, Rama discharged (at him) shafts furnished with knobs.
And smit with these having the impetus of the thunder-
bolt, the foe of the celestials did not feel any pain or smart,
And those shafts which had severed the seven stately sé/as,
and, to boot, had slain Vali—best of monkeys,—they resemb!-
ing the thunder itself—could not impart any pain to
Kumbhakarna’s body. And drinking up in his body those
arrows resembling a shower, the enemy of the great Indra


1326 RAMAPANA,


whirling bis mace possessed of fierce vehemence, put out the
arrowy discharge of Rama. Them that Raksha whirling his
mace washed in blood, capable of striking terror into the
mighty hosts of gods and Danavas, and possessed of fierce
impetus,—made the monkey-army take to its heels, Then
Rama, taking a mighty Vdyavya weapon, used the same against
the night-ranger ; and cut off his arm with the mace.@ And
having his arm cut off, he set up- tremendous roars. And
his arm with the mace, resembling a mountain-peak, cut off
by R&ghava’s arrows, fell in the midst of the army of the
monkey-king, and destroyed that army,*  Thereat the
monkeys remaining after those broken and slain,—dispirited,
and baving their limbs wounded, —moving aside, looked on
the dreadful encounter between the Raksha and the lord of
men. And then Kumbhakarna, having his arm severed,
resembling the foremost of mountains with its crest hewn
away by a mighty sabre, tore up a tree with his (remaining)
arm and in the conflict rushed against the monarch of men,
Thereupon with a shalt plated in gold, set upon a weapon of
Indra, Rama cut off his uplifted arm with a palm tree, look-
ing like the body of a pannaga. And that arm of Kumbhakarna,
being severed, dropped inert on the earth, like a hill, and
crushed trees and rocks and crags and monkeys and Rakshasas.
And Rama, seeing that one shorn of his arms suddenly spring
up, roaring,—took up two whetted crescents, and in the
contest cut off the legs of the Rakshasa. And thereupon
those legs (of his), making all sides and quarters and rocks
and caves and the mighty main and Lank& herself and the
army of the monkeys and the Rakshasas,—resound.—dropped
down (on the ground). And having his arms cut off and his
legs also severed, (Kumbhakarna), opening wide his mouth
resembling in sheen the mouth of a mare, roaring swiftly
darted against Raghava,—even as Rahu pursueth the Moon
in the firmament. Then Rama stuffed his mouth full of


* This, of course, is not to be taken li


YUDDHARANDAM. 1327


sharpened shafts having their feathered parts furnished with
gold. And having his mouth filled, he could not articulate ;
but with extreme effort uttered indistinct accents and
swooned away. Then Rama took an arrow of Indra,
whetted and knobhed, impetuous as the wind, resembling the
effulgence of the Sun, and like unto the very banner of
Brahm, or the Destroyer himself ; and fatal to foes. And then
Rama burled it at the ranger of the night. And thereat that
weapon hurled by R&ma's arm, resembling a smokeless flame,
lighting up the ten cardinal points with its own glory,—saught
him that was possessed of the dreadful energy of Sakra’s
thunder-bolt. And therewith he (Rama) cut off the head of the
lord of Rakshas resembling a mountain-summit, furnished
with prominent teeth,—from which the ear-rings had fallen off,
—even as formerly Purandara had cut off the head of Vritra.
And then Kumbbakarna’s huge head deprived of the ear-rings
appeared like the Moon seated in the midst (of the heavens)
on the rising of the Sun in the morning.+ And struck with
Rama's arrow, tho head of the Raksha resembling a bill fell
down to the earth ; and (in its fall) crushed edifices on the
highways and gateways ; and elevated walls also it bore down
to the ground. And then that Raksha of gigantic proportions
and vast to the view plunged into the deep; and crushing
huge and mighty fishes and serpents, saught the depths,
And on that enemy of the Br&hmanas and gods, endowed
with immense slrength,—having been slain in battle, the
earth shook and the mountains also ; and from excess of joy
shouted aloud. And those deities and saints and
Maharshis and Paanagas,and celestials and (other),beings and
birds and Guhyakas, together with Yakshas and Gandharbas,
all these who had stationed themselves in the welkin,—were
rejoiced at the prowess of Rama. And at his (Kumbhakarna’s)
great destruction, the intelligent adherents of the king
of Nairitas,—aggrieved exceedingly, began to cry at the sight


the celestia


+ This sfoka is wanting in many texts—T.


1328 RAMAYANA,


of that best of the Raghus, even as mad elephants cry at
sight of a lion. And like unto the Sun emerged from the
mouth of Ruhu, and destroying the darkness of the celestial
fields,—shone Rama in the midst of the monkey-army having
slain Kumbhakarna in battle. And countless monkeys
experienced the very height of delight ; and on (their) foe of
terrific strength having been slain, they with countenances
resembling awaked lotuses paid homage unto the king’s
son—Raghava—the sharer of good fortune. And as the
monarch of the immortals had rejoiced on slaying the mighty
Asura—Vritra—Bharata’s elder brother rejoiced on having
in battle slain that smiter of celestial hosts, Kumbhakarna in
mighty conflict, never (before) vanquished in renowned
encounters.


SECTION ixvil,


Svein Kumbhakarna slaia by the high-souled Raghava,
the Rakshasas conveyed the tidings to the lord of the
Rakshasas—Révana ; (and addressed him, saying),—"O king,
that one resembling the Destroyer himself, urged on by
Death,—having scoured the monkey-army and-eaten up
monkeys,—and for a while displayed his prowess, hath met
with his quietus at the hands of Rima exerting his energy.
And with half his body immersed in the dreadful deep, thy
brother, Kumbhakarna, with his nose and ears cut off, and
blood besmearing his body,—with his head and limbs hewn
away, and his body uncovered,—monntain-like blocketh
up the gate of Lanka with his person,—and resembleth a tree
that hath been consumed by a forest-fire.’ Hearing the
mighty Kumbhakarna slain in battle, Ravana burning in


VODDHAKANDAM. 1329


grief, swooned away and dropped to the earth. And hearing
their uncle slain, Trigiras* and Atikaya—destroyers of gods
and men,—began to weep, oppressed with sorrow. And
Mahodarat and MabSpargwat hearing of their uncle.slain by
R&ma of untiting deeds, were overcome with grief. Then
regaining his senses with extreme exertion, that foremost of
Rakshasas, distressed in consequence of the destruction of
Kumbhakarna, mourned with his senses overwhelmed,
saying,—‘O hero! O humbler of the pride of the foe! O
mighty Kumbhakarna! Leaving me, thou through Destiny,
hast gone to the abode of Yama. O exceedingly powerful one,
leaving me (lone) whither dost thou wend, without extracting
my dart as well as that of thy friends? Now really I am not,
inasmuch as my right arm hath dropped. Backed by this
one, I would not fear celestials and Asuras. How to-day
forsooth hath such a bero-—crusher of the hauteur of gods
and Danavas—resembling the Fire arisen at tke hour of
universal wreck,—been slain in fight by Raghava ? He who
could not be harmed by the concussion of the thunder-
bolt itself—how can he, smitten with Rama's arrows, sleep
soundly on the earth? These gods stationed in the sky
along with the saints,—beholding thee slain in battle, are
shouting in glee. Surely to-day the monkeys overjoyed, —
finding occasion, will scale all the gateways and fortifications
of Lanka. Ihave nothing to do with empire. And what
shall 1 do with Sita? And deprived of Kumbhakarna, I do
not even wish to tive. If Ido not slay in encounter that slayer
of my brother—Raghava,—certainly death is even that which
is good for me,—otherwise, this life is useless. This very
day will I repair to that place where my younger brother is,
Forsaking my brother, I forsooth dare not live for a moment ;
for the gods shall laugh on seeing me, who had formerly


* Three-headed.—T.
+ Hoge-bettied —T.
¢ Mighty-fanked.—T.


167


1330 RAMAYANA.


wronged them. But, how, O Kumbhakarna, thou having
been slain, shall I conquer Indra? Now the beneficial words
of Bibhishana have been verified. And as through blindness
T did not accept the advice of that high-souled one, Kumbha-
karna and of Prahasta, this disaster arisen, shameth me sore.
And as I had disgraced the virtuous and graceful Bibhishana,
this peril producing grief, hath been the consequence of my
conduct.” Having thus piteously and long lamented
Kumbhakarna, the Ten-necked one, with his inmost soul
overwhelmed. with sorrow, and sore distressed in consequence
of gcief,—fell down, knowing his brother—the enemy of
Indra~~slain in battle.


SECTION Exrx.


Hearne the lamentations of the wicked-minded R&vana,
overwhelmed with grief, Trigiras addressed him, saying,—
“O Sire, this second uncle unto us possessed of mighty
prowess hath* forsooth been slain in fight, But, O king,
heroes never indulge in grief as thou doest. O lord, thou
certainly alone art competent to conquer the triple world.
Wherefore then dost thou vent such sorrow like an ignoble
one? Thou hast thy dart conferred on thee by Brahma ;
and thy mail and thy weapon—the bow—and thy car yoked
with a thousand asses, sending forth clatter resembling the
rumbling of clouds, The deities and the Danavas have by
means of thy arms been terrified over and over again. And
furnished with all arms, thou ought to chastise Raghava.
But stay at thy pleasure, O mighty sovereign, I will go out


* Evameva—forsooth, as | render it, The commentator, however, saya it
means such as thou hast described him—T.


FUDDHASANDAM. 1330


to battle; and even as Garura captureth serpents, will €
capture thine enemies. And as Samvara was vanquished by
the lord of the immortals, or Naraka by Vishnu, will I bring-
ing down Rama in battle make him sleep (in the field),”
Hearing Trigiras' words, Ravana—tord of Rakshasas—urged
on by Fate, considered himself as having regained his life,
And hearing the speech of Trigiras, Devantaka, and
Narantaka, and the energetic Atikdya also, were wrought up
with martial enthusiasm. And then those foremost of
Naicitas—the heroic sons of Ravana—endowed with the
prowess of Sakra himself—roared out, ‘I will go,’ 'I will go.’
And all could range the sky, and all were skilled in illusion,
and all were crushers of the pride of the immortals ; and all
were irrisistible in encounter. And all of them were endowed
with superior strength, and all had achieved wide celebrity.
They bad never been heard of as baving been beaten in fight
even by the gods along with the Gandharvas, or the mighty
serpents accompanied by the Kinnaras. And all were skilled
in weapons and heroic ; and all were versed in warfare. And
all were possessed of the higher knowledge ; and all had ob-
tained boons. And then the king surrounded by those sons of
his appearing like celestials,—capable of injuring the force and
fortune of the foe,—looked splendid like Maghavan environed
by the immortals,humblers of the hauteur of mighty Danavas.
And embracing his sons and adorning them in ornaments—
he sent them to the field with his best benedictions. And
Ravana sent the brothers—Yudhyonmatta and Matta—for
protecting the princes in the field. And then, saluting the
high-souled Ravana—destroyer of creatures,—and going
round him, those huge-bodied ones marched forth, And
furnished with every description of medicinal herbs and
perfumes, these six Nairitas—foremost of their kind—
endowed with great strength,—burning for battle, march-
ed forth,—Trigiras and Atikadya, and Devantaka and
Narfutaka, and) Mahodara and Mab&pargwa went out,


1332 RAMAYANA.


urged on by Fate. Then Mahodara mounted the elephant—
Sudargana—sprung in the race of Airivata, and resembling
dark-blue clouds. And accoutred in every weapon, and
decked with quivers, he looked splendid on his elephant like
the Sun ascending the crest of the Setting-hill. And
R&vana’s son—Triciras—ascended a car yoked with excellent
steeds, and furnished with every variety of arms. And
having ascended the car, Trigiras bow ini hand appeared
beautiful like a mass of burning clouds having lightning and
meteors, and crowned with Indra’s bow.* And dight with
three diadems, Trigiras looked splendid in that superb car,
like the monarch of mountains Himavan—with the three
golden hills. And then that foremost of all bowmen—the
powerful Atikaya—son unto the lord of Rakshasas—ascended
the best of cars, having excellent wheels and aéshas, and
yoked with excellent steeds,—and furnished with bottoms
and holes; flaming with quivers and bows ; and bristling
with prdgas and swords and blugdeons. And adorned with
a crown plated with wrought gold and (other) ornaments,
he looked like the Meru swimming in its own splendour.
And that powerful son of the king surrounded by the Nairitas
looked lovely on that car like the thunder-handed (Deity)
engirt by the immortals. And Narantaka mounted a white
steed resembling Uchchaigrava, caparisoned in gold, having
a large frame and endowed with the velocity of the Wind,
And taking a prdra, Narantaka appeared like the.energetic
Guha mounted on the peacock, grasping his dart. And
taking a bludgeon decked in golden ornaments, Dev&ntaka
resembled Vishnu at the time of the churning of the ocean,
holding the Darbhy&,t and staying burthening (the earth).
And the powerful Mab’pargwa endowed with terrific energy,
taking his mace, appeared like Kuvera holding in his hand a


* The rain-bow is called sometimes /udra's bow and at others Rdma’s
bom.—T.
+ The mountain Mandara which served as the churning-stick. —T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1333


mace in the encounter. And like immortals issuing out of
Amarfvati, they marched out with elephants and steeds and
cars sending out clatter resembling the rumbling of clouds.
And them followed high-souled Rakshasas equipped with
mighty-arms, And those sun-bright high-souled princes
decked with diadems appeared splendid like burning planets
in the firmament. And the various gorgeous attires which
they had worn’ resembled rows of cranes in the sky, looking
like autumnal clouds. Resolved on dying or conquering the
foe in fight, those heroes sallied out seeking encounter. And
those high-souled ones, incapable of being repressed in fight,
roared and shouted and discharged shafts and held them.
And the earth shook as they sent up leonine roars and struck
at their arms with their hands; and the sky seemed riven
with the leonine roars of the Rakshas. And issuing out
cheerfully, those foremost of Rakshasas endowed with great
strength beheld that monkey-army staying with upraised
rocks and stones. And the highsouled monkeys also
saw that mighty host of Rakshasas thronging with elephants,
horses and cars, and ringing with hundreds of bell-lets ;
resembling dark-blue clouds ; upraising mighty arms; and
environed on all sides by Nairitas resembling flaming fire.
And seeing that force advance, the monkeys, finding
opportunity, upraising giant crags,momentarily set up shouts.
And thereat, the Rakshasas, incapable of bearing those
shouts, shouted in reply unto the monkeys. And again the
monkeys shouted unto the Rakshas, who were unable to put
up with that cry. And hearing that loud shout of the
monkey-leaders, the mighty Rakshas incapable of bearing
that noise expressive of exhilaration,—shouted still more
dreadfully. And then diving into that dreadful Rakshasa
army, the monkey-leaders began to range it with uplifted
rocks,—like unto mountains. And equipped with trees and
stones, the monkeys enraged, ranged the Raksha army, now
rising inte the sky, and now coming down to the earth. And


1334 KAMAY ANA.


some among the powerful monkeys went about taking
broad-shouldered trees. And the encounter that took place
between the thronging Rakshas and monkeys was some-
thing terrific. And (the monkeys) began to pour a wonderful
shower of trees and rocks and cliffs. And the monkeys
of dread prowess were resisted with vollies of shafts,
And in the contest the monkeys and Rakshasas emitted
leonine roars. And monkeys crushed YatudhSnas with rocks,
and, wrought with rage, (they) in the encounter slew
(R&kshasas) covered with armour and ornaments; and some
slew heroes mounted on cars and elephants and steeds.
And the monkeys on a sudden slew heroic Yatudhanas, And
smit with mountain-peaks on their persons, and with their
eyes falling off, the foremost of Raksbasas moved, dropped
down, or roared in the scene of conflict. And the Rikshasas
(on their part) pierced the foremost of monkeys with
sharpened and keen darts and clubs and scimitars; and slew
them with darts and prdcas. And, eager for bringing down
each other, the monkeys: and the Rakshasas with their
persons washed with the blood of their antagonists felled
each other, Andina moment the earth was covered with
crags and swords discharged by monkeys and R&kshasas,
—and was drenched in gore. And the field was blocked
up with scattered mountain-like Rakshas influenced by
martial ardour,—mangled by their enemies. And the
monkeys thrown down and felled by means of broken crags
and monkeys* and arms and legs,—waged a wonderful war.
And those foremost of Nairitas slew monkeys with (the dead
bodies of monkeys); and the monkeys smote RAakshasas
with (the dead bodies of) Rakshasas; and the Rakshasas
slew (the monkeys), hurling rocks and crags. And snatching
away their own arms by main force, the monkeys finished
Rakshas; and they slaughtered them with mountain-peaks,
and also wounded each other. And the monkeys and


* ig, the carcasses thereof.


YUDDHAKAINDAM. 1335


Rakshasas emitted leonine roars in the encounter. And the
Rakshasas, slain by the monkeys, having their mail and
defence for the body rent, bled like unto trees exuding
sap. And in that encounter, some among the monkeys
destroyed cars with cars, elephants with elephants, and steeds
with steeds. And the Rakshasas rived the trees and rocks
of the foremost monkeys by means of Kshkurapras and
crescents and sharpened Bhad/as and arrows, And in
that encounter, the earth became impassable, having been
scattered with crags baffled and severed trees and (warriors)
slain by monkeys and Rakshas. And those monkeys, equipped
with various weapons, and with their vigor unworn, entering
upon the conflict casting off fear,—cheerfully putting forth
efforts springing from pride of spirit, warred on with the
R&kshasas. And in that fearful conflict, which was being
waged, on the monkeys having been exhilarated and the
Ra&kshasas having been brought down, the Maharshis and the
deities sent up shouts. Then mounted on a charger endued
with the celerity of the Wind, and grasping a whetted dart,
Narfntaka entered into that fierce army of monkeys, like a
fish diving into the deep. And that hero by means of an
effulgent bearded dart pierced seven hundred monkeys ; and
at one time the high-souled enemy of Indra slew the army of
the foremost of monkeys. And the Vidy&adlaras and
Maharshis saw that high-souled one mounted on horseback,
ranging the monkey-ranks. Aad his course was discovered,
miry with flesh and blood and blocked up with mountain-like
monkeys fallen. And when the monkeys set their hearts on
displaying their prowess, Nar&ntaka, baffling them, pierced
them with shafts. And he consumed the monkey-army, like fire
burning a forest. And when the wood-rangers uprooted trees
and crags, they slain by bearded darts dropped down like
mountains riven by the thunder, And raising a glowing prdca,
the powerful Narantaka began to range about in the rear*


* Sangrémdnte, I presume, means rear af the forces; although literally it


1336 RAMAYANA,


of the furces; dashing everywhere (against the foe) in
fight, like the wind in the rainy season. And the heroes could
not appear prominently, or keep their posts. And how
could they thea move freely? And that one endued with
prowess pierced everyone, whether springing, or staying,
or moving. And broken through by a single prdga, resembl-
ing the Reaper, and furnished with solar effulgence, the
monkey-ranks began to roll on the earth. And the monkeys
were ilt fitted to bear the impetus of that préga having the
touch of thunder itself; and they raised a loud cry. And
Uke appearances of those monkey-heroes falling were like
mountains toppling, having their summits riven with the
thunder-bolt. Those high-souled and powerful monkeys that
formerly had been brought down by Kumbhakarna,—having
recovered, were present with Sugriva in this encounter.
And Sugriva, looking around, saw that monkey-army flying
in all directions, agitated with the fear of Narantaka, And
after seeing the army in flight, he saw Narantaka himself,
advancing, wielding a prdga, and mounted on a steed, And
as soon as he saw (that hero), the exceedingly energetic
Jord of monkeys—Sugriva—addressed the heroic prince
Angada, endowed with strength equal to that of Indra,
saying,—"Go against this heroic Rakshasas that is mounted
on astced; and speedily deprive of life that one who is
devouring up the ranks of his foes.” Hearing bis master’s
speech, Angada descended from that host resembling clouds,
like the powerful Sun himself. And resembling a mass of
crags, Angada—foremost of monkeys—adorned with Angadas,
appeared beautiful like a mountain with metals on it, And
weaponless himself, and furnished only with nails and teeth,
Vali’s son attacking NarAntaka, said,—“Stay ! What shalt
thou do with these inlerior monkeys? This prdga, having
the feel of the thunder-bolt, do thou hurl at my heart itself.”


means, at the conclusion of the conflict,—because this interpretation would not
be proper, the battle being now at its hottest.—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM. : 1337


Hearing Angada’s words, Narntaka was fired with wrath.
And knawing his upper lip with his teeth and sighing like
aserpent, Narantaka, wrought with wrath, approached V&li’s
son, And then whirling his prdga, he suddenly discharged
that flaming (weapon) against Angada. And then it was
snapped on the breast of Vali’s son, resembling the thunder-
bolt, and dropped to the earth. And seeing the préga
broken in pieces, like a powerful snake severed by Suparna,
V&li’s son, raising his hand, dealt a slap at the head of his
(Narfintaka’s) steed. Thereat, with his legs sinking down
and his eye-balls coming off and his teague hanging down,
and wearing the look of a mountain,—on being smit with that
slap, Nar&ntaka’s steed fell down to the ground, with its
head lying at random. And Narantaka seeing his charger
slain and fallen, was seized with a furious wrath, and raising
his clenched fist, that one endowed with exceeding great
enorgy in that conflict hit Vali’s son on the head. Thereat
Angada having his head wounded by that blow, warm blood
gushed out plentifully. And momentarily burning and
momentarily swooning, he, regaining his senses, was amazed.
Then Vali’s son, the high-souled Angada clenching his fist
into a blow resembling Death itself in energy, and like unto
a@ mountain-peak, let it descend on the chest of Nardntaka.
Thereat, with his breast riven and broken down, vomitting
flames and having his body bathed in blood, Nar&ntaka
dropped down to the earth, like a hill shattered by the
impetus of the thunder-bolt. And on Narntaka of exceeding
prowess having been slain by Vali’s son in battle, there
arose a tremendous uproar in the firmament from the wood-
rangers and the foremost of celestial. And Angada having
performed that difficult deed of prowess, capable of delighting
the mind of R&ma, was seized with amazement ;* and that
one of terrific feats in fight was again inspired with delight
in the encounter.


* Probably, at kis own promess—T.


1338 * RAR ANA,


And seeing Narantaka slain, the foremost of Nairitas
“including the thre-headed Devdotaka and Pulastya’s
descendant, Mahodara,—began to cry (in chorus). And then
the vehement Mahodara, mounted (on horseback), rushed
against Vali’s son endued with energy. And aggrieved in
consequence of the calamity that had befallen his brother,
the strong Devdntaka grasping a dreadful bludgeon, darted
against Angada. And ascending a car resembling the Sun
yoked with superb steeds, the heroic Trigiras rushed against
Vali’s son. Then charged by those three powerful Rakshasas
-—crushers of the hauteur of immortals, Angada uprooted
a tree furnished with gigantic branches. And as Sakra
hurleth the mighty flaming thunderbolt, that hero—Angada
at once hurled against Devintaka that mighty tree having
giant branches. And Trigiras cut off that tree in pieces by
means of shafts resembling serpents. And seeing the tree
severed, Angada darted up; and* then that foremost of
monkeys showered crags and trees. And all those Trigiras
wrought with wrath cut off by means of whetted arrows ;
and Mahodara snapped those trees with the end of his
bludgeon. And then Trigiras rushed against that hero—
Vali's son—with shafts ; and Mahodara chased him,t mounted
ou an elephant ; and struck Angeda in thechest with comarvs
resembling the thunder-bolt. And Dev&ntaka, enraged
advancing, hit Angada with his bludgeon, and then, endowed
with velocity, he swiftly turned away. And attacked
simultaneonly by those three powerful Nairitas, the exceed-
ingly energetic son of V&li possessed of prowess, did not
feel any pain. And that impetuous one incapable of being
aonquered, summoning his utmost vehemence, rushing on,
pealt a slap at hist mighty elephant. And thereat the
elephant fell down in his very sight and expired. And then


* The text has dngada, avoided for euphony.
+ The text has VAli’s son,
$ Mahodara’s.


* FODDHAKANDAM. 1339


pulling out his tusks, the highly powerful son of Vali, darting
against Devantaka, dealt him a blow therewith in that en-
counter. And thereupon that strong one overwhelmed like a
tree buffeted by the wind,began to discharge blood profusely,
looking like the hue of lac. And then cheering him, the
exceedingly energetic and powerful Nar&ntaka, violently
whirling his bludgeon with might and main, hit Angada with
it. And albeit struck with the bludgeon, the son of the lord
of monkeys, going down on his knees, again darted up. And
as he sprang up, Trigiras hit at the temples of the son of
the king of monkeys with three straight-speeding terrific
shafts. And seeing Angada assailed by the three redoubt-
able Rakshasas, Hanum&n and Nila proceeded (to his rescue).
Theu Nila hurled a mountain-top at Trigiras; and thereat
that son of Ravana severed it with sharpened arrows. And
that mountain-top on being riven, dropped down, aflame
and shooting out sparks of fire. And seeing him* yawning
in joy, the stalwart Devantaka in that encounter pursued the
Wind-god’s son with his bludgeon. And as he rushed on,
that foremost of monkeys—Hanum&an—dealt on the crown
of his head, a blow resembling the thunder-bolt itself. And
the mighty and heroic son of the Wind-god hit (at his
antagonist); and that redoubted monkey also with his roars
made the Rakshasas tremble (in fear). And thereat with
his head crushed and cleft, and his teeth and eyes falling out,
and his tongue hanging down, that son unto the sovereign
of the R&kshasas suddenly dropped to the earth, deprived
of life. On that fierce and mighty Rakshasa warrior—that
foe of the immortals—having fallen in fight, the Three-
headed one, waxing wondrous enraged began to shower
terrific sharpened shafts on Nila’s chest. And Mahodara,
getting enraged, again swiftly mounted an elephant like the
ray-furnished (Sun) mounting Mandara. Then even as a
mass of roaring clouds poureth down showers enwheeled with


* Trigiras.


1340 RAMAYANA.


Jevin on a mountain, he showered arrows right on Nila’s
breast. Thereat showered with those shalts, that leader of
monkeys Nila with his person pierced, had his body riven
and was stupified by that exceedingly powerful one. Then
that (monkey) possessed of tremendous vehemence, having
regained his senses, uprooting a crag with a whole tract of
trees, struck it at Mahodara’s head. And struck by that
mighty enemy, Mahodara, broken down by the impetus of
that rock, deprived of his senses, dropped down dead on the
ground, like a cliff smit with the thunder-bolt.

Sceing his uncle slain, Trigiras took up his bow; and
inflamed with fury pierced Hanumin with whetted arrows.
And thereat the Wind-god’s son, enraged, burled a mountain-
peak (at his adversary). And Trigiras by means of keen
artows severed the same in shivers. And seeing the
nsountain-peak baffled, the monkey in the encounter began to
shower trees on RAvana’s son. And Trigiras endowed with
prowess by means of sharpened shafts cut off that descending
arrowy shower in the sky and shouted (in delight), Then
Hanuman flying into a fury, bounding to the welkin, with his
nails ript the steed of Trigirar,even as a lion cleaveth,a power-
fal elephant. Then taking a dart even as the Destroyer
employeth the Fatal Night, Ravana’s son—Trigiras—
discharged it at the offspring of the Wind-god. Thereat
catching the dart of resistless course as it descended from
the sky, the powerful monkey snapped it and then shouted.
And seeing that dreadful dart broken by Hanuman, the
monkeys, transported with delight, sent up shouts, even as
clouds rumble. Then upraising his sword, that foremost of
Rakshasas—Trigiras —brought it down on the breast of the
monkey-chief. Overpowered with the sword-blow, Hanuman
—son unto the Wind-god,—endowed with energy, dealt the
Three-headed one a slap on the head. And smitten with that
slap, the highly powerful Trigiras, with‘ his hands and attire
dropping off,fell down to the earth, deprived of consciousness.


FUDDHARANDAM 1344


Then that mighty monkey résembling a hill broke his sword
as he fell, and roared, terrifying all the Rakshasas. But not
brooking that uproar, that night-ranger sprang up; and
springing up, he dealt a blow at Hanum&n. And at that
blow, the redoubtable monkey was wrought up with wrath ;
and inflamed with rage, he smote that foremost of Rakshasas
about his diadem. And then with a sharp sword the Wind-
god’s son cut off his heads decked with diadems and furnished
with ear-rings ; even as Sakra had severed the heads of
Tashtri’s son.* Thereatieven as burning stars, loosened,
drop down from the course of Indra, the large organs of
sense, and eyes flaming like glowing fire, and heads of that
foe of Indra, dropped down’ to the ground. On Trigiras—
enemy of the immortals—having been slain by Hanuman
endowed with the prowess itself of Sakra, the monkeys
shouted, the earth shook, and the Rakshas began fo fly on all
sides. And seeing Trigiras and Yudhyonmatta slain and
seeing also the irrepressible Devantaka and Narantaka slain
(in the encounter), that highly jirascible and powerful
Rakshasa—Matta—was transported with passion, and then
took up a flaming mace entirely wrought with iron inlaid
with gold ; frothy with flesh and goro; mighty to behold ;
gratified with the blood of foes; with its end flaming in
splendour ; decked with red wreaths ; and capable of striking
terror into Airfivata and Mah&padma and Sarvabhauma.}+ And
flaming up like the Fire arisen at the end of a Yuga, that
foremost of Rakshasas—Matta—wrought with fury,—rushed
against the monkeys. Then the mighty and powerful monkey
—-Rishabha-—springing up before R&vana’s son, stood
before the hosts of Matta. And seeing that mountain-like
monkey staying before (him), Matta, enraged, dealt him a
blow on the hreast. And smit with the mace, that foremost
of monkeys, with his breast riven and trembling, began to


* Vigwarupa.
+ Elephants of the cardinal points —T.


1342 RAMAYANA.


bleed copiously. And regaining his senses after a long while,
Rishabha—lord of monkeys—inflamed with wrath, pouting
out his upper lip, gazed at MahSparcwa.* And then
impetuously approaching the Rakshasa, that foremost of
heroic monkeys resembling a hill, endowed with vebemence,
clenching his fist, suddenly smote him with a blow on his
breast, Thereat like a tree whose roots have been severed,
he suddenly dropped on the ground, covered with blood.
And thereupon, (Rishabha) swiftly snatched his dreadful
mace resembling the rod of Yama himself; and shouted.
Only for a moment did het remain like one dead. Recovering
his senses, the enemy of the immortals, looking like evening
clouds in hue, suddenly springing up, attacked the son of the
king of waters.{ And thereat, he dropped down to the
earth, senseless. In a moment regaining bis consciousness,
he again bounded up,—and whirling the mace resembling a
peak of the foremost of mountains, in that encounter dealt
(Matta) a blow therewith. And descending on the body
of that dreadful one—the enemy of deities, sacrifices and
Vipras—that terrific mace rived his breast ; and he began to
bleed profusely, even as the lord of mountains discharges
minerals and water. And taking the terrific mace of the
high-souled (Matta) and swinging it again and again,
(Rishabha) rushed (against the R&kshasas). And that
high-souled one began to slaughter Matta’s forces in the field.
And broken down by his own mace, Matta dropped down
like a hill, with his teeth and eyes shrivelled up; and he
dropped to the earth deprived of strength and life, with his
eyes paling. And on that Rakshasa falling, the Rakshasa
forces began to fly. And on that brother of Ravana having
been slain, that host of Nairitas appearing like the ocean in


* Otherwise calied Matta—T.
+ Matta.
$ Varuna.


YUDDHARANDAM. : 1343


grandeur, leaving its arms behind,—solely for life rushed
away, like unto the deep riven (by the winds).


SECTION LXXt.


Sezinc in sore straits his own mighty forces capable of
making people’s down stand on end,—and seeing his brothers
resembling Sakra in prowess, routed; and seeing also his
uncles brought down in batgle, as well as his brothers—
Yudhyonmatta and Matta—foremost of Rakshasas, that
crusher of the pride of deities and Danavas—the exceedingly
energetic Atikaya—resembling a hill, who had obtained from
Brahm& a boon in battle, was fired with wrath, Ascending
a car effulgent like a thousand suns mingling their rays into
a burst of brilliance, that enemy of Sakra, charged the
monkeys. And stretching his bow, (Atikaya) decked with a
diadem and wearing polished ear-rings, proclaimed his name
(among the monkey-ranks) and shouted in lofty tones,
And with his leonine roars and the proclamation of his name,
and the tremendous twang of his bow-string, he s.ruck terror
into the monkeys. Seeing the magnitude of his person, the
monkeys thinking that it was Kumbhakarna who had come,
—and affrighted thereat, sought the shelter of each other.
And seeing his form like unto that of Vishnu when he
displayed his threefold energy, the monkey-warriors seized
with fear, began to scour on all sides. And on Atikaya
appearing before them,the monkeys, stupified in that conflict,
saught the shelter of Lakshmana’s elder brother. And from
a distance Kakutstha saw the mountain-like Atikaya
mounted on the car and equipped with his bow, like unto roar
ing clouds (seen) on the occasion of the universal disruption.


1344 RAMAYANA.


And seeing that huge-bodied one, Raghava struck with
surprise, comforting the monkeys, addressed Bibhishana,
saying,—“Who is this one resembling a mountain, furnished
with a bow and having leonine eyes, that is stationed on
a large car yoked with a thousand steeds,—he that with efful-
gent sharpencd darts and keen prdgas and fomaras, shineth
like Mahecwara environed by spectres—he that displaying
his fatal tongue, appeareth splendid, surrounded with darts
in his car; like a mass of clouds graced with lightning, And
his bows adorned and backed with gold all over, beautify his
car even as Indra’s bow beautifyeth the firmament. And who
is this foremost of RAkshasas and best of bowmen that
embellishing the field of battle, approacheth on a car glorious
as the sun; who, displaying the ten cardinal points with his
shafts resembling the rays of the sun, appeareth handsome
with his peak of a banner bearing the figure of Rahu—whose
bow bent in three places, emitting roars resembling the
rumbling of clouds, and plated with gold, looketh like the
bow itself of Satakratu?. And his mighty car furnished with
a banner and ensign and bottom, and having clatter
resembling the roaring of clouds, hath four horsemen
{attached to it), And there are on the car eight and thirty
quivers and dreadful bows and yellow-golden bow-strings.
And there are (in that car) two effulgent swords at his side,
illumining it,—their hafts measuring four hands and their
blades ten each, And that calm (warrior) wears red garlands
about his neck, and resembles a mighty mountain. Anda
very Destroyer, he hath a mighty mouth, appearing like that
of the Destroyer himself; and he looketh like the sun
stationed on clouds. And with his arms adorned with golden
angadas, he appeareth splendid like that best of mountains—
the Himavin with its towering summits. And with his pair
of eas-rings, his charming yet terrific countenance shineth
like the full Moon entering into Punarvagu.* O mighty-armed


* The seventh lunar asteriam—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1345


one, tell me all about this foremost of Rakshasas, seeing
whom the monkeys, overwhelmed with fear, fly away in all
directions.” Asked by the king's son—R&ma of immeasurable
prowess—the exceedingly energetic Bibhishana spoke unto
Rama, informing him,--"The highly powerful king, Vaigra-
vana’s younger brother of dreadful deeds, the high-souled
Ravana—is the sovereign of the Rakshasas. This one is
his mighty son, like unto Ravana himself in strength. He
serveth the aged, is of wide celebrity and is the prime of those
versed in all branches of knowledge. And he is competent
to ride horses and elephants, to wield the sword or draw
the bow,—or in sowing dissensions, or giving away, or in
ccounsel,—he reposing in whose arm Lanka hath cast off fear.
Know him to be Atikaya, son unto Dhinyamali. Haviag
adored the pure-souled Brahm& with austerities, he hath
obtained weapons, and hath defeated his foes (in fight).”
‘Thou shalt be incapable of being slain by celestials and
Asuras’—was the boon conferred on bim by the Self-sprung ;
and he also gave him this celestial mail and this car resembl-
ing the effulgent Sun himself. He hath vanquished (in
battle) hundreds of deities and Danavas ; and he hath (always)
protected the Rakshas, and destroyed Yakshas. And this
intelligent one resisted the thunder-bolt itself of Indra;
and in encounter baffled the very noose of the king of
waters. This one is Atik’ya—foremost of R&kshasas; and
that son of Ravana is the humbler of the hauteur of deities
and D&anavas. Therefore, O best of persons, do thou
endeavour thy best. This one with his shafts slaughtereth
the monkey-hosts before (us).” And then the powerful
Atikiya entering that monkey-force, stretched his bow and
shouted again and again. And the high-souled principal
monkeys, seeing that (hero) possessed of a dreadful person,
that best of cdr-warriors—stationed on his car, rushed
forward. And Kumuda and Dwivida and Mainda and Wila
and Sarabha dashed on at one time with tcees and mountain-


169


1346 RAMAYANA.


peaks. Thereupon that foremost of those skilled in weapons,
the exceedingly energetic Atikdya, severed those trees and
rocks by means of shafts dight with gold. And in that
encounter that powerful one possessed of-a gigantic person,
skilled in arms, pierced all those monkeys staying before him
with arrows entirely made of iron. And agonised, having their
persons pierced in that mighty conflict by that arrowy shower,
they were incapable of resisting the same. And the Rakshasa
terrified that host of monkey-heroes, even as an enraged lion
priding in his youth terrifyeth a society of deer, And in the
midst of those bands of monkeys, that lord of Rakshasas did
uot slay anyone without battle. And then springing up
before Rama, that one furnished with his bow and quiver,
addressed him in haughty words, saying,—°Stationed in
this car holding the bow and arrows in my hands, I will
not fight any that is ignoble. Him that hath strength,
and that also understandeth this business,—let him to-
day speedily give me battle.” Hearing his speech, that
slayer of foes—Sumitra's son—was fired with wrath, And
not bearing him, he sprang forward disregarding his anta-
gonist’s words, and took up his bow. And flying unto fury,
Sumitra's son, darting up, took out arrows from his quiver,
and stretched his mighty bow in front of AtikBya. And
filling the entire earth and the sky and the ocean and all the
cardinal quarters,—the terrific twang of Lakshmana’s bow
struck terror into the {hearts of the) night-rangers. And
hearing the dreadful twang of the bow of Sumitra’s son, the
exceedingly energetic and powerful son of the lord of
Rakshasas was struck with surprise. Then Atikdya, enraged,
seeing Lakshmana advance, taking sharpened shafts, spoke
unto him,—"Thou art a boy, O Sumitr&’s sou; and as such
knowest not how to display prowess. Go thou, Why
wishest (hou to fight with me resembling Death itself. Not
Ilimalaya itself or the firmament or the earth is capable of
bearing the impetuosity of shafts shot by my arms. Thou


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1347


wishest to rouse a fire slumbering sweetly. Leaving alone
thy bow, do thou return, Do not lose thy life by coming in
contact with me, Or it may be that thou art proud; and,
therefore, hast no mind to return. Stay then. Renouncing
thy life, thou shalt go to Yama’s mansion. Behold my whetted
arrows—crushers of the insolence of foes—resembling the
weapon itself of the Lord,*—adorned with burnished gold.
And even as a lion enraged sheddeth the blood of a mighty
elephant, this arrow of mine resembling a serpent shall shed
thy blood.” Having delivered himself thus, he fred with wrath
set his shaft on his bow. Hearing in that encounter Atikaya's
wrathful speech fraught with hauteur, the highly powerful
and intelligent son of the king possessed of exceeding
grace, was transported with passion; and ho said—“Thou
canst not attain pre-eminence solely by virtue of thy speech.
One cannot be a worthy person simply by say. O wicked-
minded one, do thou display thy strength on me equipped
with the bow and holding arrows in my hands, To-day shall
my shafts decked in gold, drink thy Llood flowing from thy
person and issuing out of wounds inflicted by my arrows
resembling daris.—'This one is a boy’, thinking this, thou
ought not to slight me. Whether 1 am a boy or an oldt man’
—death shalt thou know in the conflict, It was as a boy
that Vishnu had overpowered the triune world with his
prowess.” Hearing Lakshmana’s words, fraught with reason
and high senso, VidyAdharas and ghosts, deities, Daityas and
Maharshis, and the high-souled Guhyakas then beheld that
marvel.t

Then Atik&ya, enraged, setting his arrow on his baw, shot
it at Lakshmana, as if-devouring up the welkin, Thereat,
Lakshmana—slayer of hostile beroes—wiil, a crescent sever-


* Isvara—Siva—His weapon is the trident.—-T.
+ The commentator says the passage means—Thou knowest (me) for


death itselt. 1 prefer the sense given. 7.
} The encounter that ensued between Lakshmana and Atikiya—T,


1348 RAMAYANA.


ed that sharpened shaft resembling a venomous serpent, as it
was descendigg. And seeing the shaft severed,like a serpent
having its person cut off, Atikaya waxing exceedingly
enraged,took up five arrows ; and the night-ranger discharged
them at Lakshmana, Thereat Bharata’s younger brother cut
off the approaching arrows with whetted shafts. And having
severed them with sharpened shafts, Lakshmana—slayer of
hostile heroes—took up a sharpened arrow, as if flaming in
energy. And taking it, Lakshmana set it on his excellent
bow ; and drawing the latter, vigorously discharged the shaft.
And that hero endowed with prowess hit that foremost of
Rakshasas in the forehead with that shaft having bent knots,
discharged from his bow drawn to its full bent.—And that
arrow piercing the forehead of that dreadful Rakshasa, and
smeared with blood, appeared like the lord of serpents in a
mountain. And the Rakshasa, smarting under Lakshmana's
shaft, showered, like the dreadful gateway of Tripurd
battered by Rudra. Then recovering himself and reflecting,
he said,*—' Excellent well! By this discharge of thy shaft,
thou approvest thyself as a foe in whom I can well glory.”
Having spoken thus candidly, be, folding his hands at
ease, and seated on the platform of his car, began to range:
init. And then that foremost of Rakshasas began to take
up, set, and shoot one, three, five, or seven shafts. And
those shafts resembling Fate itself, plated with gold at the
feathered parts,—and looking like the Sun himself (in
splendour),—discharged from the bow of the lord of Rakshasas,
lighted up the heavens, Thereat Raghava’s younger brother
by means of many a sharpened shaft calmly cut off all those
vollies of arrows shot by the R&kshasa. And finding all
those arrows riven in the encounter, that enemy of the lord
of the immortals, Ravana’s son, was fired with wrath, and
took up a whetted shaft. And then aiming that arrow, that
highly powerful one suddenly shot it; and with that, rushing


‘+ Chintaydmdsa—thought, | apprehend, means said in this connection,


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1349


on, hit Sumitra’s son in the chest. And struck in the encounter
by Atik€ya, the son of Sumitr& began to bleed copiously,
like a mad elephant discharging the temporal juice. And
then that lord at once extricated the arrow ; and then took
up a keen shaft and fixed the same on his weapon.*
And then he set a shaft (on his bow-string) reciting a formula
for the Agneyat weapon; and thereat his arrow as well as
bow flamed up. Then the highly powerful Atikaya took up
a Raudrat weapon; and thereon fixed a shaft plated with gold
at the feathered part, and resembling a serpent in sheen.
And even as the Reaper hurleth his rod, did Lakshmana hurl
that weapon inspired with divine energy, dreadful and
aflame,—at Atik’ya. And seeing that shaft set upon an
Agneya weapon, that night-ranger discharged a Raudra
arrow set upon a Solar weapon. And there like a pair of
infuriated serpents, those arrows with their beads flaming
in energy, baffled each other in the sky. And burning each
other, the shafts fell on the earth; and those best of arrows,
shorn of brilliance and reduced to ashes, were deprived of
their splendour. And having blazed in the welkin, those
two fell down to the earth reft of their lustre, Then Atikdya
wrought up with wrath discharged an arrow called Aishika
dedicated to Tashtri. Thereat the powerful son of Sumitra
severed that shaft by an Aindra§ weapon. Seeing Aishika
baffled, that Prince—son unto Ravana—fired with rage, fixed
an arrow on a Y&myall weapon; and then the night-ranger
shot that weapon at Lakshmana, And Lakshmana resisted
it by a Vayavya{ weapon. And then as a mass of clouds
poureth down showers, Lakshmana, enraged, poured volleys


fe. the bow.
Belonging to the god of Fire.
Relative to Rudra.
Belonging to Indra.
‘What could this be like # The commentator is silent over this import-
ant point —T.

{| Belonging to the Wind-god.


watt


1350 RAMAYANA.


of shafts on Ravana’s son. Thereupon, hitting Atikaya,
those arrows coming in contact with his mail, had their barbs
broken, and fell down to the earth. And seeing them baffled,
that slayer of hostile heroes—the renowned Lakshmana—
began to shower shafts by thousands. And albeit showered
with those arrows, that Rakshasa—the mighty Atikaya—in
that encounter was net pierced by them on account of his
impenetrable mail; and that best of men failed to hurt him
in the contest. Then approaching him, the Wind-god spake
unto bim, saying,—"This one hath received a boon from
Bralm&, and is covered with an impenetrable mail. Pierce
him with a Brihma* weapon, He cannot otherwise be slain.
This one clad in mail and endowed with prowess is forsooth
incapable of being slain by others.’ Hearing the words
of the Wind-god, Sumitra’s son like unto Indra in prowess
took an arrow endowed with fierce impetuosity, and at once
set it on a Brahma weapon, And on that sharp-headed
best of arrows being fixed on that foremost of weapons, the
cardinal quarters and the Moon and the Sun and the mighty
planets and the sky were seized with affright; and the
earth shook. And inspiring that arrow furnished with a
feathored part and resembling an emissary of Yama himself,
and fixing the same on his bow, Sumitra’s son in that
encounter discharged that shaft like unto tho thunder-bolt
atthe son of the enemy of Indra. And in that conflict
Alikfya beheld that shalt fair-feathered and having its
feathered part dight with splendid diamonds, acquiring
enhanced vehemence arising from its having been discharged
by Lakshmana,—and hissing and rushing on with tremendous
impetuosity. And seeing it, Atikfya swiftly resisted it with
countless sharpened shafts, But endowed with the energy
of Suparna himself, that shaft vehemently went to him, And
seeing that shaft flaming and resembling the Fatal Destroyer
himself,—coming, he, exerting himself to the utmost resisted


+ Belonging to Brahmi.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 135t


it with darts and résh#és and maces and adzes and javelins
and arrows. But beating down all those weapons of wonder-
ful forms, that arrow alive with flames, coming to the
diadem-decked head of Atikaya, severed the same (in twain)
And that head furnished with a corsalet, cut off by
Lakshmana’s arrow, suddenly dropped to the earth, like a
summit of Himavan toppling (to the ground). Seeing him
rolling on the earth, with his attire and ornaments scattered
about, those night-rangers that survived were overwhelmed
with grief. And with pale forces and distressed, they,
fatigued in consequence of the thrashing they had undergone,
suddenly began to cry in frightful accents. And on their
leader having been slain, those night-rangers that were about
(AtikBya), without waiting any longer,—overwhelmed with
panic, rushed towards the city. Andon their foe endowed
with terrific prowess and incapable of being confronted,
having been slain, innumerable monkeys filled with excess
of joy,and displaying countenances resembling blown lotuses,
paid homage unto Laksbmana working out their welfare.


SECTION LXIXIT.


eet


Hearwe Atikaya slain by the high-souled Lakshmana,the
king was filled with exceeding great anxiety and spoke thus,
—"Dhumraksha exceedingly wrathful,—best of those equipped
with all arms—and Akampana and Prahasta and Kumbha-
karna~all these exceedingly mighty heroes—Rakshasas ever
seeking warfare, conquerers of the forces of foes, and never
defeated by antagonists, have together with their hosts been
slain by Rama of untiring ~feats. And other Rakshasas
having gigantic bodies and skilled in various arms,—countless


1352 RAMAYANA.


high-souled heroes—have also been brought down. These
brothers were formerly bound by my son Indrajit of renowned
strength and prowess with terrific shafts, obtained as boons.
And I do not know by what power or superhuman virtue or
stupifying energy did those brothers—Rama and Lakshmana—
liberate themselves from those dreadful bonds,which could be
loosed neither by celestials nor the highly powerful Asuras
combined nor Yakyas, Gandharbas and Pannagas. And all
those heroic R&kshasa warriors that marched forth at my
bidding, have been destroyed by monkeys of marvellous
might. Him see I not that can now slay Rima with Lakshmana,
—that hero together with his forces and Sugriva and
Bibhishana, Alack ! mighty must be Rama and wondrous. is
his strength of weapon—he coming in contact with whose
prowess, these Rakshasas have met with their deaths, Now
Jet this palace be everywhere guarded by a vigilant garrison,
—as also the agoka wood where Sita is being ‘guarded. We
should always be acquainted with the ingress and egress (of
every person). And do ye, surrounded by forces, remain
where there are garrisons. And the night-rangers should in
the evening,at midnight and ‘in the morning always watch the
movements of the monkeys. The monkeys should by no
means be slighted. And ye should know whether the enemy
putteth forth (fresh) efforts,—and whether they advance ot
remain stationed where they at present are.’—Thereupon
those exceeding mighty Rakshasas did as they had been
desired. And having directed them, R&vana—lord of
R&kshasas—bearing the dart of ire (in his heart), in forlorn
guise entered his own mansion. And with the fire of his
rage blazing up, the exceedingly powerful sovereign of the
night-rangers, absorbed with the danger that had befallen his
son, began to sigh momentarily.


YVUDDHAKANDAM. % 1353


SECTION Lxxtt.


Tutose Rakshas that remained after the others had been
slain, swiftly informed R&vana that all those foremost of
Rakshasas—Devantaka and the rest, Trigiras, Atikaya and
others—had been slain. And suddenly hearing them slain,
the king with his eyes charged with brine, thinking of the
disastrous destruction of his sons and brothers,was extremely
agonized. Thereupon, seeing the king afflicted, and sunk in
a sea of sorrow, that foremost of car-warriors—son unto the
Rakshasa king—Indrajit, addressed (lie sire), saying—“O
father, it doth not behove thee to be overcome with this
excessive grief, inasmuch as, O lord of Nairitas, Indrajit yet
breaths. Smit by the enemy of Indra, (Raghava) can by no
means save his life in encounter. To-day behold R&ma along
with Lakshmana with their bodies torn with my shafts,—
lying down lifeless on the ground, having their persons
covered with my sharpened arrows! Hear this vow of the
foe of Indra, never swerving and instinct with prowess and
divinity,—this very day will I with unfailing shafts slay
Rama along with Laksmana. To-day fet Indra and
Vaivagwata and Vishnu and Rudra and Sadhyas and Vaigwas
and men and the Sun and the Moon, behold my immeasur-
able prowess, terrific like that of Vishnu at the sacrificial
ground of Vali.” Having spoken thus, that foe of the lord
of celestials endowed with exceeding energy, taking the king’s
permission, ascended a car having the velocity of the wind
itself, yoked with asses, and furnished with every ‘variety of
weapons. And ascending the car, resembling the car of


Hari himself, that exceedingly powerful repressor of enemies
at once set out for the field of battle. And as that high-souled
(hero) marched, he was followed by countless mighty
(Rakshasas) breathing spirits ; bearing bows in their strong


170


1354 RAMAYANA


hands. And some of those, resembling mountains, were
mounted on elephants, and some on superb steeds, and
some on bears, and some on beasts of prey, and some on
lions and: jackals,-and some of the Raikshasas endowed
with dreadful vigor were mounted on crows, and some on
swans, and some on peacocks,—they were equipped with
pragas and maces and xistringas and axes and clubs. And
alt sides were filled with the blares of conclis and the sounds
of kettle-drums, And then that enemy of the lord of celestiala
marched forth with impetuosity. And with an umbrella hued
Ike the Moon, that destroyer of enemies appeared like the
full Moon stationed in the sky. And that hero garnished
in golden ornaments—that foremost of all bowmen—was
fanned by an excellent and graceful golden chowrs. And
with Indrajit furnished with the splendour of the Sun
himself, and possessed of peerless prowess, Lank& looked
beauteous even as the firmament graced with the glorious
Sun,

Arriving at the scene of conflict, that highly powerful
repressor of foes arrayed his forces aound the car, And then
that foremost of R&kshasas with choice mantras duly
offered libations unto Fire* And that powerful lord of
Rakshasas there worshipping Fire with fragrant wreaths
and fried paddy, sacrificed unto it. And arms served for
Kéca and Bibhitakas for fuel ; and there were red cloths and
a ladle made of black iron. And spreading Fire there,
with éomaras representing Kéga, he seized the neck of a
living goat. And then the kindled smokeless fire blazing
up brilliantly, displayed signs betokening victory. Thereat,
with his* right tongue whirling, the Deity of Fire
himself looking like one made of gold,—arising, accepted
the offering. And then that (R&kshasa) skilled in weapons
acquired a Brahma weapon (from that Deity), and inspired
his bow and car with mantras. On that weapon baving been


* Hotabbokttram—sater of sarifcial offer ings—a designation of Fie.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 4355


inveked,* and on (the god of Fire) also having been
worshipped, the firmament furnished with the suns and stars
and planets was afflicted with affright. Having worshipped
(the god of Fire), that one endowed with the splendour of
Fire itself, that one possessed of the prowess of the great
Indra and gifted with inconceivable vigor, accoutred in
bows and arrows and swords and having steeds and cara
and darts,—disappeared in the sky. Then burning for
battle, setting up roars went out the Rakshasa ranks, throng-
ing with steeds and cars, and graced with pennons and
standards. And they fell to slaughtering monkeys in the
engagement with countless shafts, sharp, variegated and
decorated; as also with fomaras and hooks. And Rivana’s
son, fired with wrath, seeing those night-rangers, addressed
them, saying,—“Do ye, burning with a desire to destroy the
monkeys, fight cheerfully.” Thereat all those R&kshasas,
eager for victory, smittiug roars, covered the dreadful
monkeys with showers of shafts. And environed by Rakshas
in that encounter, het poured on the monkeys #d/vkas and
nardchas and maces and clubs. And trembling in the
encounter, those monkeys armed with trees at once began to
shower rocks and trees on Ravana’s son. Then the exceed-
ingly powerful Indrajit, son unto Ravana, endowed with
wondrous energy, pierced the bodies of the monkeys (with
arrows). And fired with wrath, that (hero) rejoicing the
Rakshasas with a single shaft pierced nine and seven monkeys
in that encounter. And that invincible hero in that coffict
mangled the monkeys with shafts resembling the Sun,
decked with gold. And their persons pierced in that contest,
and the mselves pained with those arrows, they began to fali
dowa, giving up all intention of fight, like mighty Asuras smit
by the celestials. And then waxing highly enraged, those
considerable monkeys in that conflict hotly pursued (Indrajit)


+ he. on the deity presiding over that weapon, being invoked.
+ Indrajit.


1356 - RAMAYANA.


sesembling the Sun himself and having terrific arrows for
his rays, And all the monkeys, with their bodies riven and
deprived of their senses, and bathed in blood and writhing
in torments,—pursued (Indrajit), And putting forth their
prowess in behalf of Rama, those monkeys, equipped with
rocks in the encounter, who had set apart their very lives
(for him), paused,shouting up loudly. And they in that conflict
showered trees and crags and mountain-tops on Ravana’s
son, And that destroyer of foes—the exceedingly energetic
son unto R&vana—resisted that mighty shower of trees and
stones capable of compassing destruction, Then that Lord
pierced the monkey-hosts in the encounter with shafis
resembling fire or venomous serpents. And piercing
Gandbamadana with eight and ten sharp arrows, he wounded
Nila stationed at a distance with nine shafts. And that one
endowed with redoublable prowess pierced Mainda with
seven shafts capable of piercing into the pith; and he
pierced Gaja with five shafts in the encounter. And he
pierced Jambavan with ten and Nila with thirty, And then
with dreadful sharp shafts obtained as boons, he rendered
Sugriva and Rishabha aud Angada and Dwivida (almost)
lifeless, And transported with passion, and resembling the
Five arisen at Doomsday, Indrajit, harassed other principal
monkeys with countless arrows. And in that terrific conflict,
he agitated the monkey-hosts with swift-speeding shafts,
resembling the Sun himself, deftly discharged (from his bow).
Then in that encounter, leaving his army, Indrajit became
suddenly invisible unto the monkey-hosts,—and began to
shower fierce arrows, like dark clouds pouring rain. And
with their persons torn by the arrows of the conqueror of
Sakra,—-slain by his power of illusion,—with their teeth
uprooted, those mouotain-like monkeys felt down in the
field, emitting frightful cries—like a mountain smit with
Indra’s thunderbolt. And in the conflict they could only
see sharp-pointed shafts among the monkey-ranks; but


VYUDDHAKANDAM. 1357


that foe of the celestial chief—the Rakshasa, hidden by
virtue of illusion, they could not discover there. And then
the high-souled ford of Rakshas covered all sides with sharp-
pointed shafts resembling the rays of the Sun; and he rived
the foremost ménkeys. And whirling darts and nistraigas
and axes, flaming and having the effulgence of Fire,—and
furnished with flames shooting forth sparks,—he discharged
them furiously at the forces of the savereign of monkeys,
And the monkey-leaders struck with Sakrajit’s shafts resembl-
ing flames, appeared like laughing Kincukas. And some
looking at the sky were struck at their eyes. And they
gradually began to hide themselves in each other and drop to
the earth. And that foremost of Rakshasas—Indrajit—with
prégas and darts and whetted arrows, inspired with mantras,
pierced all those powerful monkeys,—Hanum&n and Sugriva
and Angada and Gandhamadana and Jambavin and Sushena
and Vegadargin, and Mainda and Dwivida and Nila and
Gaviksha and Gavaya and Kesari and Hariloman and the
monkey Vidyutdanshtra and Suryyanana and Jyotimukha
and the monkey Dadhimukha and Pavakaksha and Nala and
the monkey Kumuda. And having pierced those foremost
moukeys with golden-hued maces, he showered on Rama
and Lakshmana arrows resembling the rays of the Sun,
And showered with those vollies of arrows, Rama, with-
out heeding that discharge resembling a very downpour,
reflecting, spoke unto Lakshm§na,—"O Lakshmana, thie
lord of Rakshasas, this foe of the lord of celestials, having
obtained the Brahma weapon,—after having brought down
the monkey-hosts, are assailing us with sharpened shafts,
And that high-souled heedful one, having been given a boon
by the Self-sprung, hath rendered his dreadful body invisible.
How can we slay him, who is fighting with upraised weapons,
but who hath hid bis body. The reverend Self-sprung, I
deem, is incomprehensible. And this is his weapon, embody-
ing his energy. Therefore, O intelligent one, do thou to-day


3358 RAMAYANA,


along with me calmly bear this. And let this foremost of
them all—this ford of R&kshasas—cover ail sides with the
showers of his shafts. And in consequence of this, the army
of the monkey-king with its greatest heroes fallen, doth not
appear to advantage. And seeing us also fallen senseless,—
and desisting from fight with our joy and anger gone off from
us, for certain will the enemy of the immortals, taking the
Fortune of fight seek his home.” And assailed by Indrajit
with networks of arrows, they were then sore distressed in
the field. And having struck them with sadness, Indrajit
from joy shouted in the encounter. And having thus worsted
in battle that monkey-army and Rama along with Lakshmana,
he speedily entered the city ruled by the hand of the Ten-
necked one, And extolled by the Yatudhdnas, he, filled with,
delight, related everything unto his sire.


SECTION LXXIV«


— Sr


Ano they* were rendered inert in the field; and the
army of the monkey-leaders was stupified, with Sugriva
and Nila and Angada and Jambavan,—and they did not show
any signs of activity. Thereupon, secing them dispirited,
that foremost of intelligent persons—Bibhishana—cheering
them up with his peerless speech, said,—“Ye heroes of the
king of monkeys, do not give way to fear. This is not the
time to indulge in grief at this place ; for. the sons of that
noble one,t—inactive and depressed, and seeming to be
wounded with the showers of Indrajit’s sbafts,—are in reality


Rama and Lakshmana,
+ Dagaratha.


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1359


in this plight, for showing reverence unto the words* of the
Self-sprung one.—On him the Self-sprung hath conferred the
mighty Brahm& weapon of unfailing power; and the king’s
sons are doing honour to by lying down on the field of
battle. Why then do yo grieve now?” Hearing the words
of Bibhishana and honoring the Brahma weapon, Hanum&n
spoke as follows :—‘The host of the quick-paced monkeys
hath been slain by this weapon. Let us go and console them
who are still living.” And those two great heroes—Hanuman
and that foremost of the Rakshasas, with fire-brands in their
hands, began to range to and fro in the battle field. And
they beheld there the earth strewn on all sides with monkeys
lying down like so many bills and various shining weapons.
And some of these monkeys were deprived of their tails,
some of their hauds, some of their thighs, some of their legs,
some of their fingers, and some of their heads. And blood
was gushing out from the persons of some, and others were
urinating out of fear. And Bibhishana and Hanuman be-
held there Sugriva, Angada, Nila, Gandhamadana, Jambavan,
Sushena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, and
the monkey, Dwivida,—almost slain. And Bibhishana and
HanumAn saw in the field seven and sixty Aofis of fleet.
footing monkeys slain (in battle) at the filth part of the day
by the darling of the Self-sprung. And surveying that
host worsted, dreadful like the surges of the sea, Hanuman
and Bibhishana began to search for Jambav&n, And finding
that heroic son of Praj&pati, afflicted with natural decrepilude,
aged, and resembling smouldering fire,—-wounded with
hundreds of shafts, Pulastya’s son said," noble one, hath
not thy life been destroyed with those sharp shafts ?”*
Hearing Bibhishana’s words, J&mbav&n—best of bears—
evoking utterance with extreme effort, said,—"O foremost
of Nairitas, endowed with exceeding prowess, I know thee by
thy voice. Having my person pierced with sharp shafts, I


* Mantra,


1360 RAMAYANA,


cannot see thee with my eyes. Doth he through whom
Anjana as well as Matarigwa® are blessed with fair offapring,—
doth that prince of monkeys—Hanuman—live >” Hearing
JAmbavan’s speech, Bibhishaua said,—Why, passing by the
son of the bigh and mighty,t dost thou enquire after the
Wind-god’s offspring ? O noble one, thou dost not show that
overflowing affection either for king Sugriva or Raghava that
thou showest for the son of the Wind-god.” Hearing
Bibhishana’s words, Jambav8n said,—‘Hear, O foremost of
Rakshasas, why I enquire after the Wind-god’s son. While
this hero is alive, this force, albeit destroyed, liveth ; but if
Hanuman is reft of life, although living, we are destroyed. O
child, if the Wind-god’s offspring, resembling bis sire himself
or (the deity of) Fire in prowess, is alive,there is hope for our
lives.” Then approaching that aged one, Hanum&n—son
unts the Wind-god—saluted him humbly, holding Jambavan’s
feet. Hearing Hanum§n’s voice, that foremost af monkeys,
with his senses sorely smarting, doemed himself as baving
regained his life. Then that exceedingly energetic one
addressed Hanum&n, saying,—"Come, O powerful monkey.
It behoveth thee to rescue the monkeys. There is none else.
Endowed with profuse prowess, thou art the greatest friend
of these. This is the hour when thou shouldst display thy
might. Any other see I not. Do thou cheer up this host
consisting of bears and monkeys ; and do thou also heal the
wounds of these two tormented by them. Bounding sheer over
the main, thou, O Hanum4n,shouldst repair to the Himavan—
foremost of mountains, There thou wilt see that best of
mountains—the golden Rishabha of terrific aspect, and, O
smiter of foes, the peak also of Kailiga. Lying in the lap
of these two, thou, O hero, O powerful monkey, wilt see
the mountain of medicines, fraught with healing herbs of all
kinds. On its summit thou wilt find four medicinal herbs


* The Wind-god.
+ Vide Ramlet.


YUDDHAKANDAM. “436%


flaming ard illumining the ten cardinal quarters—zis.,
Mritasanjivani,* Vigalyakarani,t Suvarnakarani,t and the
mighty medicine, Sandhani, QO Hanum§n, providing thyself
with these, thou shouldst come hither without delay, Do
thou, O offspring of the Wind-god§ bringing back lives
wnuto these monkeys, cheer them up.” Thereat Hanuman
Gilled himself with energy, even as the Ocean heaveth with
the force of the winds (blowing on its breast), And ascend-
ing the summit of that mountain.]] and burting it with his
tread,that hero—Hanumfin—appeared like a second mountain.
And crushed under the tread of that monkey, the mountain
was dispirited ; and sore distressed, it could hardly contain
itself, Aud the trees on it began to topple to the earth ;
and on account of the vehemence of the monkey, they flamed
up. And smitten by Hanum§n, its peaks were scattered
around, And monkeys could no longer dwell on that fore-
most of mountains, which, being hard pressed (by Hanum&n),
was trembling all over, with its slopes covered with broken
trees and rocks. And with her giant gateways shaking, and
the doors of hee edifices broken, that night Lank&, over.
whelmed with fright, seemed to be dancing. And the
offspring of the Wind-god, resembling a mountain itself,
bringing that mountain to sore straits, agitated the entire
earth with her Oceans. And hurting the mountain with his
tread, he, opening wide his mouth resembling that of a mare,
sent up loud shouts, terrifying the night-rangers. And
hearing those tremendous roars as he kept emitting cries,
the powerful Rakshasas were quite stupified, And bowing
down unto the Ocean, that subduer of enemies, the Wind-
god's son, endowed with dreadful prowess, began to ponder


* Lit, reviving the dead.
+ Lit. healing wounds inflicted by darts,
{ Zit, transmuting any thing to gold.

§ Gandhabakdtanaya—lit., son wato the bearer of smell—a designation of
the Wind in Sanskrit —T.


aq Trikuta.
a71


31362 RAMAYANA,


over the mighty mission with which he had been entrusted
in the interests of RAghava—And, then upraising his tail
resembling a serpent, bending his back, contracting his ears,
and opening his mouth looking like that of a mare, that one
possessed of terrific impetuosity, bounded into the sky.
And with the vehemence of his rush,—he carried away in his
wake whole tracts of trees, and rocks, and crags, and inferior
monkeys ;* and alter having been carried away some
distance by the vehemence of his arms and thighs, they, at
length losing their velocity, fell into the waters (of the Ocean.)
And stretching his arms resembling serpents, the son of the
Wind-god endowed with the prowess of Garurat coursed on
towards the monarch of mountains, as if making all the
quarters tremble. And seeing the sea with its hosts of
billows roliing furiously, and with the confideracies of aquatic
animals bewildered by the angry waters, he coursed on
rapidly, like the discus discharged by the hand of Vishnu,
And surveying hills and birds and pools and rivers and tanks
and splendid cities and flourishing provinces, that one equal
to his sire himself in celerity, held his way. And that hero—
Hanumin—like unto bis father in prowess, and incapable of
being fatigued, vigorously proceeded along the orbit of the
Sun. And that powerful monkey possessed of the speed of
the Wind itself, and having mighty impetuosity, careered,
making all sides resound with his roars. And remembering
Jambavn’s words, that redoubtable monkey, son unto the
Wind-god, possessed of terrific prowess, and resembling a
mountain, suddenly saw (before him) the Himav&n;
furnished with countless cascades and numerous caves and
rivulets; with splendid summits appearing like massess of pale
clouds ; and graced with various trees. And arriving at that
lord of mighty mountains, furnished with excellent towering
golden summits, he saw the great sacred asylums (of the


* Residing in the Trikuta mountain.
4 «The text has, the Foe of scrpexis—an appellation of Garura


VYUDDHAKEANDAM. 1363


ascetics), inhabited by the flower of celestial saints.
And he saw Brahmakoga() and Rajatalaya® and Sakrflaya()
and Rudragarapramoksha@ and Hay&nana() and the flaming
Brahmagiras,/) and the servants of Vaivagwata.~) And
he saw the abode of the Fire-god, and the abode of Vaigra-
vana and the effulgent Suryyanivandhana,® and the abode
of Brahma,() and the bow of Sankara, and the navel of the
Earth.) And ho saw Kailaga of terrific aspect,and the stone()
of Himayan, and that bull,@ and the gotden mountain, and
that foremost of mountains furnished with all medicinal
herbs, flaming, and illuminated with every kind of medicinal
plants, And beholding that flaming mass of fire, the offspring
of Vasava’s(™) emissary wondered. And bounding up to the
lord of medicinal mountains, he fell to searching for the
drugs, And that mighty monkey--the Wind-god’s son—
leaving behind a thousand yoya@nas, began to range the
mountain containing the divine remedies in its entrails. Aad
those potent medicines,in that foremost of mountains, knowing
(before-haud) that one was coming seeking for them, rendered
themselves invisible. And not seeing them, the high-souled
Hanuman was angered; and from wrath he set up roars,


(a) The place of Hiranyagarbha,

(The place of Rajatantbha—sileer.naveled—another form of Hiranya-
garbha,

(The abode of Sakra.

{d) The place wherefrom Rudra discharged his arrow on the cecasion of
the destruction of Tripura,

{e) The place of the Horse-necked,

(A) The place of the deity presiding over the Brahma weapon,

(g) An appellation of Yama,

(A) The spot where the suns meet.

@ The place of the four-faced Brahma,

(A) The spot of Prajapati.

@ On which Rudra sat when engaged in asceticism.

(Which bad been mentioned by Jambavdn,

(m) ‘The emissary of VAsava in his cloud-form is the Wind driving the
cloud ; and the passage refers to Hanumin.—T.


2364 RAMAYANA.


And not brooking that, (Hanum4n) with eyes resembling
glowing fire, addressed that foremost of mountains, saying, —
“What is this that thou hast decided on, that thou showest
no compassion for Raghava? But, O lord of mountains,
to-day witness thyself, overpowered by my arms and torn in
pieces !” And (anon) on a sudden, he violently rooted up its
summit with trees and elephants and gold, and furnished with
thousand varieties ‘ef ore,—baving its tops torn and its
slopes aflame, And uprooting it, he sprang into (the bosom
of the air), terrifying the worlds containing celestials and
the lords thereof. And hymned by countless rangers of the
air, that one endowed with the terrific impetuosity of Garura
himself, taking that summit furnished with the splendour
of the Sun, went along the orbit of the Sun. And near the
Sun, that Sun-like one seemed to be another Sun. And
with that mountain, the offspring of the bearer of perfumes
appeared surpassingly grand, like very Vishnu equipped with
the flaming discus having a thousand edges. And seeing
him, the monkeys shouted—and he also, seeing them,
shouted in delight. And hearing their tremendous cheers,
those residing in Lanka shouted still more dreadfully. And
then the high-souled one dropped on that best of mountains in
the midst of the moukey-forces; and, bowing down unto
the principal monkeys there, he embraced Bibhishana. And
then those sons of that king of men, smelling the perfume
of that mighty medicine, were then and there healed of their
wounds; and the heroic monkeys also sat up. And all the
heroic monkeys were instantly healed and cured; and those
also that were slain (in battle), through the smell of that best
of drugs, sat up, like persons risen after sleep at break of
day. Ever since the monkeys and Rakshasas had begun to
fight, for maintaining honor, all those R&kshas:is that were
slain there by the mighty monkeys, were thrown into the sea.
Then that monkey, the offspring of the bearer of fragrance,
endowed with terrific speed, took that medicinal mountain


YUDDHAKANDAM. “1365


(bach) unto Himavin and again presented himself before
Rama.


SECTION LXxv.
erate


Thien the exceedingly energetic lord of monkeys,Sugriva,
said unto Hanuman these words fraught with import,—
“Inasmuch as Kumbhakarna hath been slain as also the
princes,* Ravana can no longer defend the city.t Now let
those principal monkeys that are endowed with great strength
and that are furnished with fleetness, taking fire-brands
(in their hands) rapidly rush towards Lank&"” Then when
the Sun had set and at the terrific front of Night, those
foremost of monkeys marched towards Lank&, equipped with
fire-brands. And charged at all points by numbers of
monkeys armed with fire-brands, those fierce-eyed (Rakshasas)
that guarded the gates.f suddenly fled away. And thereat,
(the monkeys) delighted set fire to gates and upper apart-
ments and spacious high-ways and various by-ways and
edifices. And the fire§ burnt their|] mansions by thousands ;
and mountain-like superstructures toppled headlong to the
earth. And there burnt aguruz, and sweet sandal, and pearls,
and sheeny gems, and diamonds and corals. And there


© Nishuditdh—slain, teft out for eaphony.

+ Upanirhtram is a contested term, Kataka gives the sense adopted by
me. Tirtha saya it means ‘Ravana cannot give battle in the open field’
According to others, it means ‘He cannot offer trace to us.—T.

$ Arakshth—according to some means gates, According to others, a
gulma or division of an army—T.

$ Hutabhuh—tit, eater of sacrificial offsprings—a designation of Fire.

& According to the commentatar this refers to the fire lighted by the
monkeys, I differ —T.


1366 - RAMAYANA,


burnt linen and fine silk. and devkas and various kinds
of woolen cloths; and vessels of gold, and weapons;
divers kinds of furniture, trappings and ornaments of
steeds ; cords for tying elephants ; burnished ornaments for
cars ; armour of warriors ; and hides of horses and elephants,
And swords and bows and bow-strings and arrows and
tomaras* and ankugast and darts. And blankets and chowris
and tiger-skins and musk and other things. And pearls and
excellent gems; and edifices all around. And there the fire
burneth heaps of various kinds of arms, And then the fire
burnt various kinds of curious structures, and the dwellings
of Rakshasas and all householders. And there the fire
flaming up again and again burnt down by hundreds and
thousands the houses of the denizons of Lank&,—clad in
curious golden mail; and wearing wreaths and ornaments and
attires ; having their eyes wildly moving in intoxication ;
reeling in drink; those whose paramours were dressed
in flowing apparels; or those wroth with their foes; or
bearing maces and darts and swords in their hands; or
engaged in eating or drinking ; or asleep with their beloved
on costly couches ; or who, agitated with fright, were hastily
going taking their sons with them.—And that fire burnt down
firm-based rich dwellings furnished with innumerable apart.
ments, and garnished with golden Moons and crescents,—
and mansions having graceful crests; and variegated
windows and daises raised there, embellished with rubies
and lapises, and seeming to touch the Sun; and piles
resembling mountains in grandeur,—and resonant with the
cries of Kraunchas and peacocks and the tinklings of
ornaments. And the flaming gateways all round appeared
like clouds in the rainy season lighted up by lightning, or
like the peaks of a mighty mountain ablaze with a forest


* An Iron club.—T,
+ The hook used to drive an elephant.—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1367


conflagration. And superb damsels asleep in lofty edifices,*
being burnt, cast away ‘their ornaments and shrieked. And
consumed by the fire, buildings began to drop down like the
summits of a mighty mountain smit with the thunder-bolt
of the thuaderer. And those burning, appeared from a
distance like the peaks of Him&laya aglow. And in
consequence of those tops of the edifices burning and of the
living flames, that night Lavk& looked as if swarming with
flowering Kingukas, And with elephant-ridcrs, and elephants,
and steeds let loose, Lankd appeared like the Ocean at the
hour of Universal tumbling,—with its ferocious aquatic
animals whirling in wild chaos. Sometimes, an elephant
seeing a steed let looso,—was flying away in fear; and
sumetimes a horse seeing a frightened elephant,was stopping,
himself seized with fear.—And on Lanka burning, the mighty
main with the reflection (of the conflagration) looked like an
Ocean of red waters, And in a short time that city set on
fire by the monkeys, looked like the earth glowing at the
time of the Universal dissolution, And the cries of the
females amidst the drift of smoke, heated by the flames,
could be heard from an hundred Yoyanas. And as Rakshasas
having their bodies burnt came out of houses, monkeys eager
fur encounter on a sudden sprung upon them. And the shouts
of the monkeys and the cries of the R&kshasas made the ten
cardinal quarters and the ocean and the Earth resound.

And on those high souled ones—both Rama and
Lakshmana—having been cured of their wounds, possess-
ing themselves in calmness, took up their excellent bows,
And Rama drew that best of bows. And thereat there
was heard a tremendous twang striking terror into the
Rakshasas, And drawing his redoubtable bow, Rama
appeared like the reverend enraged Bhava, drawing his bow
having sounds and instinct with Brahma energy. And the
twang of Rama’s bow, drowning the roars of both the


* Vimdne, according te RamAnuya, is a seven-storied edifice—T.


1368 RAMAYANA.


monkeys and the Rakshasas,—was alone heard. And the
utulations of the monkeys and the cries of the Rakshasas and
the ratule of Rama’s bow—these three filled the ten cardinal
quarters. And with the shafts discharged from his bow, the
gateway of the city resembling the summit of Kaillica was
crushed in pieces, scattered around on the ground. And
seeing Rama’s shafts in cars and dwellings, the preparations
for conflict were pushed on with great vigor. And in conse-
quence of the foremost Rakshasas prepating for fight, and
emitting roars, that night appeared like the Fatal Night
itself. Aud the foremost monkeys were directed by the
high-souled Sugriva, saying—“Ye monkeys, do ye fight,
approaching the gate lying at hand. But he that flyeth from
his ranks, should be slain by main force”. As the principal
monkeys stationed themselves at the gate, equipped with
fire-brands, wrath took possession of Ravana. And as he
yawned, the wind (blowing) from his mouth), filled the tea
cardinal regions ; and his wrath resembled that appearing in
the person of Rudra. And wrought up with a mighty rage,
he sent forth Kumbha and Nikumbha—both sons of Kumbha-
karna—in company with innumerable R&kshasas.—And
in accordance with Rayana’s command, Yupaksha and
Sonitaksha, and Prajangha, and Kampana went with
Kumbhakarna’s sons. And, setting up leonine roars, he
commanded all those highly powerful Rakshasas, saying,—
“Do ye go this very day for battle.” Thus directed, those
heroic Rakshasas, equipped with flaming weapons, went out,
roaring again and again. And the firmament was iltuminated
with the splendour of the ornaments of the Rakshasas and
the splendour of their persons and the fire kindled by the
monkeys. And there the light of the Moon and that of the
stars and the brilliance of their ornaments,—combined, lighted
up the welkis.—And the beams of the Moon and the brilliance
of the ornaments and the flaming splendour of the planets
emblazoned all round the forces of the monkeys and


YUDDHARANDAM. 1369


Rakshasas. And the tight of half-burnt houses, again, falling
on the restless ripples of the sea, made it wear an extremely
beautiful aspect. And those dreadful Rakshasa hosts,
possessed of dreadful prowess and energy, were seen,—with
ensigns and banners; excellent swords and paracwadhas,*
tetrific steeds and cars and elephants rife with paths,t and
flaming darts and clubs and scimitars and yrésas and tomaras
and bows ; bearing blazing prdésas ; ringing with the tinklings
of hundreds of balls; with their arms encased in golden
networks ; flourishing axes ; whirling their mighty weapons 5
fixing shafts on their bows; making the air swoon away
with the perfumes of their wreaths; extremely terrific;
swarming with heroes ; sending out sounds like those of the
sea, And seeing the army of the Rakshasas incapable of
being coped with advance, the monkey-forces began to move
and send up loud cheers. And thereat that array of
Rakshasas vehemently sprang forward before the force of the
foe, like unto insects plunging into aflame. And whirling
with their arms bludgeons and acanis, that army of Rakshasas
appeared exceedingly grand. . And the monkeys, eager for
encounter, darted forward like maniacs; and began to
despatch the night-rangers with rocks and trees and clenched
fist. And R&kshasas possessed of dreadful prowess with
whetted arrows swiftly cut off the heads of falling monkeys.
And the Rakshasas ranged there, with their ears torn with
teeth, or their heads broken by blows, or their limbs crushed
with the discharge of crags. And in the same way other
gtim-visaged night-rangers slew with sharpened swords
the foremost of monkeys on all sides. And one about to
slay another was himself slain by the latter; and one, about
to bring another down, was himself brought down (by his
adversary, and one that was railing at another, was in turn


*- A platoon consisting of one chariot, one elephant, three horse and five
foot~-T.
+ A kindjof sword,


172


1370 RAMAYANA,


rebuked by his enemy; and one who was going to bite his,
foe, was himself bitten by him. And one was crying ‘Give,'*
and his adversary anon giveth; and another, again said,—
‘I will give. Why puttest thyself to trouble? Stay’ Thus
there did they accost each other. And there was waged a
terrific encounter between the monkeys and the Rakshasas,—
in which arms lay scattered about ; and armour and weapons
strewn around; and mighty prdcast were upraised; and
which was faught with blows and darts and swords and
Kuntalas.~ And in that conflict the Rakshasas slaughtered
monkeys by tens and sevens. And then the monkeys
hemmed in the Rakshasa-forces, with their apparels falling
off and with their mail and standards strewn around.


SECTION LXXVE,


——_


On that furious and destructive carnage proceeding,
Angada, eager for encounter,approached the heroic Kampana.
Thereat, challenging Angada in wrath, he assailed him with
impetuosity. And Kampana dealt a blow to Angada with
his mace; and thereat, wounded with it, he reeled. Then
regaining his senses, that energetic one hurled 2 mountain-
top. Borne down by the blow, Akampana dropped down
to the earth, And seeing Kampana slain in the conflict,
Sonitaksha mounted on a car, intrepidly rushed against
Angada. And he then impetuosly pierced Angada with
sharpened shafts, keen and capable of cleaving the body


* Battle.

+ A bearded dart.

= What could this be like? The commentator is mute. Wilson has
Kuntaliké—butter-knife or scoop. Kuntala may, however, mean # plough.—T.


YUDDHAEANDAM. 31371


and resembling the Fatal Fire itself in appearance,—with
-‘Kshuras(@) and Ksburapras(} and Nar&chas@ and Vatsa-
dantas@) and Sitiamkhas( and Karnis() and Salas(s) and
Vipatas,@) and countless (other) whetted arrows. And the
powerful son of Vali—Angada—endowed with prowess having
his person pierced with arrows suddenly smashed (his
adversary’s) car and arrows and dreadful bow. And thereat,
Sonitaksha swiftly took up his sword and shield ; and without
reflecting for a moment, that vigorous one sprang forward.
And the powerful Angada, speedily bounding up, seized
his enemy’s sword and holding the same with his hands
shouted. And then hitting at (Alkampana’s) shoulder-blade,
that powerful monkey—Angada—hewed him io twain, his
blow going obliquely down like the sacred thread, And
taking that terrific sword, and shouting again and again, in
the field, Vali’s son rushed against other enemies. And then
strong and heroic Yupaksha accompanied by Prajangha,—
mounted on a car, wrathfully approached the mighty son of
Vali. And taking an iron mace, that hero, Sonit&aksha,
adorned with a golden engada,—attaining a little respite,
advanced against Angada. And that redoubtable hero, the
powerful Prajangha, also, accompanied by Yup&ksha, fired
with weath,equipped with a mace,advanced towards the son of
Vali endowed with exceeding prowess, And placed between
those two—Sonitaksha and Prajangba—that foremost of
monkeys appeared like the full Moon placed between the
Visakhas.@ And Mainda and Dwivida defending Angada,


(@) Arrows having razor-like edges.
() Crescent-shaped shafts.
(©) Arrows made entirely of iron.
(2) Arrows resembling the tecth of calves.
“(@ Arrows resembling the feathers of the Kanka.
(/) Arrows furnished with two sides resembling cars.
(g) Arrows with short leads.
G) Arrows resembling the tops of Karaviras—Tirtha.
@ The asterisks so named.


4372 ; RAMAYANA,


remained beside him, desirous of witnessing the encounter
between those two (combatants). And fired with fury, those
huge-bodied R&kshasas endowed with dreadful prowess,
equipped with swords and shafts and maces,—being on their
guard, fell upon the monkeys. And the encounter that took
place between those three lords of monkeys combined (on
one side), and the three redoubtable Rakshas1s (on the other),
was dreadful and capable of making people’s down stand on
end, And they,* taking up trees, hurled them in the conflict
(against their antagonists); and the powerful Prdjangha
resisted all those with his swords. And (the monkeys) in the
contest showered rocks and trees on the cars (of their
enemies: and the exceedingly strong Yup&aksha cut them
off with vollies of arrows. And the powerful Sonit&ksha,
endowed with prowess, with his mace severed in the middle
the trees which Dwivida and Mainda had uprooted and
discharged. And summoning speed, Prajangha darted against
Vali's son, upraising a huge scimitar capable of piercing
into the vitals of trees. And seeing him approach, that lord
of monkeys possessed of exceeding strength and great
prowess struck him with an Agwakarna tree ; and with a blow
smote his antagonist on his arm holding a mstringa, And
seeing the sword resembling a mace dropped to the earth,that
exceedingly mighty one clenched his fist into a blow like
unto the levin ; and that one,endowed with wondrous energy,
smote in the forehead that foremost of monkeys possessed
of redoubtable prowess. And thereat be for a moment was
staggered, And then recovering his senses, the energetic
and powerful son of Vali by means of his clenched fist severed
Prajangha’s head from his body. Thereat Yupaksha, seeing
his uncle slain’ in battle, with his eyes filled with tears,
finding his shafts exhausted, swiftly descended from his car
and took asword. And finding Yup&ksha charge, Dwivida,
waxing wroth, speedily smote him on the breast; and that


* The mookeys,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1373


powerful one also seized him. And finding his brother taken,
the highly energetic Sonitéksha then dealt the mighty
Dwivida a blow in the chest. And overcome by that blow,
that one endowed with great strength, shook; and Dwivida
seized his antagonist’s upraised mace. In the meanwhile
Mainda came to the side of Dwivida. And Sonitaksha and
Yup&ksha, bestirring themselves, began to vehemently and
forcibly drag and pull those (two) monkeys, And Dwivida
with his nail tore Sonitdksha’s face ; and that powerful one
violently bringing him down to the earth, pressed him with
might and main, And fired with wrath, Mainda—foremost
of monkeys—grasped Yup&ksha with lis arms; and that one
dropt down dead on the earth. And thereupon the force of
the lord of the Rakshasas, having its foremost heroes slain,—-
and aggrieved thereat, went to where Kumbhakarna’s son
was. And then cheering up the flying forces, that best (of
Rakshas),—-the energetic Kumbha—seeing that Raksha host
with its mighty heroes slain by highly powerful monkeys
crowned with success, began to perform difficult feats
in the encounter. And heedfully taking his bow, that first
of bowmen discharged shalts resembling venomous serpents
capable of piercing the body. And his excellent bow with
shafts shone resplendent like the very bow of Indra himself
affluent with the splendour of Airavata and lightning. And
then drawing his bow to its utmost bent, he hit Dwivida with
a feathered shaft knobbed with gold. And suddenly wounded
with it, that best of monkeys having the splendour of Trikuta,
fell down senseless to the earth, stretching his legs wide,
And Mainda, seeing his brother, broken in mighty encounter,
furiously rushed forward, taking a gigantic crag; and that
one possessed of great strength, hurled it at the Rakshasa.
And thereat Kumbha severed that crag with fire shalts
discharged (from his bow). And then aiming other fair-
headed arrows resembling venomous snakes, that exceedingly
energetic one smote Dwivida’s elder brother in the chest.


1374 RAMAYANA.


And struck (with those arrows), that leader of monkey-
bands, Mainda, with his marrow pierced therewith, fell down
to the earth, deprived of his senses, And Angada seeing
his uncles* endowed with exceeding prowess, overpowered,
darted vehemently at Kumbha staying with bow upraised.
And as he descended, Kumbha pierced him with fire shafts;
and as one pierceth an elephant with ¢omaras, he also pierced
(Angada) with three other arrows. And the powerful
Kumbha pierced Angada with a great many arrows, sharp-
pointed, whetted, keen and ornamented with gold. And Vali's
son Angada, albeit pierced all over in his person, did not
shake ; and he kept showering on hist head stones and trees.
And the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off and cleft all
those (stone and trees) discharged by Vali,s son. And seeing
him spring up, Kumbba pierced that monkey-leader on the
grouud with shafls, even as one assaileth an elephant with
fire-brands. And blood gushed out of his closed eyes,
And then covering his eyes with his hand, Angada with
another took a sé/a that was hard by. And placing
on his breast the sé/@ furnished with shoulders, and
pulling its branches and bending its top, he cleared it of
its foliage, in that mighty encounter, And then in the sight
of all the Rakshas he violently discharged that tree resembl-
ing the very banner of Indra and appearing like Mandara
itself, And thereat hef severed it with seven sharp shafts
capable of piercing the body. And Angada experienced a
sharp pang and fell down deprived of his senses. And seeing
the invincible Angada down fike ebbing sea, the foremost
monkeys informed Raghava of it. And Rama, hearing that
Vali's son had come to grief in tertific fight, directed
the principal moukeys, headed by Jambavan. And hearing
Rama's command, the monkeys, fired with wrath, charged


* Maternal uncles,
+ Kumbha’s,
+ Kumbha,


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1378


Kumbha, staying with his bow upraised. And those powerful
monkeys, with their eyes crimsoned with choler and bearing
rocks and trees in their hands, were engaged in defending
Angada. And Jambavin and Sushena and the monkey,
Vegadarci, wrought with wrath, darted against that hero—son
unto Kumbhakarna. And seeing them spring forward; he
covered up those exceedingly mighty lords of monkey, with
showers of shafts, even as a crag obstructeth the course of a
current. And even the great deep cannot see his own
shores, those high-souled lord of monkeys, coming within (he
range of his arrows, could not even see. And seeing those
monkeys sore distressed by the shafts, the king of the
monkeys, Sugriva, in that conflict taking his brother's son
on his back, rushed against the son of Kumbhakarna, even as
a powerful lion rusheth at an elephant ranging on the slopes
of a mountain. And that mighty monkey, uprooting many
an agwakarna and other mighty trees of various kinds,
discharged them (at the foe). And by means of his sharp
arrows the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off that down-
pour of trees covering the welkin; and incapable of being
resisted. And being baffled those trees louked like gataghnis,
And seeing that shower of trees riven by Kumbha, the
graceful lord of the monkeys endowed with exceeding strength
and prowess, did not feel any mortification. And suddenly
attacked, he bearing those arrows, seized Kumbha’s bow
resembling in resplendence the very bow of Indra, And
swiftly bounding up and performing that feat difficult of being
achieved, he, exceedingly enraged, addressed Kumbha
resembling an elephant shorn of his tusks, saying,—""O elder
brother of Nikumbha, marvellous are thy might and the
force of thyself as well as the modesty and prowess that are
thine and Ravana's. And, O thou equal unto Prahrada or
Vali or the slayer of Vritra or Varuna or Kuvera! thou alone
walkest in the wake of thy yet mightier father. As mental an-
guish doth not dog one that hath controlled his senses,—the


1376 RAMAYANA.


celestials cannot cope in conflict with thee alone, O repressor
of foes, O of mighty arms, bearing thy dart in thy hand. O
thou of high intelligence, put forth thy prowess! and do thou
also witness my work. It is only by virtue of thé boon he
hath received, that thy uncle can bear the deities and the
Danavas, But Kumbhakarna copeth with the immortals and
Asuras by means of his native might. And in the bow
equal to Indrajit himself and in power equal to Ravana, thou
now in might and energy art the foremost of Rakshasas.
And to-day let all creatures witness the mighty and
wonderful encounter in conflict between thee and me, like
unto the meeting of Sakra and Samvara. And unparal-
leled is the feat thou bast performed; and thou hast
displayed thy skill in weapons. And heroic monkeys
endowed with dreadful vigor, have been brought down by
thee, And, O hero it is only because of the apprehension* of
censure of the people that I do not slay thee who art fatigued
in consequence of the acts that thou hast performed, And
reposing from fight, do thou see my strength!” And being
thus honored (by Sugriva) with fair speech, (Kumbha) flamed
up like a flame into which oblations have been poured.
And then Kumbha seized Sugriva by the arms, And like
two elephants in rut, they sighing momentarily, fastened on
each other’s person, and possessed each other,—and from
fatigue emitting from their mouth flames mixed with vapour.
And with the stamping of their feet, the earth was rent into
rivers, and the main was waxed, with ite billows surging
furiously. Then Sugriva lifting up Kumbha clean, violently
plunged him into the salt wash, making his eyes acquainted
with the locality of the deep. And in consequence of
Kumbha’s plunge, the waters heaving up, rolled on all
sides like the Vindhya or Mandara. Then springing up,
and bringing Sugriva down, Kumbha, transported with wrath


* fe, Lest people should censure me, saying,—‘Sugriva slew Kumbha
when he was fatigued in fight —T,


YUDDHARANDAM. 1377


dealt a blow on his chest, like unto the levin. And thereat
bis skin was rent, and blood began to gush out—and the
impetus of that blow broke Sugriva’s bones. And the
vehemence (of the blow} caused a great fire to blaze up at
that spot; even asthe thunder-bolt smiting the mountain
Meru, maketh place blazed. And the mighty Sugriva—
foremost of monkeys—sorely handled by him, fastened his
fingers into a box resembling the thunder-bolt, and furnished
with all the effulgence of the solar disc having a thousand
rays. And then that powerful one made that blow descend
right on Kumbha's breast. And agonised with that stroke,
Kumbha reft of his senses, dropped like unto a fire that hath
Jost its brightness. And overpowered by that blow, the
R&kshasa anon dropped down, like unto the bright Lohitinga
dropping from the firmament urged on by Destiny. And the
aspect of the falling Kumbha with his breast broken by the
blow, appeared like that of the Sun routed by Rudra.
And on his being slain, in encounter, by the foremost of
monkeys en:lowed with terrific strength, the earth with her
hitls and woods, shook; and a mighty fear took possession
of the Rakshas.


SECTION Uxxvil.


Sceinc his brother slain by Sugriva, Nikumbha, gazed
at the lord of the monkeys, as if consuming him with his
passion. And then that one endowed with calmness, grasped
a bludgeon entwined with wreaths, and furnished with an
iron ting measuring five fingers, and resembling the top of
the Mahendra ;* plated with gold and embellished with


= The mountain, so named.


1378 RAMAYANA,


diamonds and lapises,—and looking like the rod of Yama
himself ; dreadful, and capable of removing the fear of the
Rakshas. And whirling this, that highly - powerful one,
resembling the banner itself of Sakra in energy, Nikumbha
possessed of terrific strength, with his mouth wide open, set
up shouts. And with gold adorning his breast, and angadas
placed on his arms and a pair of curious and variegated ear-
rings, Nikumbha, with his ornaments and that same bludgeon,
appeared beautiful like a mass of roaring clouds laughing
with lightning and {furnished with the iris. And the head of
that huge-bodied heroe’s parigha undid the conjunction of the
Seven* Winds and appearedt like a noiseless and smokeless
flame. Along with the gyration of Nikumbha’s parigha
the whole welkin, together with the excellent cityf of the
Gandharbas, and the planets, stars and the moon, began to
whirl, And Nikumbha was hard to approach like unto the
fire of dissolution, being resplendent with the brilliance
of parigha and other ornaments and having his anger for
its fuels. And the Rakshasas and monkeys did not dare
stir even out of fear. And the heroic Hanuman, spreading
his breast, stood before him. And thereat the _ powerful
(Nikumbha) having long-arms§ threw his parigha resembling
the Sun at the breast of that powerful one. And falling
on the firm and spacious breast of Hanum&n it was broken
into hundred picces. And the broken portions, being
scattered, appeared like hundreds of fire-brands in the sky.
Like unto a mountain standing still even at the time of an
earthquake that mighty monkey was not moved albeit
struck with the parigha. Being thus hurt that highly powerful
Hanum&n, the foremost of the monkeys, with great velocity
clenched his fist. And with this, the powerful (monkey)


This indicates the length of the Parigha,
This might refer to Kumbha as well,
Some say Vitapabati and some say Alaka,
Lit. arms resembling garighas,


wae


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1379


gifted wilh great impetuosity, and resembling the wind in
prowess, strack Nikumbha on his breast. And with that
fist, his (Nikumbha’s) armour* was riven and blood gushed
out. And a light rising out of his breast suddenly disappeared
like unto lightning disappearing in a mass of clouds. And
being struck with his (Hanuman’s) fist Nikumbha was greatly
moved and restoring himself attacked the mighty Hanum&n
and pulled him up. And beholding in conflict the terrible
and powerful Hanuman pulled up by Nikumbha, the
residents of Lank& began to shout with joy. Being thas put
tashame by that Raksha, Hanuman the son of the Wind,
struck him with his iron fist. And releasing himself from the
grasp of Nikumbha, Hanum&n the Wind-god’s son instantly
planted his foot on the earth. Inflamed with ire, he, throwing
down Nikumbha, began to crush him; and gifted with vehe-
mence, he, with great impetuosity, leaped up and sat on the
breast (of the Raksha). And holding his head with two hands,
he, emitting loud roars, displaced bis head. Nikumbha being
thus slain iu conflict by the Wind-god’s son, there ensued
a terrible conflict between the highly enraged armies of the
son of Dagaratha and the lord of Rakshasas. And Nikumbha
being deprived of his life, the monkeys began to shout—as if
resounding all the quarters. And with it the whole earth
moved and the abode of the celestials dropped down, And
the Rakshasa-hosts were greatly terrified.


* Some texts read charma (skin) in the place of Barma—(armour) é. ¢. his


skin was rent--This equally indicates Hanumdn’s strength.—T.


#380 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LXXVIIE.


egiee


Baenorowe Kumbha and Nikumbha slain, Ravana was
excited with ire like unto flaming fire. And being beside
himself, simultaneously with wrath and grief Ravana* spoke
unto Makaraksha, Khara’s son, having spacious eyes, saying,
—"O child, do thou proceed at my command with the
army and destroy R@ghava and Lakshmana with all the
monkeys.” Hearing the words of Ravana, Khara’s son,
Makat&ksha,proud of his own prowess, delightedly spoke unto
the night-ranger, saying, “Be it so.” And saluting and
circumambulating the Ten-necked one, that hero, at Ravana’s
behest, issued out of the house. Aud Khata’s son spoke
unto the commander who was near him, saying.—"Do thou
speedily bring the chariot here and all the soldiers.” And
heaing his words, that commanding night-anger, soon led
before him the army and the chariot. And going round the
chariot and addressing the chanoteer that night-ranger
(Makataksha) said,—! O charioteer, do thou soon drive the
chariot.” And Makaraksha addiessed those R&kshasas,
saying, —"O Rakshasas ! do ye all fight before me. [ have
been commanded by the high-soulkd Ravana, the lord of
Rakshasas, to slay both Rama and Lakshmana in conflict. I
shall slay to-day, O night-ranger, with my excellent arrows,
Rama, Lakshmana, Sugtiva and all other monkeys. Like
unto fire consuming dry fucl, shall I to-day slay the host of
monkeys with my darts.” Hearing those words of Maka-
raksha, the mighty night rangers, (addressed themselves for
fight). They were armed with various weapons, cautious ;
assuming shapes at will, crookedhaving featful tecth,coppery
eyes; tating like elephants, having dishcvelled hair and


* Nuirita is another name of Ravana,


. terrible. And encir:


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1381


ing the huge-bodied son of Khara, those
gigantic (Rakshasas) began to -proceed, delighted and
moving the earth (with the weight of their persons). There
arose a terrible noise on all sides from the sound of conches,
and thousands of bugles, and from the moving of the arms of
the heroes, And all on a sudden the reins slipped off (the hands
of} the charioteer and the flag of the RAkshasas dropped
down, And the course of the steeds was thus slackend and
they began to move slowly and poorly with their heads droop-
ing down, There blew a terribly rough wind mixed with
dust when the fearfully wicked-minded Makar&ksha’s issued
out for battle. Those powerful Rakshasas neglecting those
bad omens proceeded towards where Rima and Lakshmana
were. They were all black like wato clouds, elephants and
buffaloes, and bad marks of swords and maces on their
persons, And all those night-rangers were skilled in the
art of warfare and began to range to and fro (in the battle
field) saying, “I shall go first.”


SECTION LXXIX+


— ae


F Benoowe Makaraksha out for battle, those foremost
monkeys, leaping on a sudden, addressed themselves for fight.
Thereupon ensued a terrible conflict, capable of making
one’s down stand on end, between the night-rangers and the
monkeys like unto one between the celestials and Danavas.
And those monkeys and night-rangers crushed each other
down with trees, darts, maces and parighas. And those
night-rangers began to assail those foremost of monkeys
with s@kiié* swords, maces, funtas, ftomaras, pattigas,


* A short arrow throws: from the hand or shot through a tube—T.


1382 RAMAYANA.


Vindipalas* arrows, nooses and clubs. Being thus assailed
with fearful arrows by Kbara’s son, those monkeys, stricken
with fear, fled away. And beholding the monkeys fly away,
the victorious R&kshasas began to roar like excited lions.
The monkeys thus flying away to all quarters, Rama with
a downpour of shafts assailed the Rakshasas. And beholding
the Rakshasas thus overpowered, the night-ranger Makaraksha,
excited with the flame of ire, said,—“Stay, O Rama, let us
both fight with each other; I shall take thy life with
sharp arrows discharged off my bow. Thou didst slay my
father in the forest of Dandaka. Remembering, thy action
and finding thee before, my ire is excited. O Raghava! O
Vicious souled one! My limbs are being burnt (with wrath)”
for I did not see thee then in that mighty forest. O Rama,
by my good tuck, I have got thee to-day, like unto a hungry
lion desiring to have other animals. Being despatched by
my arrows to the world of devils, thou shalt live with those
heroes, who had been killed by thee before. What is the use
of speaking more, O Rama, do thou hear my words. Let all
the people behold thy as well as my prowess in the battle-
field. Either with weapon or with clubs, in whatever thou
art expert, do thou fight with me in the battle-field,O Rama.”
Hearing the words of Makaraksha, Rama, Dagaratha’s son,
smiling, replied to the words of the babbler. “O Raksha, what
is the use of idle prating ? None can achieve success in a
battle with idle words—but with fighting. I slew in the
forest of Dandaka thy father with fourteen thousand
Rakshasas, Trigira and Dushana. O vile one, thou being
slain to day, with thy flesh, vultures and crows, having sharp
beaks and nails, and jackals shall be satisfied + Being thus


* An Iron spear or dart—T.

+ Here is another sloka, which is to be found in all N. W. P, texts and
in_ one or two texts published in Bengal—but it has been omitted by many for
it conveys the same meaning as the previous sloka; the meaning is;~And the
birds drinking thy blood shall fy away to,various quarters. —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1383°


addressed by Righava, the mighty Makaraksha, began to
dart sharp arrows towards him in the battle-field. And
Rama, with his shafts, sundered into several pieces, those
arrows, And being thus rendered useless those arrows,
feathered in gold, fell down on the earth. Then there arose
a terrible conflict between the Rakshasa Khara’s son and
Dagaratha’s son, And there were audible in that battle-
field, the outcry of the heroes and the twang of the bows
stretched by their hands,-like unto the muttering of the
clouds in the sky. Aud to beheld that wondrous conflict,
the celestials, Danavas,Gandharbas, Kinnaras and the mighty
serpents stationed themselves in the sky. They were wounded
with the arrows discharged by each other and their strength
was doubled. And they began to fight in that battle-field
one attacking and the other withstanding the attack. And
in tiut conflict the Rakshasa sundered the shafts discharged
by Rama, And likewise Rama severed into several pieces the
arrows shot by the Rakshasa. Ail the quarters were covered
with arrows and nothing on earth or in the sky was visible.
Therevpon being excited with ire, Raghava of long arms
sundered his (R&kshasa's) bow in conflict and with eight
Nérachas pierced the charioteer. And with arrows Rama
sundered the chariot and killing the horses brought them
down, And the night-ranger Makaraksha was brought down
on the earth from the chariot. He then again rose up with
a dart in his hand creating terror unto all creatures and
resembling the Fire of Dissolution in resplendence. It was
a terribly huge dart conferred on him by Siva, shining
in the sky in its native brilliance and like unto another
weapon of destruction.* And beholding which dart even
the celestials fly away in fear to different quarters, And
taking up that huge flaming dart, the night-ranger, being
excited with ire, hurled it at the high-souled Raghava.


* This refers to the weapon used by Siva for destruction—for Siva, ac-
cording to the Hindu Mythology is the God of destruction.—T.


1384 RAMAYANA


“And R&ghava, with four shafts, sundered that dart, in
the sky, flaming and hurled at him by the son of Khara.
And that flaming dart, feathered in gold, being splintered
into several pieces by Rama’s arrows fell down on earth like
a huge fire-brand. And beholding that dart baffled thus
by Rama of unwearied actions all those, stationed in
the welkin began to shout, “Well done! Well done!!."
And beholding his dart thus sundered, the night-ranger
Makataksha clenching his fist spoke unto Kakutstha, saying,
“Stay! Stay!" And seeing him advance thus, the
descendant of Raghu, smiting, fixed a fiery arrow on his
bow. And with that arrow the Raksha was slain by
Kakutstha jn battle. And having his heart pierced he fell
down and died. And beholding Makaraksha thus slain
all the Rakshasas, being afraid of Rama's arrows, proceeded
towards Lanka. And seeing that night-ranger, the son of
Khara, slain by Rama's arrows, like unto a ‘mountain clept
by a thunder-Lolt, the celestials were greatly delighted,


SECTION Lxxx.


‘Hearne of the destruction of Makaraksha, the heroic
Ravana, being excited with ire, began to grind his teeth.
Being thus angered, and thinking within himself what steps
to take, he ordered his son Indrajit to proceed to the battle-
field. “O hero, gifted with great prowess as thou art, do
thou, hidden (in clouds) or appearing before them, slay the
two heroic brothers Rama and Lakshmana. Thou didst defeat
in conflict Indra of unequalled prowess. Shalt thou then
neglect to slay men as they are?’ Being thus addressed
by the lord of the Rakshasas and obeying bis fathers


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1385


command, Indrajit proceeded towards the sacrificial ground
to satisfy Fire (with oblations). There came some she-demons
with crimson turbans and waited respectfully where Ravana's
son was offering oblations unto Fire. In that sacrifice the
weapons were the leaves of sara,* dzbhutakst were fuels,
and there were brought crimson clothes and sruvast made
of black iron. And spreading fire on all sides with sara
leaves and fomeras, (Indrajit) caught a living goat, all black,
by the neck. And the fire, with oblations of sara, became
greatly blazed and devoid of smoke. And there were visible
many good omens indicating victory. The flame of the
fire was like unto gold, and moving Southwards began
to receive offerings of clarified butter. And thus offering
oblations unto fire and unto celestials, D&navas and
Rakshasas, he ascended an excellent car and soon disappear-
ed, It was drawn by four horses and a huge bow, set
with sharp arrows, appeared beautiful on that excellent car.
The chariot was brilliant with its own native resplendence,
adorned with gold and painted with the figures of deer and
acresent, It was encircled on all sides with golden bracelets,
adorned with flags made of vaidurja and was like unto the
flaming fire. And being thus well protected with Brahma
weapons resembling the Sun in brilliance, the mighty
son of Ravana became invincible. And offering oblations
unto Fire in accordance with demonaic incantations and
thus obtaining the power of hiding himself, that hero, ever
victorious in battle, issued out of the city and said,—Slay-
ing these two brothers in battle, who have uselessly wandered
away into the forest, sball I crown my father Ravana with
victory. Destroying Rama and Lakshmana, and clearing
the monkeys off the earth, shall I satisly my sire greatly.”


* Saccharum—a reed or grass.

+ Beleric myrobalan.

¢ A ladle with a double extremety or two oval collateral excavations made
‘of wood to pour ghre upou the sacrificial Fire,—T.


174


1386 RAMAYANA.


Saying this, he disappeared from their view. Thereupon
that fearful foe of the lord of celestials appeared in the battle-
field, excited with wrath, armed with bow and sharp
Na&rachas and commissioned thus by the Ten-necked one.
He beheld there those two heroes discharging flaming arrows
and surrounded by the monkeys like unto the fearful three-
hooded serpent in the midst of other serpents, And thinking
“these must be Rama and Lakshmana,” and stretching
his bow he began showering arrows like unto clouds. He
was seated in a car in the welkin and hidden from the human
gaze and began to assail Rama and Lakshmana with
sharp shafts, And being hurt with the arrows, Rama and
Lakshmana, fixing arrows on their bows, began to discharge
celestial shafts. And those two highly powerful heroes
could not even touch his person with their arrows resembling
the Sun albeit they covered the whole welkin therewith,
And clouding the whole sky with smoke that effulgent one,
enveloped in frost, hid himself from their gaze. There
was not audible the twang of his bow,the sound of the wheels,
or the noise of the steeds. Nor was he seen by any. In
that terrible darkness of clouds that one of mighty arms
began to make a downpour of Narachas and arrows like
hail storms. And in that encounter, Ravana’s son, inflamed
with ire, wounded Rama, with shafts, resembling the Sun
and obtained by him as a boon. And being hurt with
Nar&chas, like unto mountains wet with rain, those two
foremost of men, began to discharge shafts feathered in gold.
And reaching the son of Ravanain the sky and soaked in
blood those golden arrows, fell down on earth. And those
two best of men, hurt with his arrows, became more efful-
gent and baffled the shafts discharged by the R&kshasa.
Thereupon Rama and Lakshmana began to aim their
sharp shafts to the direction whence the arrows came down,
And stationed in bis chariot that mighty car-warrior
disturbed all quarters with his arrows and pierced Dagaratha’s


YUDDHARANDAM. 1387


sons with sharp shafts won by him, And being greatly hurt
with those sharp-pointed and terrible arrows Rama and Laksh-
mana appeared like blossoming Aimgsukas. Like unto the
sun hidden in clouds they could see neither his counte-
nance and motion, nor his bow and arrows. And being
wounded with those arrows hundreds of monkeys died
and fell down onthe earth. Thereupon Lakshmana, being
excited with wrath, spoke unto his brother, saying—"To
slay all the Rakshasas shall I discharge to-day Brahma
weapon.” Thereupon Rama spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted
with auspicious marks, saying—‘It doth not behove thee to
clear all the Rakshasar off the earth for the folly of one indivi-
dual. Thou shouldst not slay bim,who hath retired from battle,
hath hidden himself, hath sought thy shelter, hath stood
before thee with joined palms, hath fted away or who is
bewildered. O thou of mighty-arms, let us try to slay him
(Indrajit). And to accomplish it I shall use the weapons
gifted with great impetuosity and resembling the serpents,
He is hidden from the public gaze so we must slay him—
had he been fighting openly the leaders of the monkey hosts
could have slain that Rakshasa. Truly he shal! be burnt to
death with my shafts and fall down on the earth albeit he
entereth the regions under the earth or the abode of the
celestials.” Having said these words pregnant with a high
significance, the high-souled and heroic descendant of Raghu,
being surrounded by monkeys, began to concert various
plans for the destruction of that.terrible Rakshasa of wicked
deeds.


3388 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LXX Xe.


——


AVING read the intention of that high-souled Raghava,
he retired {rom the battle-field and entered into the city of
Lanka. And remembering the destruction of many a quick-
paced Rikshasa, his eyes were rendered coppery with ire ;
and that hero,the son of Ravana, issued out of the city again.
And that highly powerful, Indrajit, a descendant of Pulasta
and an enemy of the celestials, issued out, encircled by the
Rakshasas, by the western gate. And beholding the heroic
brothers Rama and Lakshmana prepared for fight, Indrajit
spread illusions. And placing an illusory figure of Sita on
the car, encircled by a huge army he began to make arrange-
ments for her destruction. And desiring to charm all with
his illusions, that one of wicked intent, preparing himself
to slay Sita,proceeded towards the monkeys. And beholding
him thus proceed, the monkeys, inflamed with ire, desirous
of fighting and with crags in their hands, moved on, And
-preceded them all, Hanum4n, the foremost of the monkeys,
with a huge mountain-top in his hand. He beheld there, on
Indrajit’s car, Sit, deprived of all joy,poorly, greatly reduced
with fasts and wearing a single braid. And Raghava’s be-
loved spouse wore a piece of soiled cloth, and though
highly beautiful, the grace of her person was greatly
spoiled with dirt. That daughter of Janaka, was not seen
by him for a long time. And beholding ber and deciding
instantly that she is the daughter of Mithila, (he became
greatly sorry). And seeing her-on the car, ianocent, poor,
deprived of joy and brought under the influence of the son
of the lord of Rakshasas that great monkey thought within
himseli—'What must be the intention of Indrajit ? and
accompanied by heroic monkeys advanced towards the son
of Ravana. And beholding that monkey-host, Ravana’s son


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1389


became beside himself with ire and unsheathing his weapon
Nistrinsha, caught her by the hair. And that R&kshasa
addressed himself to strike her in the presence of all those
monkeys, and that illusory figure of Sita began to bewail
saying, “O Rama! O Rama!” And seeing her thus caught by
the head, Hanumfn, the son of Maruta, greatly sorry,began to
shedtears. And beholding that beloved spouse of Rama,
having a tender and beautiful person,he addressed angrily the
son of the lord of Rakshasas with harsh words. “It is for thy
destruction, O Vicious-souled one! that thou hast touched
her hair. Being descended from that great Brahma ascetic
thou art born as a Rakshasa. O! cursed art thou, since thou
hast cherished such a desire and engaged in such a vicious
deed. O vilet O wicked y O cruel and dishonorable wight t
O thou having vice for thy prowess! O shameless! Art
thou not ashamed of perpetrating such an inhuman deed.
What hath Maithili done by thee, O cruel one! that thou
art ready to slay her—She hath been banished from
her home, territory and hath been separated from her lord.
O thou worthy of being slain, destroying Sita, thou shalt not
live long as thou hast been brought under me. Thou shalt
after the death reach the place which is occupied by those
who murder women—a place which is avoided even by those
who commit every sort of crime punishable by law.” Saying
this Hanuman, accompanied by monkeys armed with weapons,
and excited with ire, proceeded towards the son of the lord
of R&kshasas. Beholding the highly powerful monkeys
advance thus the Rakshasas, inflamed with wrath, obstructed
them. And assailing the monkey-hosts with thousands of
arrows, Indrajit spoke unto that foremost of monkeys,
Hanumin, saying,—"To-day I shall slay before you all
Vaidehi,for whom thou,Sugriva and Rama have come. Slaying
her, OQ monkey, I shall afterwards kill thee, Rama,
Lakshmana and Sugriva and the dishonorable Bibhisana.
And, O monkey, about not destroying women, of which thou


1390 RAMAYANA.


wert speaking (I might say} that we must always do
what pains our enémies."* Saying this, Indrajit with a
sharp sword, himself killed the illusory Sit& thus bewailing.
And being sundered by him obliquely in a way in which a
sacred thread lies on one’s own person, the innocent (Sit8)
having a beautiful countenance fell down on the earth. And
slaying her Indrajit spoke unto Hanum&n, saying,—"Behold
Ihave slain (before thee) with my sword R&ma's beloved,
And Vaidebi being thus slain, all your labours have been
rendered useless”’ And destroying her with his own hand
by means of a huge sword, Indrajit, greatly pleased ascended
his car and began to emit dreadful roars. And the monkeys
stationed near heard that terrible roar and saw him enter
the castle.t And slaying Sitaf that wicked-minded son of
Ravana became greatly pleased. And beholding him thus
delighted the monkeys being greatly sorry fled away.


SECTION Lxxxtl.


Hearine that dreadful uproar resembling the sound of
Indra’s thunder-bolt, the monkeys, casting their looks on
all sides fled away. Thereupon Hanuman, the son of Maruta,
spoke unto them, poorly, terrified and of a sorrowful counte-
nance, saying,—' O monkeys, why do ye look so melancholy


* There is one sioka intervening according to some texts—but it has been
omitted by many- The reasons for this omission are best known to them,
‘The purport is —Why did Rama slay TAraka before ? AndI shail therefore
slay his spouse the daughter of king Janaka.” Hearin Indrajit attempts
to justify himself and wants to prove that Rama is equally blameable for


thia.—T,
+ The castle built by Indrajit by means of bis Illusory power in the


air-—T.
$ This refers to the figure of Sitt made by illusion —T. 7


YODDHAKANDAM. 139%


and why are you flying away? Why have ye renounced
your earnest desire for fight? And where is your heroism
gone? Doye remain behind me, I shall go first in the
battle.” Being thus addressed by that highly intelligent son
of the Wind-god, they were greatly excited with wrath and
being pleased took up trees and crags in their hands, And
roaring thus the leading monkeys advanced towards the
Rikshasas and stood encircling Hanum&n in the battle-field.
And being surrounded on all sides by leading monkeys,
Hanuman began to burn down enemy’s host like unto fire
spreading its flames, And being encircled by monkey-hosts
that mighty monkey resembling Death himself began to
gtind the Rakshasas, And being overwhelmed with grief
and wrought up with ire, that monkey Hanuman, threw a
huge crag on the car of that son of Ravana, Beholding that
crag about to fall down on the car, the charioteer moved
his horses and it was speedily brought at some distance.
And not reaching Indrajit stationed on the car and the
charioteer, that crag, uselessly hurled, fet] down on the earth,
And that crag falling down many of the Rakshasas were
crushed. Thereupon hundreds of huge-bodied monkeys,
emitting cries and taking up crags and trees proceeded
towards him (Indrajit) and hurled them at him. And the
monkeys gifted with dreadful prowess began to make a down-
pour of crags and trees. They thus assailed the enemies and
frequently emitted cries. And the grim-visaged night-
rangers were thus assailed with trees in that field by the
terrible monkeys. Beholding his army thus distressed by
the monkeys, Indrajit, excited with wrath, and taking up his
dart, proceeded towards the enemies, and encircled by his
soldiers showered terrible shafts upon them. And that one of
dreadful prowess slew many a leading monkey by means of
darts, Aganis, swords, patétpas and clubs. And the highly
powerful monkeys destroyed his retinue, with crags, stones
and trees having strong trunks, And Hanuman thus crushed


1392 RAMAYANA, 7


many a Rakshasa of terrible deeds. Obstructing the
Rakshasas (for some time) Hanumfn spoke unto monkeys,
saying,—"Stay, we should not fight now, That daughter
of Janaka hath been slain, for whom we have engaged in
fight, renouncing all hope of life and desiring to accomplish
Rama's satisfaction. Let us now go and inform Raima and
Sugriva of it. And we shall do as we shall be commanded
by them, Saying this and desisting all the monkeys from
encounter that foremost of monkeys proceeded undaunted
and heroically, And beholding Hanuman proceed thus where
Raghava was that wicked-minded one (Indrajit) with a view
to offer oblations unto Fire entered the sacrificial altar
Nikumbhild. And reaching there Indrajit lighted up fire and
began to pour oblations therein. And the Fire blazed up
receiving oblations of blood, and being satisfied assumed the
appearance of the setting sun. And Indrajit conversant
with all ceremonials, offered oblations in due form for the
welfare of the Rakshasas. And they all stood there watching
the result and desirous of ascertaining the success of the
battle.*


SECTION Lxxxt.


Hearne the terrible war-cry of the Rakshasas and
monkeys Raghava spoke unto Jambavan, saying :—"O gentle
one, forsooth hath Hanum&n performed some mighty act—
forI hear the dreadful sound of the weapons. Do thou
therefore proceed speedily, O lord of bears, with all thy
soldiers to assist that foremost of monkeys.


* This sloka hath been left off in some editions.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. “4393


Thereupon, saying, ‘So be it,’ that king of bears, surround.
ed by his forces, approached the Western gate, where: the
monkey, Hanum&n, was stationed. And then the lord of
bears saw Hanum§n approach,surrounded by monkeys sighing
hard, who had faught the fight. And seeing on the way
that host of bears dreadful and resembling dark clouds, on
the march, Hanum4n made them desist. And that illustrious
one along with that force, speedily presented himself (before
Rama), and with a heavy heart addressed him, saying. —=
“As we were fighting the field, Ravana’s son, Indrajit in our
very sight slew Sita, crying (in distress). O subduer
of enemies, seeing her (in this plight’, 1, with my senses
bewildered, have been overwhelmed with grief. Therefore
1 have come unto thee to inform thee of what hath befallen.”
Hearing these words of his, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief,
dropped down to the earth, like a tree whose roots hava
been severed. Seeing the god-like Raghava down on the
earth, the foremost monkeys from all sides rushed forward
and came to where (he was). And with water scented with
Jotuses,* they fell to sprinkling that one resembling a furious
firet that hath suddenly arisen, Thereat Lakshmana, over-
come with sorrow, embracing Rama, spoke unto him words
fraught with reason and import,—Profitlesst virtue is
fucapable, OQ noble one, of delivering from calamities thee,
who hast subdued thy senses, and who ever abidest in the
good path. Beings and the mobile as well as the immobile
cannot have that direct perception of virtue which they have
of happiness. Therefore, 1 ween, virtue is a non-entity.
Inasmuch as the immobile (albeit devoid of any regard for


* Padmotpalasugandhibhik—water scented with padmas—lotuses proper,
and s(palas—-Blue lotuses—(Nymphea cerulea)—~T.

+ ‘Rama; remarks the commentator, ‘was a fire lighted by his grief foe
sita’—T.

$ ‘Profitless,’ although apparently an epithet of virtue, is really the
aredicate of the sentence. ‘Virtue, incapable of delivering thee.
profittess,’—T.


175


1394 RAMAYANA.


virtue) are nevertheless happy. and as the mobile also are
so, this virtue cannot lead to happiness. (If it were
so}, one like thee would have not been placed in peril. Jf
unrighteousness would bring unhappiness on creatures,
Ravana should hence to hell, and thou possessed of virtue,
shouldst not come by misfortune. And seeing that he is free
from danger, and thou art in it, righteousness and its
opposite are found to have tendencies the very reverse of
those assigned to them respectively (by the Vedas). And
if by means of virluc, one attaineth the felicity attached to
it, and by means of unrighteouness, one reapeth its
proper fruit, then let those that are unrighteous reap the fruit
of their impicty,—nor let those that set their face against sin,
be deprived of the fruit of their righteousness ; and let those
that walk in the way of virtue reap the fruit of their piety.
But as prosperity attendeth those that are established in un-
righteousness, and as those regardful of righteousness fare
lamentably,—these* have not the senses assigned to them (by
the scriptures). If, O Raghava, (it is contended thatjunright-
eousness cutteth off the wicked,then whom shall Unrighteous-
ness, himself slain by the act of slaughter of the destroyer,—
slay in his turn? Or if it is said that one is slain or slayeth
another by ordinance, then it is Destiny, which is touched by
the sinful act and not he. O chastiser of foes, incapable of
meting out retribution,t—unmanifest itself, and non-existent,
how can virtue, even if we grant its existence, find out the
person that should be slain? If, O foremost of the good, it
had existed, thou wouldst not have come by any misfortune.
But inasmuch as thou hast fallen into this plight, there is no
such thing as virtue. Or itself feeble aud impotent, it taketh
refuge in manliness. And being powerless and bereft of
dignity, it should, I deem, by no means be followed. And
if virtue is a property of manliness, then caretully forsak-


* Virtue and vice,
+ ‘In consequence,’ remarks RAmAnuja, ‘of their belng deviod of consciousness,’


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1395


ing virtue, do thou follow strength as thou hast hitherto
followed virtue. But, O subduer of enemies, if truthfulness
be virtue, art thou not bound by that departing from
which the king lost his life ?* And, O chastiser of foes, if
virtue must be practised above all, or if prowess must have
precedence,—then the thunder-handed Satakratu would not
have celebrated his sacrifice, slaying the ascetict O
Raghava, virtue aided by prowess, destroyeth enemies.
Therefore, O Kakutstha, people, for compassing their ends,
resort to both virtue and prowess. This, sire, is my opinion:
this, O R&ghava, is virtue. But thou, having then
renounced the kingdom, hast laid the axe at the root} of
righteousness, Like streams issuing out mountains, all acts
spring from wealth flowing from various regions and


attaining magnitude. Like a shrunken stream in summer,
all the acts of that foolish person who hath been divorced
by wealth, are annihilated.—He that renouncing riches
within his reach,§ bankers after enjoyment,—being carried
away by his overmastering desire, taketh to getting at wealth
by sinful acts; and then he incurreth guilt. Unto him that hath
wealth are friends, unto him that hath wealth are acquaint-
ances,—he that hath wealth is an individuality in this world,
and he that hath wealth is a learned person, He that hath
wealth is powerful; he that hath wealth is intelligent; he
that hath wealth is mighty-armed ; and he that hath wealth
is full of all graces, Ail these that I have ennumerated are
the evils of forsaking fortune. (f cannot divine) what made
thee, renouncing the monarchy, to adopt such a course.—

‘™ Explains the commentator,—' King Dagaratha lost his life, because he
did not observe his word of installing thee in the kingdom. Art thou not
bound by bis word as well P’—T.

¢ The Logic is alfin a jumble; but such is the text, The ascetic was
Vigwarupa, The meaning, according to the commentator, is that, prowess is
first and virtue next. Indra first used force, and then acquired merit.—T.

$ ‘Root’, remarks Ram&nvja,—‘which is interest !'

& The commentator would have ‘guéten riches,”


1396 RAMAYANA


He that hath richea, hath virtue and desire attending on
him, and hath everything auspicious. That one without
wealth, that seeketh it, cannot secure the wealth of prowess,
without riches and desire. And, O lord of men, cheerfulness,
and desire, and pride, and piety,and anger, and self-restraint,
and self-control—all these come from wealth. As the planets
are not discovered on a stormy day, that wealth, the want of
which renders this world naught even unto the ascetics
practising righteousness,—is not visible in thee. O hero,
thou having abode by the words of thy superior and having
come (to the forest), thy wife dearer then tife itself hath been
ravished by Rakshas. But, O hero, to-day, O Raghava, by
my acts will I remove this huge sorrow that hath been heaped
upon us by Indrajit. Therefore, rise thou up. Rise up, O
foremost of men, O long-armed one, O thou who observest
vows. Why dost thou not understand thyself as the Supreme
Soul ?* And, O sinless one, urged on behalf of thy welfare,
1, waxing wroth on hearing of the slaughter of Janaka’s
daughter, shall with my shafts entirely raze to the ground
Lanka with cars and elephants and steeds and the foremost
Rakshas.”


SECTION Exxxiv.


Ass Lakshmana devoted to his brother was comfort-
ing R&ma, Bibbishana, posting his forces at their
proper quarters, came there, surrounded by four heroes,
accoutred in various arms, resembling masses of colly:
‘rium or leaders of elephant-herds. And approaching
the high-souled Raghava, overwhelmed with grief, he saw


* Rama is conceived as an incarnation of Vishnu.—T,


VYUDDHAKANDAM, - 1397


the monkeys with tears in their eyes. And he saw that joy
of the Ikshw&ku race—the high-souled R&ghava—stupified
with grief, lying on the lap of Lakshmana. And seeing
Rama cast down and inflamed with grief, Bibhishana, inly
pained, said,—'What is this ? Thereat,gazing at Bibhishana’s
countenance as well as all those monkeys, Lakshmana, with
his eyes flooded with tears, said these words pregnant with
dire import,—"'O placid one, hearing from Hanum&n’s lips
that Sitd hath been slain by Indrajit.Raghava hath been over-
come with stupor.” As Sumitra’s son was speaking thus,
Bibhishana, preventing him, addressed the stupified Rama in
these pregnant words,—"O king, all that Hanumfn in distress-
ful guise had communicated unto thee I deem as improbable,
like unto the drying of the deep. 1 know the intent of the
impious Ravana with reference to Sita, O mighty-armed one.
Her ho will not slay. I, seeking his welfare, had besought
him much, saying,—'Let go Vaidehi’—but he did not
act up to my speech. Neither by conciliation, nor by
gift, nor by dissension—-and where is war 9—nor by
any other means is one capable of obtaining the very
sight of Siti. Having bewildered the monkeys, the
Raksbasa hath gone back; and, O mighty-armed one, know
her to be the illusory daughter of Janaka, To-day, going
to the sacrificial ground (called) Nikumbhilé, he will offer
oblations into fire; and there the deity of fire will present
himself along with Vasava and the (other) divinities. And
then Ravana’s son shall be invincible in battle. Indubitably
that illusion hath been wrought by him, to deceive (the
monkeys), so that they might not through their prowess
disturb him there. Thither will we go before he hath
furnished his (sacrifice). O foremost of men, shake off
.this vain sorrow that hath overcome thee! Seeing thee
smitten with grief, this entire host is dispirited. Here, with
thy heart composed, do thou stay, summoning thy strength.
Send Lakshmana along with us and the flower of the forces.


1398 RAMAYANA,


This foremost of men by means of sharpened shafts will
make Ravana’s son give up his rites; and then shall he be
capable of being slain by us. These keen and sharpened
shafts of his,attaining access of velocity through the feathers
of birds, and themselves resembling fierce fowls, will drink
his* blood. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, do thou in
order to the destruction of the Rakshasa, commission
Lakshmana, even as the wielder of the thunder-bolt com-
mandeth the same. And as to-day no time should be lost,
therefore do thou send Lakshmana for campassing the
destruction of the foe, even as Mahendra sendeth the thunder-
bolt for bringing about the destruction of the enemies of
the immortals. If that foremost of Rakshasas can finish his
rites, he shall be invisible to both celestials and Asuras ; and,
he fighting after finishing his sacrifice, the celestials them-
selves shall be placed in great jeopardy.”


SECTION LXXKV.


Se


Heaaine his speach, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief,
could not perfectly comprehend what was said by the
Rikshasa. Then, summoning up patience, Rama—captor of
hostile capitals—spoke unto Bibbishana, seated near the
monkeys,-—"O lord of Nairitas, I once more wish to hear
what, O Bibhishana, thou hast said.” Hearing Raghava’s
words,Bibhishana, skilled in speech,again spoke these words,
saying,—O mighty-armed one, I have stationed the forces, O
hero, agreeably to thy directions. The entire force hath been
divided around ; and the leaders have also been placed proper-
ly. Further, O mighty master, listen to what I have to say. Oa


* Indrajit’s.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1399


thy having been causelessly aggrieved,we all of us were seized
with grief. If this anxiety of thine conduceth to the joy of
the enemy,do thou cast it off. And, O hero, bestir thyself,—
and summon up spirits. If thou art to have Sit§, and if the
night-rangers are to be slain by thee, do thou, O Raghu’s
son, listen to my profitable speech. Let Sumitré’s son go
forth, environed by a mighty force, for slaying in battle the
son of Ravana, who hath gone to Nikumbhilé ; with shafts
resembling venomous serpents, discharged from the round*
of his bow. By virtue of his austerities, that hero, from a
boon conferred by the Self-sprung, hath obtained the
Brahmagiras weapon, together with steeds coursing at their
will, Now he with his army hath gone to Nikumbhilé ; and
when, having finished his rites, he gets up, know that all of
us are slain. ‘When not reaching Nikumbhild, and not
having finished thy offerings unto fire, thou, equipped with
arms, art slain by a foe,—O enemy of Indra, that is thy
death.’—Thus, O mighty-armed one, did the lord of all
creatures confer a boon (on Indrajit), and, O king, thus was
the death of this intelligent one ordained. O Rama, for
compassing the destruction of Indrajit, do thou commission
a mighty force. On his being slain, know that Ravana along
with his retainers are slain.”"—Hearing Bibhishana’s words,
Rama said,—“O thou having truth for prowess, I know the
illusion of that fierce one, Without doubt, he is skilled in
the Brahma weapon, is potent in illusion and, is possessed of
exceeding strength. In conflict, he depriveth of conscious-
ness even the celestials with Varuna (at their head). And
as that illustrious (one) goeth about in the welkin on his
chariot, none, O hero, can perceive his course, like the course


of the Sun when the sky is covered with clouds.” And
Raghava, being well acquainted with the illusive energy of


his wicked-minded foe, addressed the renowned Lakshmana,


* The bow drawn to its full stretch, becomes circular—T_


1400 RAMAYANA, | i


saying,—"Environed by the entire host of the lord of
monkeys,—accompanied by the leaders, O Lakshmana,
headed by Hanuman,—with Jambavan—king of bears —and
girt round by the forces—do thou slay this son of the
Rakshasa, possessed of the strength of illusion. And
accompanied by his counsellors, this high-souled night-ranger
shall follow at thy back, in this engagement with that one
skilled in illusion.” Hearing Raghava’s words, Lakshmana
endowed with dreadful prowess, with Bibhishana,—took up
another excellent bow. Aud donning on his mail, and putling
on his armour and his sword, and furnished with arrows,
and a bow in his left hand,—Sumitr&’s son, touching
Rama's feet, feeling elated, addressed Rama, saying—
“To-day the shafts discharged from my bow, piercing
Ravana's son, shall fall into Lank&, even as swans drop into
a tank. This very day shall my arrows, shot from my
redoubtable bow-string, rive the body of that terrific one.”
Having spoken thus, the effulgent Lakshmana, eager to slay
Ravaua’s son, went before his brother. And having saluted
at the feet of his superior and went round him, Lakshmana
set out for the sacrificial ground (named) Nikumbhil&,
protected by the son of Ravana. And accompanied by
Bibhishana, that powerful son of the king—Lakshmana—after
his brother had offered up prayers in his behalf,—set off
with all speed. And surrounded by thousands of monkeys,
Hanum&n as well as Bibhishana together with his counsellors
—speedily went in the wake of Lakshmana. And strongly.
encompassed by that mighty monkey-hast, (Lakshmana) saw
the forces of the bear-king stationed on the way. And
having proceeded far, Sumitra’s son—enhancer of the delight
of friends—from a distance discovered the forces of the
R&kshasa-monarch, drawn up in battle-array. And that
subduer of enemies—Raghu’s son—bearing his bow in his
hand, coming upon him whose martial might fay in illusion,
stopped (there) for conquering his foe agreeably to the


YUDDH4A KANDA. f40e


erdinance® of Brahma. And accompanied by Bibhishana,
the heroic Angada, and the Wind-god’s offspring, the
powerful son of the king dived into the forces of the foe,
various, blazing with burnished arms, dease with standards,
and thronging with mighty cars,t capable of striking terrot
{into the hearts of the spectators), instinct with immeasur-
able energy, and resembling darkness,


SECTION LXXXvk


Wren things were in this condition, Ravana’s younger
brother addressed Lakshmuna in words fraught with evil to
foes and conducing to the welfare ( of his own party),
saying,—°“Do thou without delay bring on an engagement
between this cloud-black Rakshasa army, which thou be-
boldest, and the monkeys having rocks for their arms. @
Lakshmana, do thou exert thyself to break through hist
mighty-army ; and when the ranks are broken, the son of
the Ra&kshasa-lord shall be visible. And scattering among
the foes shafts resembling Indra’s thunder-bolt, charge him
white he hath not yet finished this ceremony. Slay, O hero,
this wicked one, this son of Ravana, given to illusion, and
of terrific feats—the fear of all the worlds.” Hearing
Bibhishana’s words, Lakshmana graced with auspicious
marks began to shower arrows on the son of the Rakshasa-
chief. And bears and monkeys, given to fighting excellently
with trees, in a body rushed towards that army (of Rakshas)


* The ordinance was that Indrajit should be slain while remaining outside
NikumbhilA, bis rites not yet finished. —T.

+ Mahérathai (ab) may also mean with mighty car-warriors.—T,

t Indeajit’s, that is,


176


1402 “+ RAMAYANA.


drawn up there. And the Rakshasas (on their part) burning
to slaughter the monkey-forces, rushed in the encounter with
sharpened shafts and darts and fomaras. And there took
place a tremendous onslaught of the monkeys and the
‘Rakshasas. And Lank& resounded all around with that mighty
tumult ; and the sky was covered with weapons of various
shapes, and whetted arrows and trees and dreadful upraised
mountain-tops. And Rakshasas having frightful faces and
arms, plying their arms among the foremost monkeys, began
to spread terror (there). And in the same way the monkeys
in the conflict fell to slaying and wounding the Rakshasas
with trees and hill-tops. And great was the terror that was
spread among the warring Rakshasas by the flower of the
bears and monkeys, possessed of gigantic persons and
endowed with prodigious strength.

Hearing his own army hard beset by the enemies, and
drooping,—the unconquerable one, ere yet he had finished
his rites, rose up. And issuing from the gloom of the trees,
Ravana’s son, fired with wrath, asceuded his car, which had
already been well yoked (with steeds). And accoutred ina
dreadful bow and arrows,—that one resembling a mass of
collyrium, having a red face and eyes, looked drea:lful like the
Reaper—Death. And svon as they saw him mounted on bis
car, that host of Rakshas possessed of dreadful impetuosity,
eager to engage with Lakshmana, stood on their ground. At
this time that subduer of enemies—Hanum&n—resembling
a mountain, uprooted a giant tree incapable of being handled.
And in that encounter, the moukey, consuming (the forces)
like the fire risen at Doomsilay, made that army of Rakshasas
insensible with innumerable trees. And finding the Wind-
god's son, Hanuma, suddenly spreading devastation among
the R&kshasas by thousands, (they) showered (shafts) on
lim, And approaching on all sides that one resembling a
hill, those bearing whetted darts attacked him with darts ;
those bearing swords in their hands, with swords ; those


VYUDDHARANOAM. 1403


bearing javelins in their hands, with javelins; with patészas,
those equipped with pafticas; and with bludgeons, and
maces and graceful éuwtas; and with hundreds of sataghnt's,
and iron clubs ; and with terrific axes; and with h/ndipdlas ;
and with boxes like unto thunder-holts; and slaps resembl-
ing the egani. And fired with fury, he (on his part) spread
a huge havoc among them. And Indrajit saw that foremost.
of monkeys, resembling a hill, the offspring of the Wind-
god—possessing himself in calmness, while destroying his
foes. And thereat, he* addressed his charloteer, saying, —
“Go where the monkey is. Being disregarded by the
Raksl.asas, he makes havoc among us.” Thus accosted by
him, the charioteer went where the Wind-god’s offspring was,
carrying the exceedingly invincible Indrajit seated on the
car. And rushing forward, that irrepressible one—tho
Rakshasa—began to shower on the monkey's head arrows
and swords and paftigas and scimitars and uxes. And
bearing all those dreadful arms, the Wind-god's offspring,
overcome with a mighty rage said,—"O wicked-minded son
of Ravana, if thou art a hero, fight on. Combat with me with
thy arms. If in the encounter, thou bearest my impetus,
then,O thou of perverse sense, thou indeed art the foremost of
Rakshasas.” Then Bibhishana pointed out unto Lakshmana
the son of Ravana, who witli his bow upraised, was eager to


stay Hanum&n, “This one that, mounted on his car, is eager
to’slay Hanuman, is the son of Ravana that hath vanquished
Vasava himsclf (in battle). Do thou, O son of Sumitra,
with peerless shafts capable of resisting enemies,—dreadful,
and competent to finish the lives (of foes),—slay the son of
Ravana.” Thus accosted by Bibhishana terrific unto foes, that
high-souled one saw (Indrajit) of dreadful prowess, difficult to
get at, and resembling a hill,—stationed on his car.


* lodrajit.


1404 _ RAMAYANA,


SECTION Lxxxvet


FHavine ‘spoken thas unto Sumitra’s son, Bibhishanz
experienced delight, and taking (Lakshmana) bearing a bow
in his hand, hurriedly went off. And proceeding some way
and entering the mighty wood, Bibhishana pointed out unte
Lakshmana the (place of) sacrifice. And the energetic brother
of Ravana showed unto Lakshmana the Nyagrodha, dreadfu_
to behold and resembling a mass of sable clonds, “Here
offering presents unto the ghosts,the powerfa? son of Ravana
afterwards engages in conflict. Then the Rakshasa becomes
invisible to all beings ; and he stayeth his enemies in battle
and fastens them with excellent shafts. Do thow, ere he
hath passed beyond the Nyagrodha, with ffaming arrows
destroy the powerful son of Ravana along with his car and
steeds and charioteer.”” Thereupon saying,—'So be it,’ the
exceedingly energetic son of Sumitria—that delight of his
friends—took up his post there, stretching his variegated
bow. And Ravana’s son Indrajit, endowed with strength,
mailed, and armed with a sword, and furnished with a banner,
was seen mounted on a fire-hued charict, And the highly
powerful Lakshmana addressed Pulastya’s son, never know-
ing defeat, saying,—"I challenge thee to the encounter. Do
thou give me battle, exerting thy utmost.” Thus addressed,
the exceedingly energetic and intelligent son of Ravana,
seeing Bibhishana there, spoke unto him harshly, thus,—
“Born and bred in this (Rakshasa race) thou art the very
brother of my father. Why, O Rakshasa, being my uncle,
dost thow range thysclf against thy song But neither
kinship, nor emity, nor race, O wicked-minded one, nor
co-birth, can, O destroyer of righteousness,avail to make thee
discern thy duty. © thou of perverse understanding, thou
art indeed to be pitied ; as thou art worthy of being


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1408


reproached by the virtuous; since, renouncing thine own,
thou hast espoused servitude under another. Neither by
thy cbaraeter nor yet thy understanding dost thou perceive
the mighty difference that lieth between living with one’s
own kindred, and taking refuge with the base. If one that
is not our own, be furnished with every grace, and if one’s
own be void of all merit,-one’s kindred, albeit unworthy,
is preferable ; and he that is not ours, is even always such,
He that, forsaking his own party, serveth that of another, is
destroyed even by the fatter,when his own party is destroyed.
© night-ranger, such is this thy relentlessness, that, O
R&vana’s younger brother, thou being a kindred, art capable
of displaying thy manliness (as no other person can do so).”
Thus addressed by his brother’s son, Bibhishana answered,
©O Rakshasa, why dost thou speak as if in ignorance of my
character? O impious son of the R&akshasa-chief, do thou
forego the roughness which thou assumest on behalf of my
dignity.* Albeit born in the race of Rakshas of cruel deeds,
yet having regard to the first of principles pertaining to men,
my character is not that of a R&kshasa. I do not take
pleasure in the terrible ; nor do I revel in unrighteousness,
But how can a brother, although differing from his brother
in character, be renounced by the jatter?f One renouncing
a person, lapsing from’ virtue and bent on sinful acts,
altaineth happiness, even as one doth by shaking off a
venomous snake from his hand. The wise have called that
impious one given to stealing others’ goods and violating
others’ wives,—as worthy of being forsaken, even like a
house that is aflame—Robbing others’ property, outraging
the wives of others, and inspiring fear among friends,—these
three vices lead to destruction. The dreadful slaughter of sages,


* Or, on account of thy heroism.

+ Some read Vishamagilana, Then the sense would be : “How else could
a brother bearing a difference in character, renounce his brother meaning
Ravane—T.


1406 RAMAYANA.


rebellion against all the gods, overweening conceit, anger,
long-continued enmity, and running amuck -of couusel,—
these sins are sapping the life and fortune of my brother ; and
they have hidden his virtues even as clouds cover a mountain,
It is on account of these vices that my brother, thy sire,
hath been deserted by me. And this city of Lanka will
not be, nor thou, nor thy father. Thou art proud,and haughty,
anda boy, O R&kshasa, Thou art fettered by the noose
oi Fate. Do thou say unto me whatever thou likest. To-day
thou hast addressed harshly me, who have fallen on evil
days; but, © worst of Rakshasas, thou canst not pass this
Nyagrodha. Having smitten the Kakutstha, thou canst not
live. Fight with that man-god, Lakshmana, in encounter,
Being slain, thou shalt serve the deities in the abode of
Yama. Displaying thy own prowess, do thou spend all thy
weapons and all thy shafts. But coming within the ken of
Lakshmana’s arrows, thou wilt not to-day go hence, living,
with thy forces.”


SECTION LXxxvilt,


Heaaine Bibhishana’s words, the son of Ravana,
deprived of his senses by passion, spoke harshly, and rushed
forward in wrath. And with upraised weapons and scimitars,
he, resembling the Destroyer himself, was mounted on a
mighty car yoked with black steeds, and ornamented (on all
sides). And that one endowed with terrific strength up-
raised a huge, gigantic, strong and powerful bow, and shafts
capable of destroying foes. And that mighty bowman
and slayer of foes—the powerful son of Ravana—adorned
(with ornaments) and mounted on his chariot, saw him


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1407


dight (with his own splendour’. And fired with wrath, (Indrajit)
addressed Sumitra’s son, who, mounted on Hanum4n’s
back, like unto the risen sun in splendour—accompanied
Bibhishana ; and he also addressed all those principal
monkeys, snying,—"Do ye behold my prowess} To-day do
ye inthe couflict bear my arrowy shower shot from my bow,
incapable of being approached, and resembling the down-
pour in the sky. To-day my shafts discharged from my
mighty bow shall mangle your limbs, even as fire burneth up
aheap of cotton, To-day with your persons pierced with
sharp shafts, with darts, and javelins, and réshtis and arrows,
shall I despatch you all to the abode of Yama. Who shall
stay before me, fleet-handed, creating an arrowy shower in
the field, and rvaring like unto clouds? Formerly in a
night-engagement, with my shafts resembling the thunder-
bolt and zajra, ye two along with your foremost adherents,
were rendered insensible and laid down on the earth by
me. But, perhaps, thou hast forgotten it. As thou hast
presented thyself for battle before me, fired with wrath and
resembling a venomous serpent, it is evident thou wilt go to
the region of Yama.” Hearing the vaunt of the Rakshasa-
chief, Raghu’s son, inflamed with rage, with an undaunted
countenance, spuke auto Ravana’s son,—"O Rakshasa, lard
is the achievement of the task that thou hast mentioned.
He that compasseth business by act is alone intclligent.—
But thou, O wicked-minded one, incompetent as thou art to
bring about thy end, attaining thy arduous aim by words
only, deemest thyself as crowned with success. That thou
Nadst rendered thyself invisible in the field of conflict, was
the work of a thief—and not the way of a hero. Coming
within the range of thy shafts, I stay here,—do thou display
thy prowess. What dost thou say in words?” Thus
addressed,the mighty Indrajit—conquerer of enemies—stretch-
ing his dreadful bow, showered sharpened shafts, And
discharged by him, those exceedingly impetuous arrows,


1408 RAMAYANA.


resembling the venom of serpents, hitting Lakshmana, fell
down like unto hissing snakes. And in that encounter,
R&vana’s son—Indrajit—possessed of eminent impetuosity,
pierced Lakshmana, graced with auspicious marks, with
vehement shafts. And pierced with those arrows and bathed
in blood, the graceful Lakshmana appeared fike a smokeless
fire. And seeing bis own feat, Indrajit, coming forward, and
setting up a tremendous cry, said,—"O son of Sumitra, my
feathered and sharp-edged shafts shot fram my bow, capable
of destroying life, will to-day finish thee up. To-day, 0.
Lakshmana, swarms of jackals and hosts of hawks and
vultures shall alight on thee lying lifeless, having been slain
by me. This very day shall the exceedingly wicked Rama
behold thee, who art the friend of Kshatriyas and devoted
unto thy brother,—and who ever bearest thyself ignobly,—
slain by me; to-day see thee, O Sumitri’s son, slain by me,
with thy armour fallen off thy person, thy bow broken, and
thy head severed.” As Ravana’s son was speaking thus
harshly, Lakshmana conversant with the import of words,
replied in a reasonable speech, saying,—‘“Leave off thy
strength of tongue, O thou of perverse sense, O Ra&kshasa,
O thou of crooked ways! Wherefore dost thou speak thus ?
Bring all this to pass in worthy deed. Why, O Rakshasa,
without doing (what thou sayest), dost thou simply say it ?
Do the deed,—so that I may have regard for thy utterances.
Mark ! without speaking anything harsh, without censuring
thee in the least, without venting any brag, shall, I, O
cannibal, slay thee.” Saying this, Lakshmana drawing his bow
to its full bent, hit at the Raikshasa’s chest five nérdchar—
wondrous impetuous arrows. And those arrows resembling
flaming serpents, with their velocity accelerated by. the
feathers (with which they were furnished), blazed on the
Nairita’s breast like the rays of the Sun. And wounded with
those shafts, Ravana’s son, fired with wrath, pierced
Lakshmana with three arrows discharged (from his bow).


YUDDHAKANDAM, . 1409


And exceedingly dreadful was the encounter that took place
between those leonine man and R&kshasa, each eager to
conquer the other. And both powerful, and both endowed
with strength and possessed of prowess,—and both exceed-
ingly invincible; and both having unparalleled might and
energy,—those heroes faught like two planets ia the welkin ;
or like Bala and Vrita, irresistible in conflict; and those
high-souled ones faught like two lions. And showering
countless shafts and displaying many maneuvers, that fore-
most of men and that of Rakshasas, faught on cheerfully.


SECTION LxxxIx.


ae


Tren sighing like an enraged serpent, that chastiser of
foes, Dagaratha’s son, setting shafts (on his bow-string)
showered them on the Rakshasa-chief. And hearing the
twang of his bow-string the lord of Rakshasas, with his
countenance fallen, gazed at Lakshmana. And then Bibl
shana spoke unto Sumitra’s son as he was fighting,
find (inauspicious) signs in Ravana’s son. Do _ there~
fore hasten on,—broken he is, without doubt.” Then
fixing arrows (on his bow) resembling venomous snakes,
he let go those keen shafts, like unto serpents furnished with
poison. And smit by Lakshmana with arrows having the
touch of the levin, (Indrajit) for a while was stupified and
had his senses overwhelmed. And eying that hero-~son
unto Dagaratha—present in the encounter, (Indrajit) with
his eyes crimsoned in choler, drew near Sumitri’s son. And
coming up to him.(Lakshmana), he again addressed (that
hero) in a harsh speech, saying,—"Dost thou not remembec
my prowess at that first encounter, when thou along with thy


177


1410 RAMAYANA,


brother was bound up,—that now thou art discharging arms
(at me)? Forsooth ye two in mighty encounter, with shafts
resembling the thunder-bolt and vajra, by me were first
laid down on the ground, deprived of your lives, along with
your principal adherents. Either this hath escaped thy
memory or I fancy, thou plainly wishest to go to the abode
of Yama,—inasmuch as thou hast set thy heart on beating
me. If atthe first encounter thou hast not witnessed my
prowess, to-day shall I show it unto thee. Do thou now
stay, summoning thy Attention.” Seeing this, he pierced
Lakshmana with seven shafts, and Hanuman with ten keen-
edged excellent shafts. And then, fired with double fury,
that powerful one pierced Bibhishana with an hundred
arrows, powerfully discharged (from his weapons). Seeing
this act of Indrajit, that foremost of men, Rama’s younger
brother, Lakshmana, with an undaunted countenance, fired
with wrath without minding the same,—and saying with a
laugh,—'This is nothing’,—taking dreadful arrows, in the
conflict, discharged them at the son of Ravana. “O night.
rangers, heroes, coming to the field never discharge (such
shafts as these). These arrows of thine are light and of
slight strength, and they conduce to my comfort. Heroic
warriors, eager for encounter, do not fight thus.” . Speaking
thus, (Lakshmana) accoutred with his bow showered vollies
of shafts (on his adversary). And at his arrows (hitting),
(Indarjit's) mighty golden mail fell off his person, and
dropped to the platform of his car like a cluster of stars
dropping from the welkin. And with his armour dropping
off, that hero—Indrajit—was wounded with ndrdchas, like
the Sun at dawn. That hero—Ravana’s son—endowed
with dreadful prowess, in that conflict, pierced Lakshmana
with a thousand shafts. And thereat Lakshmana’s gorgeous
and mighty mail was rent in pieces. And each rushing
forward was engaged in dealing blows and harrying them.
And sighing again and again, they faught furiously, And


YUDDHARANDAM. . t4lr


with their persons cut all over, and laved in blood, for a tong
while the heroes kept cleaving each other with sharpened
shafts. And those high-souled ones versed in warfare, and
endowed with terrific prowass exerted their utmost in secur-
ing victory. And covered with vollies of shafts, with their
armour and banners rent, they drew each other's warm blood
flowing like water from a fountain, And they discharged
dreadful showers attended with tremendous sounds, like the
sounds of black clouds at Dooms-day* pouring torrents
in the sky. And a long time went by as they faught. Nor
did they turn away from the encounter, or know fatigue.
And those foremost of those acquainted with weapons
repeatedly displayed their weapons; and their long and
short shafts enveloped the welkin. And the skill that
they displayed was perfect, and showed lightness, variety and
grace; and both man and the Rakshasa carried on fearful
and terrible conflict. Aad the dreadful and tremendous roars
of each were audible (at that place); and terrific like tho
levin, they made the hearts of hearers tremble (in terror).
And as they faught with might and main, the sounds that
they sent resembled the deep rumbling of clouds in the sky.
And pierced with xdrdchas knobbed with gold, those power-
ful and illustrious (warriors) with their hearts set on
celebrity, bled profusely. And in that engagement gold-
knobbed shafts hitting each other's person, pierced the same
and covered with gore, entered the earth. And other shafts
were resisted in the sky by sharpened weapons; and some
wore snapped, and thousands of their arrows were cleft
{in the sky). And in that field, the vollies of their shafts
were dreadful to behold like unto a heap of Kuga aflgmé in
a sacrifice. And the wounded frames of those high-souled ones
appeared beautiful like a leafless, flowering Kinguka and
Salmali in a wood. And each eager to vanquish the other,
 * Kalamaghuye (gen). The commentator says the word means (black
clouds j' but I prefer the sense given —T.


trees), And all their limbs, drenched in blood and covered
with arrows, looked like a blazing fire. And a great while
did they fight ; yet they neither turned away (from the fight),
nor did they experience any exhaustion. Then to remove
(Lakshmana’s) fatigue from fight, the high-souted Bibhishana,
working the weal of Lakshmana staying in front of the field,
came forward in the encounter and took up his post.’


SECTION LXL.


Greine the man apd the Rakshasa engaged in battle, with
their whole soul, each eager to beat the other,—like unto
elephants with the temporal juice trickling from their
temples,—desirous of beholding their encounter, Ravana’s
mighty and heroic brother, bearing an excellent bow, stood
in front of the arena. And taking up his post, he stretched
his great bow and shot terrific sharp-pointed shafts at the
Rikshasas. And even like thunder-bolt cleaving mighty
mountains, those shafts furnished with peacock’s plumes
falling powerfully (upon the foe), rent the Rakshasas. Aad
those foremost of R&kshasas, Bibhishana’s followers, also,
in the encounter discharged darts and scimitars and pattigas
at heroic Rakshasas, And surrounded by those Rakshasas,
Bibhishana, then in the midst of his followers, appeared like
an elephant in the midst of young ones. Then inciting the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1413


monkeys, whose dear object was to slay Ravana, that one
versed in time, the foremost of Rakshasas, spoke seasonably
thus,—“This one that stayeth (in the field) is the sole and
mighty support of the Rakshasa-chief ; and th his remain-
ing force. Why then do the monkey-chiefs remain inactive ?
On this wicked Bakshasa being slain on the edge of battle,
the remnant of his army, with the single exception of
Ravana, is destroyed. That hero—Prahasta—hath been slain,
and Nikumbha possessed of wondrous strength, and
Kumbhakarna, and Kumbha, and the night-ranger
Dhumraksha, and Jamvumfli, and Mahamali, and Tikshna-
vega and Hemaprabha, and Suptaghna, and Jajnakopa, and
the Rakshasa Vajradanstra, Sankradi, and Vikata, and
Arighna, and Tapana, and Manda, and Praghasa, and
Prajangha, and Jangha, and Agniketu, and Durdharsha, and
the powerful Ragmiketus and Viddojjibha, and Dwijibha,
and the R&kshasa—Suryyagatru, and Akampana, and
Sup&rgwa, and the R&akshasas—Chakramili, and Kam-
pana, and Satwavanta, and Devdntaka and Nar&ntaka.
Having slain these many powerful Rakshasas endowed
with excess of might,—having crossed the sea with your
arms, do ye cross this foot print of a cow. This is the
remaining force which you monkeys must conquer ; all those
Ra&kshasas, that had come forward, elated with the pride of
strength, have all been slain. It is not meet for me to slay
the son of my brother, yet, casting off compassion will I for
Rima slay him Tears surcharge the eyes of me who
seeketh to slay him. Let therefore Lakshmana administer
him his quietus. Ye monkeys, do ye in a body (first)
slaughter those that are beside him (Indrajit)’” Thus
exhorted by that illustrious Rakshasa, the monkey-chiels
were exhilarated and began to flourish their tails. And
then those mighty monkeys roared again and again, and
sent up various shouts, even as peacocks cry on secing


* The text has ‘brother's son.’


tata RAMAYANA,


clouds, And then Jambavin surrounded by his own forces,
assailed the Rikshasas with rocks and with their nails and
teeth. Thereat Rakshasas,endowed with exceeding strength,
equipped with various weapons reproaching the lord of
bears, as he was engaged in smiting (the foe),—and
renouncing fear, with shafts and sharp axes and pattigas and
yashtis, and tomaras, in the encounter assailed Jambavan,
who was engaged in beating the Rakshasa forces. And that
conflict between the monkeys and the Rakshas, waxed
furious, like unto the tumultuous encounter of the immortals
and the Asuras fired with wrath, And the magnanimous
Hanum&n incapable of being approached growing wroth,—-
‘uprooting a mountain, and putting down Lakshmana from
his back, began a great carnage among the R&kshasas by
thousands. And fighting a furious fight with his uncle, the
powerful Indrajit~slayer of hostile heroes—again rushed
against Lakshmana. And then there took place an encounter
between those heroes in the field,—Lakshmana and the
R&kshasa—discharging vollies of shafts and‘smiting each
other; and those mighty and impetuous ones repeatedly
covered each other with networks of arrows; like unto the
sun and the moon covered by clouds at the expiration of
Summer. And on account of their light-handedness, neither
discharge of arrows, nor the drawing of the bow; nor the
setting of the shaft on the bow-string ; nor the taking of the
bow; nor the selection of shafts; nor the clenching fast of
their fists ; nor the hitting of aims,—could be perceived as
they faught on. And in consequence of the sky being covered
with networks of arrows all around, discharged powerfully
from their bows, the forms (of objects) could not be
discovered. And Lakshmana-having at R&vana’s son, and
Ravana’s son having at Lakshmana, critical was the
huggermugger that ensued* in the encounter between each
other. And they both kept ceaselessly showering feathered


* 4. ¢. in consequence of all sldes being covered with arrows, neither the


YUDDHAKANDAM. tats.


and sharpened shafts, the firmament was engulphed with a
deep darkness. And in consequence of countless keen
arrows alighting in hundreds, all sides and all the cardinal
quarters were swarming with shafts. And all being over-
spread with gloom, a mighty fright took possession (of
creatures) when the Sun having ascended the setting-hill,
and darkness environing all objects. And that day* mighty
torrents of blood flowed in thousands of streams; and fierce
beasts of prey set up terrific yells (all around). And at that
hour the wind did not blow, and fire did not blaze; and the
Maharshis said,—‘Fair befell creatures.’ And the Gandharvas
along with the Chiranas grew exceedingly agitated. Then
Sumitrl’s son pierced the four black steeds of the leonine
Rakshasa,caparisoned in gold. And then he hit at (Indrajit’s)
charioteer with another yellow and sharpened javelin
splendid, furnished with feathérs; and resembling the
thunder-bolt of the great Indra. And through his fleet
handedness the graceful son of Raghu with the thunder-bolt
of his shaft, resonant with the sound of his palm, separated
the (charioteer’s head) from his trunk. And on his charioteer
having been slain the exceedingly energetic son of
Mandodari, himself began to perform the function of a
charioteer, and took up his bow. ‘And this in the encounter
was wonderful to behold. And then as (Indrajit) was
eagerly engaged in managing the steeds, (Lakshmana) pierced
him with sharpened shafts ; and when (Indrajit) was eagerly
wielding his bow,(Lakshmana) discharged shafts at his steeds.
And on his steeds having been torn with shafts, Sumitra’s—.
foremost of fleet-handed—in the encounter assailed (Indrajit)
doubtlessly ranging the field. Seeing his charioteer slain
in the contest, Ravana’s son forewent his martial ardour,
and was cast down. And seeing the Rakshasa with his


Rakshas nor the monkéys could distinguish their several parties in the
encounter, and the blows that cach dealt were misdirected in congequence.~T.
* Aiya to-day In the text.


1436 RAMAYANA,


face fallen, the leaders of monkey-bands, were exceedingly
delighted and rendered homage unto Lakshmana, And then
those monkey-chiefs—Pramathi, Rabhasa, Sarabha- and.
Gandam&dana, not brooking (their foe) summoned their
impetuosity. And suddenly springing ‘up, those highly
powerful monkeys endowed with terrific prowess descended
upon those four best of steeds. And on those chargers being
assailed by those monkeys resembling mountains, blood
gushed out of their mouths. And then the steeds were
smashed and sent to the ground. And having slain the
steeds, and smitten the mighty car-warrior,* again by a
vehement bound, came to the side of Lakshmana. And
springing down from his car whose steeds had been slain,
Ra&vana’s son, his charioteer having been pounded, charged
the son of Sumitr& with arrows, And then Lakshmana
resembling the great Indra, on {Indrajit’s) best of chargers
having been despatched, in the encounter began to terribly
tive with arrows discharged (his foe) footing on the earth and
showering excellent sharpened shalts,


SECTION LXLI.


Havre his steeds slain, the night-ranger—Indrajit.
standing on the ground, waxing fiercely angered, flamed up
in energy. ‘And armed with bows, they, desirous of slaying
each other with shafts resembled an elephant and a bull ina
forest, came out for securing victory in encounter, And


* Maharatham (ac.) may also mean mighty car, By the way the samasa
or junction called Tafpurusha is a frequent source of obscurity in Sanskrit,
specially where the gender of the word without samdsa is the same with that
of the thing signified by the samdsa, as in this case,—T.


YODDHARANDAM. sary


slaughtering one another, the R&kshasas and the wood-
rangers, ruabing this way and that, did not (for a moment}
leave their lords, Then Ravana’s son, gladdening all the
Rakshasas, and himself feeling cheered, addressed them ia
words of praise, saying,—"All sides are entircly enveloped
in this gloom,—so that, O foremost of Rakshasas, here we
do not know who belongeth unto us and who not.—Do ye
fight fearlessly for stupifying the monkeys; and I too,
mounted on a car, shail come hither into the conflict. Do ye
a0 act that the high-souled rangers of the woods may
mot attack me as I enter the city.” Saying this, that
slayer of foes—Ravana’s son, deceiving the wood-rangers,
entered the city of Lank& for providing himself with »
(fresh) car, And embellishing a chariot, graceful and
adorned with gold, furnished with srdgas and swords and
arrows, yoked with superb steeds, and driven by a charioteer,
knowing horses and possessed of instructions (anent his
art),—that victor in battle—the exceedingly energetic son of
Ravana—ascended it, And that hero, Mandodari’s son, urged
on by the force of the Finisher, went out of the city,
surcounded by the foremost Rakshasas ; aud drawn by fast-
speeding steeds, he presented himself before Lakshmana
along with Bibhishana, And seeing Riivana’s son seated on
the car, the son of, Sumited and the exceedingly powerful
monkeys and the R&kshasa—Bibhishana—were highly
amazed at the lighthandedness of that intelligent one. And
Rivana’s son, waxing furious, in that contest began to bring
down monkeys by hundreds and by thousands, And that
victor in battle—R&vana’s son—fired with wrath, summoning
all his celerity, slaughtered monkeys, drawing his bow into
acircle. And slaughtered by #4rdchas of terrific impetuo-
sity, the monkeys saught the shelter of Sumitra’s son, like
creatures seeking the refuge of their Lord. Then the son of
Raghu, flaming up in martial wrath, severed his bow,


© Indrajit's.


178


1418 RAMAYANA,


displaying his fleethandedness. Thereat, taking another bow,
(indrajit) hurriedly fastened the string to it. And this bow
also did Lakshmana cut off by means of @ brace of arrows.
And when (Indrajit) had his-bow severed, Sumitra’s soo
pierced the sop of Ravana with five shafts resembling the
venom of a poisonous serpent. And the shafts discharged
from his* mighty bow, piercing hist person, dropped to the
earth like unto powerful red serpents. And having his bow
cut off, Ravana’s son, vomitting blood by his mouth, took up
a superior bow powerful to a degree and having a stout
string. And then aiming at Lakshmana, he, summoning his
utmost celerity, showered arrows, as showereth Purandara in
the season of rains. Thereat Lakshmana, subduer of
enemies, retaining his calmness, resisted that powerful
arrowy shower shot by Indrajit. And then that exceedingly
energetic one, Raghu’s son, possessing himself in calmness,
displayed (his prowess) unto the son of Ravana ; and this
was wonderful (to behold), And then displaying his lightness
in the use of weapons, Lakshmana, growing furious, pierced
the R&kshasas with three arrows each in that mighty
encounter; and the lord of RBkshasas struck him with
showers of shafts. And pierced sore by that powerful
enemy—slayer of foes—he incessantly sent innumerable are
rows after Lakshmana. And ere they reached their destination,
that slayer of hostile heroes severed them with whetted
arrows.; and in the encounter that righteous one and
foremost of car-warriors with a dart having bent joints, cut
off the head of his charioteer mounted on the car. And
deprived of their driver, there the steeds, retaining their
calmness, began to go in rounds,—and this was wonderful.
Then Sumitr&'s son of steady prowess, fired with anger, in
that contest, frightening all, pierced his horses with arrows.
And not brooking that act (of his adversary), Rivana’s son


* Lakshmana's,
+ Indzajit’s


YUDDHAKANDAM. Tag


in the encounter pierced with ten shafts Sumitr’’s son capable
of making people’s down stand on end. And his shafts resembl-
ing thunderbolts, and like unto all varieties of venom, touch-
ing (Lakshmana's) mail having a golden splendour, were
reduced to naught. Thereat considering Lakshmana as clad
in an impenetrable armour, R4vana’s son—Indrajit—growing
furiously enraged, displaying his lighthandedness in arms,
pierced Lakshmana in the temples with three well-knobbed
shafts, And with those arrows lodged in his temples,
Raghu's son, delighting in battle, appeared beautiful in the
field like a mountain furnished with three summits. Albeit
thua smitten in the contest by the Raksha with shafts,
Lakshmana swiftfy smote him in turn with five arrows ; and
in the encounter Lakshmana drawing his bow, pierced with
shafts Indrajit's face graced with elegant ear-rings. And
those heroes—Lakshmana and Indrajit—equipped wittr
exceedingly powerful bows, and endowed with heroism and
dreadful prowess, wounded each other with sharp arrows,
And both Lakshmana an‘ Indrajit, with their persons bathed
in blood in that encounter, appeared {ike unto flowering
Kingukas, And approaching each other, those bowmen, each
setting his heart on victory, wounded each other all over the
body with terrific shafts. Then Ravana’s son, carried away
by martial rage, pierced Bibhishana in his handsome face
with theee accows. And piercing the lord of Rakshasas,
Bibhishana, he with three iron-headed arrows, pierced the
monkey-leaders each with a shaft. Thereat, enraged at
him more furiously than ever, the exceedingly energetic
Bibhishana with his mace despatched the steeds of the
awicked-minded son of Ravana, Then jumping down from
his chariot with its horses slain, ({Indrajit), endowed with
great energy, who had his charioteer pounded, discharged a
dart at bis uncle. And seeing it descend, the enhancer of
Sumitri’s joy severed the same with whetted arrows and
brouvgit it down in ten Iragments to the ground. And


3490 . RAMAYANA,


Bibhishana of a tough bew, growing enraged, discharged
at (Indrajit), who had his steeds slain, five speeding shafte
Ahaving the touch of the thunder-bolt—And those arrows
furnished with gold at the feathered parts, riving his person,
were bathed in blood, and resembled mighty red serpents.
Thereat wroth with his wncle, Indrajit took up an exccllent
shaft—bestowed on him by Yama himsell—endowed with
terrific force~—the flower of shafts among all the Rakahas,
And seeing that mighty shaft; set by him (om the bow-
string), the highly powerful Lakshmana, possessed of
dreadful prowess, (in his turn) took up another arrow,
bestowed by Kuvera himself of immeasurable soul in a
dream,—vnconquerable, and incapable of being borne even
by the celestials and Asuras with Indra at their head. And
on their best of bows being powerfully drawn with their
arms resembling bludgeons, they set up cries like unto
Kraunchas. And on those foremost of shafts set on those
excellent bows of those heroes, being drawn, flamed up in
exceeding splendour. And those flaming arrows, discharged
from the bows, illumining the welkin, with vehemence struck
at each other's head. And a concussion took place of those
arrows of terrific aspects; and a furious fire sprang up
thereat, with embers shooting arovnd. And dashing against
each other like unto mighty planets, they, reduced to an
hundred shivers in the encopnter, saught the earth. Seeing
their shafts bafited, Indrajit and Lakshmana, staying
on the edge of the battle, were seized with shame and wrath,
Thereat Sumitr3’s son, flying into a fury, took up a Varuna
weapon. And the conquerer of the great Indra intent on
battle, in the encounter discharged a terrific Raudra weapon ;
and the exceedingly wonderful Varuna weapon was baffled
by him. Then, waxing wroth, that victor in batthe—the
wondrous energetic Indrajit~as if anvihilating the world,
discharged a fliming Agneya weapon. And the heroic
Lakshmana resisted it with a Solar weapon, Seeing his


YUDDHAZANDAM. igat


weapon resisted, Rivana's son, transported with passion,took
‘wp an Asura arrow, capable of rending foes. And from that
weapon issued daggers and clubs and darts and dhugandis
and maces and swords and axes.* And in the conflict,
seeing that dire and dreadful weapon, irrisistible to all
creatures and capable of riving all arms, the effulgent
Lakshmana baffied it with a Mabegwarat weapon. And the
encounter that took piace between them was wonderful and
vapable of making people’s down stand on end. And beings
stationed in the sky surrounded Lakshmana on all sides: And
in that terrific encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas
resounding with dreadful roars, the welkin was covered
with innumerable beings seized with wonderment. And
saints and Pitris and deities and Gandharbas and birds and
serpents, placing Satakratu in their front, protected Laksh-
mana in the conflict. And then that hero,Raghava’s younger
brother, fixed (on his bow) another superior shaft, having
the feel of fire itself,and capable of riving the son of Ravana ;
furnished with fair feathers ; tapering ; having elegant joints;
symmetrical; and plated with gold,—an arrow capable of
finishing the body, irrisistible; dreadful; terrific unto
Rakshasas ; resembling the venom of poisonous serpents ; and
worshipped by the celestial hosts ; by which the exceedingly
energetic and wonderful: Lord riding the horset—Sakra—
of old in the war between the celestials and the Asuras had
defeated the Dinavas. And Sumitr4’s son, Lakshmana.graced
with auspiciousness, drawing on hia best of bows that
foremost of shafts—the Aindra weapon—invincible in conflict,
spoke these words, tending to bring about hix success,g—


* This arrow resembled somewhat the bomb-shells in modern European
warfare—T.

+ £2. belonging to Mahegwara or Siva.

} The celestial steed, Uchchaigravd, sprung from the ocean on the
occasion of the churning of the deep—T.

§ Words addressed to the deity presiding over the weapon,


1422 | RAMAYANA,


“If Dagaratha’s son—R&ma—is righteous and truthful, and
if in prowess he hath no rival, then slay this son of Rivana.”
Saying this, the heroic Lakshmana in that conflict, drawing
the straight-speeding arrow up to his ear,* discharged it at
Indrajit. And shooting the Aindra weapon, that destroyer of
hostile heraes—Lakshmana —severing from its trunk the head
of Indrajit with its corslet, graced with burning ear-rings,
brought it down tothe ground, And the mighty severed
head of the Riikshasa’s son, resembling one made of gold,
was seen covered with blood, And slain, Ravana’s son
dropped to the earth, with his armour and corslet on, and his
bow fallen (from his grasp). And then all the monkeys with
Bibhishana set up cheers, even as the immortals cheered
at the destruction of Vritra. And in the sky there arose tho
victorious shouts of all beings and high souled saints, and
also of Gandharbus and Apsarfs. Aod knowing (Indrajit)
fallen (in fight), the mighty army of Rakshasas, attacked by
monkeys burning for victory, fled in the ten cardinal
directions. And assailed by the monkeys, the Rakshasas,
pursued (by their foes), with their senses lost, rushed towards
Lanka, leaving their arms behind. And overwhelmed with
fright, R&kshasas fled in an hundred directions, all renounc-
ing their arms—bearded darts, and swords, and axes, And
harassed by the monkeys, some hurriedly entered Lanka,
and some plunged into the sea, and some saught shelter in
the mountains. And seeing Indrajit slain and lying down on
the field of battle, thousands of R&kshasas fied away. As
when the Sun sets, his rays remain no longer, on that
Rakshasa having fallen, the Rakshasas dispersed in the ten
cardinal quarters, like unto the Sun when his rays have been
rendered mild, or fire which hath been extinguished. And
the mighty-armed (Indrajit) was utterly reft of life. And
on the son of the Rakshasa-chief falling, the world, having
ita foe slain, with its huge «ffliction gone off, experienced


* ie. drawing the bow to its utmost stretch.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1423


the height of joy. And on that unrighteous Raikshasa
having been slain, the reverend Sakra together with the
Maharshis was filled with delight. And sounds of kettle-
drums were heard in the sky proceeding from the celestiats.
And Dlossoms were showered by dancing Apsaris and
high-souled Gandharbas. And this was wonderful (to behold.)
And on that Rakshasa of fell deeds having been slain, the
dust was laid, the water became transparent, the sky looked
bright, and the deities and D&navas were filled with
rejoicings. And on that Dread of all creatures having beea
slain, the gods, Gandharbas and Danavas, assembled together
in joy, said,—""Now let the Brahmanas who have their sina
removed, with thir anxiety gone off, range about.”
And then the monkey-leaders, seeing that foremost of
Nairitas of unparalleled prowess slain in battle, began to
gladly pay homage (unto Lakshmana). And Bibhishana and
Hanuman and. Jambavin—leader of bears—saluted and
hymned Lakshmana on the score of his victory, And
shouting and bounding and roaring, the monkeys at this
hour of high joy stood surrounding Raghu’s son.* And
flourishing their tails and striking the earth (with them), the
monkeys shouted,—'Victory unto Lakshmana!’ And embrac-
ing each other, the monkeys with delighted spirits began to
converse in various ways touching Raghava’s welfare. And
beholding that deed, difficult of being done, performed by
their beloved friend—Lakshmana—and hearing their foe—
Indrajit—slain (in battle), the celestials attained the summit
of joy.


* Descendant, that is,


pyre RAMAYANA.


SECTION Exuu,


Hawine ia the conflict slain that conquerer of enemies,
Lakshmana graced with auspicious marks, with his body
bathed in blood, experienced delight. And then supporting
himself on Bibhishana and Hanumfin, the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana endowed with prowess, taking
Jambavain, Hanuman and all the monkeys with him, speedily
went to the place where Sugriva and Righava were. And
then going round Rama and saluted him, Sumitr&'s son
stood before his brother, like Indra’s brother staying before
Sakra. And approaching with a look which of itself was
significant,* the heroic Bibbishana described unto the high-
souled Righava the dreadful destruction of Indrajit. Aod
then the delighted Bibhishana related unto Rima how
the high-souled Lakshmana had cut off the head of R&vana’s
son. And as goon as that exceedingly powerful one heard
of the destruction of Indrajit by Lakshmana, he experienced
a huge accession of joy, and thus delivered himself,
“Excellent, O Lakshmana! Pleased am I (with thee). Thou
hast performed a difficult feat. The son of Ravana having
been slain, know for certain-that we have been victorious.”
And then smelling the head of the bashful Lakshmana,
enhancer of fame, (R&4ma) endowed with prowess, from
affection forcibly hugged him inte his lap. And making him
seat on his lap, and overpowering him with embraces,t
(Biima) again and again tenderly eyed his brother, Lakshmana.
And moved with grief, that best of persons, Rima, smelling
the head of Lakshmana, wounded with darts and having
hie person pierced (with arms), sighing and breathing hard —


9 ie. of the destruction of Indrajit.
+ Avapiritam—(ac) pained. RAmSnuya says this epithet refers ta
Lakshmanp’s having been wounded in the encounter, I differ from him.—T.


VUDOHARANDA.


sge5


end nursing his body with his hand, addressed Lakshmana,,
soothing him,—"To-day his son having been slaio, I- deem
Bavann himself as stain in fight. On that wicked-minded
enemy of mine having been destroyed, I am victorious {in
encounter). By luck, G hero, hast thou in confict severed the
right arm of the felt Ravana. Verily he (Indrajit) was his stay.
Both Bibhishana and. Hanum§n have done mighty deeds in
battle. In three days and nights, (my enemy) hath heen
brought down. To-day have I been made foeless. Now
Ravana will for certain march forth,—backed by a mighty
phalanx, Ravana will for certain sally out, hearing his son
brought down. That unconquerable lord of Rakshas
aggrieved for the destruction of his son, marching out,
shall { slay, environed with a mighty force. O Lakshmana,
the conqueror of Sakra having in battle been slain by thee—
who art my lord—Sith and the (entire) earth are not
incapable of being obtained by me.” Having thus soothed
and embraced his brother, Raghu’s soa—Rama—highly
rejoiced, culling Sushena, said,—"Do thou so act that this
highly wise son of Sumitr&, devoted to his friends, may be
healed and be eased. Do thou without delay heal Sumitra’s
son, attached to his friends, of his wounds. And do thou also
carelully relieve all those heroes in the army of bears
and monkeys fighting with trees,—as well as others, who
have been wounded and have got sores {in consequence).”
Thus addressed by Rama, the high-souled monkey-leader
administered a potent medicine to the nose of Lakshmanz,
And smefling the same, he got healed; he was relieved of
his pain and his outgoing vitality was shat up. “And al the
mandate of Raghava he likewise treated his friends headed
by Bibhishana and all the principal monkeys. And res-
tored to his alural condition, Sumitr&’s .sen, healed, and
with his exhaustion removed, and his suffering gone off in a
moment, experienced exhilaration of spirits. And Rima and
the monkey-king and Bibhishana and the powerful lord of


179


1436 RAMAYANA.


bears along with their hosts, seeing Sumitra’s ‘son risen
hale, rejoiced greatly in delight. And the high-souled sox
of Dagaratha honored exceedingly that exceedingly hard feat
of Lakshaman and the monkey-king, hearing that the
conquerer of Sakra had fallen in fight, was filled with joy,


SECTION LXLII,


Cusn the counsellors of Pulastya’s son, hearing of
Indrajit having been slain, speedily conveyed the tidings
unto the Ten-necked one, who was ignorant* of the same,
“O mighty monarch, in our very sight thy exceedingly
effulgent son hath been slain by Lakshmana with the help of
Bibhishana. And that hero confronted by the (other) hero,
hath been vanquished in fight. And the hero, thy son, the
conquerer of the celestiat chief, hath also been slain by
Lakshmana, And having gratified Lakshmana with his
sbaits, he hath repaired to the supreme regions.” Hearing
of that mighty terror, viz, the rueful and dreadful
destruction of his son, Indrajit, in battle, he straightway
swooned away. Then regaining his consciousness after a
long while, that foremost of Rikshasas—the king—over-
whelmed with grisf for his son, and distressed, burst into
lamentations, with his senses wildered,—thus,—‘O foremost
inthe Rakshasa army! O my child endowed with high
might! Having conquered Indra himself, wherefore to-day
hast thou come under the sway of Lakshmana? Doubtless,
thou enraged could pierce with thy arrows the Destroyer of
Time bimself, and the summit of Mand&ra,—what shall I say


* Avajudya, Rani&nuya says it means “ignorant of the same.” Tirtha
says it means, ‘Seeing’ Then the sense would be, ‘the counsellors, haviog
first seen Indrojit slain,‘intormed Ravana of it.’—T.


VYUDDHARANDAM. 1487


of -Lakshmana in.encounter ? To-day king Viwacwata hath
raised himself immensely in my estimation, for to-day be,
© mighty-armed one, lath brought thee under the law: of
Time. But this is the way of capable warciors at
well as celestials. He that layeth down his life for his
lord, repaireth to heaven. To-day seeing Indrajit slain,
the deities and the guardians of the’ worlds, and the
mighty saints, their fear gone off, shall sleep peacefully.
This triple world and this entire earth with her woods,
reft of one—Indrajit—appear to me as vacant. To-day
shall I hear the cries of the daughters of the Nairitas
in my inner apartment, like unto the roars of she-elephants
in a mountain-cavern. Renouncing thy. state of an heir-
apparent, and Lank& and the Rakshas, O subduer of enemies,
and thy mother, and me, and thy wife—whither hast thou
gone, (leaving) us ally O hero, I having gone to the region
of Yama, thou ought to have performed my last rites, but:
thou standest in a relation the very reverse of this.* And
Sugriva living and Lakshmana and R&ghava, without extract-
ing my dart, whither hast thou gone, leaving us ally And
then arising from the disaster that had befallen his son, a
mighty wrath overcame the lord of Rakshasas—Ravana, as
he was thus indulging in lamentations. And even as ia
summer, the (Solar) rays, flame up the Sun, the destruction
of his son flamed up all the fiercer, him, who was naturally
irascible. And as he kept yawning in passion, a flaming.
fire with smoke darted from his mouth, even as it did from
the mouth of Vritra. And burning in grief for the destruction
of bis son, and coming under masterdom of passion, that
hero—R&vana—reflecting (awhile) in his mind, resolved upon
slaying Vaidehi, And naturally red, and reddened (atili-
more by the fire of wrath, Ravana’s glowing eyes were
dreadful (to behold). And his form, terrific by nature, in

© fe, U bave to perform thy last rites, thou having fallen’ in fight while {
am alive—T.


cers) RAMAYANA, 7


consequence of the fire of his wrath havieg possessed it
entirely, resembled the form of the enraged Rudra. Aad.
from the eyes of that infuriated one fell drops of tears as
drop from a flaming lamp drops of burning oil. And as he
gdinded his teeth, the gnashing resembled the sounds sent Ly
the machine* drawn by the Danavas and chorning the deep,
The Rakshasys durst not approach that one eying round
and resembling the Destroyer himself, intent on devouring
both mobile and immobile. Then exceedingly enraged,
Ravana—lord of R&kshasas—spoke in the midst of the
Rakshasas, inciting them to battle,-—-“l practised severe
austerities for thousands of years; and gratified the Sclf-
sprung at times. Neither from Asuras nor from celestials
can any fear xpring to me. My mail conferred on me by
Brahima, which in effulgence resembles the Sun himself, was
not broken by blows like unto thunder-bolt at the war
between the deities and demons. To-day who will come
forward against me in battle accoutred in that and mounted
on a car in the conflict? Not even Purandara himself, Do
ye, beating hundreds of drums, to-day raise that mighty and
dreadful bow of mine which, with arrows, had been bestowed
on one by the grptified Self-sprung at the war of the gods
and Asuras,—so that I may therewith compass the destruc-
tion of Rima and Lakshmana in mighty batile.” Burning
(in grief} for the destruction of his son, the fell Ravana,
coming under the influence of anger, reflecting (in his mind),
resolved to slay Sil. And eying round, that copper-eyed
and dreadful one of a terrific aspect, distressed, in a piteous
voice addressed all the night-rangers, saying,—-“By bis
power of illusion, my beloved child, for deceiving the wood-
rangers, slaying something (else), had shown it unto them
as Sita. Now will I do that good office myseli,—
Vaidei will I slay—even her that is devoted to that friend
of Kshatriyas.” Having spoken thus unto his counsellors,
* Meaning the mouatain Mandéra,


Hag VUDDHARANDAM. 1489.


he swiftly took op a sword; and raising it, of excellent
temper and of cerulean hue, lie rushed ont vehemently,
surrounded by his wives and counsellors. From grief for his.
ton, Ravana with his consciousness wildered, taking up &
sword, in rage, rushed towards the place where Mithila’
daughter was. Seeing the Rakshasa rixing on, some,
emitted leonine roars, and seeing the R&kshasa enraged,
embracing each other, said,—"To-day those two brothers,
seeing this one, will be exceedingly pained. By this one,
influenced with passion were the four guardians of the
worlds ‘conquered ; and many other foes were brought down
in battle. Procuring gems from the three worlds, Ravana
enjoyeth them, Neither in strength nor in prowess is there
any one on earth who is his compeer.” As they were
speaking thus, Ravana, reft of his senses by wrath, rushed
against Vaidehi, who bad taken up her abode in the Agoka
wood. And dissuaded by his friends endowed with good in-
telligence,he,wrought up with high wrath,darted (againat Sita),
even as an enraged planet® rusheth against Rohinit in the
firmament. And the blameless daughter of Mithila protected
by the Rakshasis, saw the infuriated Ravana bearing that best
of blades in his hand, Seeing (Ravana) approach, sword in
hand, despile the earnest entreaties of his friends, Janaka's
daughter, Sil%, pained and overcome by grief, said, weeping,
— “From the way in which, wrought up with wrath, this
wicked-minded one is rushing on at me personally, it appears
that he will slay me, who have a lord, as one who hath not.
He did urge me much ever devoted to my Jord, saying ‘Be
thou my wife ;' but forsooth I disregarded him. And plainly
in consequence of my refusal, he bath given way to despair.
And overcome by anger and passion, he is ready to slay me,
Or it may -be that to-day for me those foremost of men, the
brothers+Rima and Lakshmana—have been slain in
encounter by this inglorious one. I heard a furious and


*  Kuja, ete. We ite + Hesperus,


1430" RAMAYANA,


fearful uproar raised by countless Rakshasat rejoicing,.
and expressing their delight—Alas! O fie For me those
princes have met with destruction, Or it may be that hot
without ‘slaying Rima and Lakshmana, this terrific
Riakshasa, having his Heart set on sin, from grief for his aon,
will slay me, Foot that Iam, I did not then act agreeably
to Hanumin's words. If I had gone away seated on his
back, without waiting for the victory (of my lord}, I
devoted to him, placed on his lap, should not have come by
this repentance. When Kaucaty&, having an only son, will
hear of her son slain in battle, J fancy, her heart .shall burst.
And, weeping, she will remember that high-souled one’s birth
and boyhood, and youth and pious acts and loveliness. And
that one bereft of her consciousness, filled with despair, alter
having performed his srdddka,* will doubtless enter into
fire or water, Shame on the unchaste and hump-backed
Manthar&, having her heart fixed in sin, for whose sake this
grief shall exercise Kaugalyal’ Seeing the distressed
daughter of Mithila tament thus, like unto Rohini come
under the away of a planet in the absence of the Moon, in
the meanwhile hist pure and good courtier, named Suparcwa,
etidowed with intelligence, albeit prevented by other
courtiers, spoke unto R&vana, foremost of R&akshasas,—
“Wherefore, O Ten-necked one, O thou who art the very
younger brother of Vaigravana himself, Dost thou desire
to slay Vaidehi, forsaking righteousness? Why, O hero {
© lord of Rukshasas! having led the Brahmacharyya mode
of life, studied the Vedas, and returned from the house of
thy spiritual guide, and ever engaged in religious acts, to-day
dost thou intend te slay a woman? Do thou, O king, now
stay expecting Mithila’s daughtert endowed with loveliness ;


* Funereal rites performed in accordance with the injunctlona of the
Hindu Serlptures.—T.

t Rav v

+ Explains the commentator : "till-thou slayest Rama in battle." —T.


YODDHAKANQAM. apt


and do thou along with us vent thy wrath os him.* To-day
being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, do thou this
very day prepare for conflict ; at amdvasyd,t environed with
thy forces, do thou march for victory. Heroic, and intelli.
gent, a mighty car-warrior and swordsman, thou, mounted on
a car, slaying the redoubtable son of Dacaratha, wilt obtain
Mithila’s daughter.” Thus exhorted by hia friend, the
unrighteous Ravana accepted his virtuous speech ; and then
that powerful one went (back) to his house, and, surrounded
by his friends, entered the court.


SECTION Lxttv,


Eareaine his court, the king, distressed, and exceed-
ingly aggrieved, sat him down on the foremost seat sighing
like an enraged lion. And stricken with grief in consequence
of his son’s death, that highly powerful Ravana, with folded
hands, addressed all the heroic Rakshasas, saying :—Do
ye all proceed to battle with elephants, horses and cars.
And encircling Rima only and discharging shafts at him,
delightedly, like unto clouds, in the rainy season, pouring
water, do ye slay him. Or I shall slay him to-morrow in the
presence of all, wounded by you in the mighty encounter
with sharpened arrows.” Hearing the speech of their lord
the Rakshasas, with a huge army and 2 host of cars, speedily
issued out for battle. And they all threw at the monkeys
life-destroying Parighas, Pattias, arrows, daggers and
Parashwadhas. And the monkeys too threw crags and trees
at the Rakshasas. Thus on the eve of sun set there arose
a terrible conflict between the Rakshasas and the monkeys.


* Rama, t t.¢, to-morrow,


tags RAMAYANA,


And they struck each other in the conflict with clubs, chitras,
Prasas, daggers and Parashwadhas. The conflict being thus
carcied on, there aroxe a mighty dust which was again
destroyed hy the current of blood gushing out of the persona
of the Rakshasas and the monkeys. Elephants and cars
were like the banks of that river of blood, the arrows were
like the fishes, and the flags were the trees on their banks
and the corpses were like planks afloat there. Being thus
wounded and assailed by the R&kshasas, those heroic
monkeys leaped and broke dowa the flags, armours,
cars, horses and other weapons. And with their sharp
teeth and nails they scratched the hair, ears, foreheads
and the noses of the Ra&kshasas. Like unto vultures
falling upon a felled tree, hundreds of monkeys fell upon
one R&kshasa in that encounter, And the Rakshasas
resembling mountains, with huge clubs, prdsas, daggers and
hardshwadhas, struck the monkeys (in their turn). Being thus
assailed by the R&kshasas, the mighty host of monkeys
took refuge of Rama, the son of Dagaratha, the worthy refuge
of all creatures. Thereupon the highly effulgent and power-
ful Rama, taking up his bow, entered the Rakshasa host
and began to make a downpour of arrows. And Rama
entering the field, those terrible Rakshasas, being burnt with
the fire of his arrows, could not stand before him like unto
clouds disappearing before the Sun in the welkin, And
the night-rangers only espied the dreadful feats performed
by Rama and which were ubove the power of others.
Except when guiding the huge army or driving the cars they
could not see Rima like unto the wind invisible in a forest.
They all beheld the R&kshasa force scattered, wounded,
burnt down with arrows, broken and assailed with weapons,
by Rama, but sone could see the quich-moving Rama, As
people cannot see the soul which governs all objects of
wense so they could not see RA&ma, who was thus inflicting
(wounds on them, “it ie he who is destroying the suldicrs


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1433


riding the elephants,it is he who is breaking down the mighty
cars, and it is he who with sharp arrows is slaying the
cavalry—rider and horse.” Thus saying those R&kshasas, in

that conflict and in the very presence of Rima, highly
enraged, began to slay each other. They were all bewildered

by the huge Gandharba weapon discharged by the high-
souled Rama and so they could not see Rama, who was thus
burning down their force. And the R&kshasas sometimes
beheld thousands of Rama in the battle field and again saw

one Rama only. They at times saw the quick-moving golden

end of the bow of that high-souled one, resembling a circular
fire brand but they did not behold Raghava. And he
looked like &4/a chakra, having his middle body as its navel,

his own strength as its lustre, the arrow for its radius or
spoke, the bow for the circumference, the twang of the bow
for its sound, his power and intelligence for its brightness,
and the aim of the celestial weapons for ite limit. And.
in the eighth division of the time by Rama alone with
arrows resembling the flame of fire were destroyed ten
thousands swift-coursing cars, eighteen thousand elephants
fourteen thousands horses and riders and two million

Rakshasa infantry assuming shapes at will. And those night-
rangers, who were still left, having their horses killed, cars and
flags broken, fled in fear of life to the city of Lanka. And
the battle field, filled with slain horses elephants and infantry,
looked like the high-souled and enraged Rudra’s arena. of
sports. Thereupon the celestials with Gandharbas, Siddhas

and the great ascetics glorified the wonderful feat of Rama.’
Aud the virtuous-souled Rama addressed Sugriva, Bibhishana

the monkey Hanumén, the leading monkey Jambaviin, Mainda

and Divida who were near him, saying—"This is the power of
my weapons and as well as that of Rudra.” The high-souled

Rima, equalling Sakra in prowess, thus slaying the huge

host of the ford of Rakshasas and assailing them with shafts
and weapons—the celestials, delighted, sang his praises.


180


140348 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LxLV.


‘By Rama, of unwearied actions, with flaming arrows
feathered in burning gold, were destroyed thousands of
elephants—many horses with their riders, many a car crested
with flaming banners ; thousands of heroic Rakshasas assum-
ing shapes at will, engaged by Ravana, and armed with
clubs and parighds ; and golden pennons. Beholding and
hearing of this the remaining night-rangers assembled and
were greatly bewildered, poorly and stricken with anxiety.
The widows and those who had Jost their children or
kinsmen approached those Rakshasas and overwhelmed
with grief, bewailed piteously,—Alaa ! why did the aged and
grim-visaged Surpanakh&, having her belly extending down- ~
ward, behold in the forest Rama graceful like Kandarpa.
And bebolding him of great beauty and prowess, ever
engaged in the welfare of all creatures, that ugly one, worthy
of being slain by people, was excited with Just. Why
‘did that ugly-faced she-demon, devoid of all qualities, address
Rama, having a beautiful countenance, gifted with many
virtues and great effulgence? Alas for the misfortune of the
Rakshasas, the aged Rikshasee brought before him such a
vile proposal, hated of all and worthy of creating laughter.
For the destruction of Khara, Dushana and other Rikshasas
that ugly one approached Raghava with such a vile intention.
It was for her that Rivana created enmity (with Rima)
and Sit% was carried away by the Ten-necked. Raksha:
But he could not spread his influence upon Sit& the daughter
of king Janaka and deep rooted and eternal became the
enmity with the highly powerful Raghava. And beholding
the Rakshasa Birddha slaia by Rima alone—(Rivana)
wishing Vaidehi should have regarded that as a sufficient
proof of his prowess. And fourteen thousand Rakehasas of |


YUDDHAKANDAM. tags


terrible deeds were slain by him in Janasthfna with shafts
resembling the flame of fire. Khara, Dushana as well as
Trigir® were slain by him in conflict with arrows resembling
the Sun—this was a sufficient proof (of his power).
Yoyanab&hu and Kavandha, drinking blood, were slain by
him, roaring with wrath—this too was a sufficient proof of
his power, Rama slew the powerful Vali, the son of the
thousand eyed one, resembling the cloud—that too was the
sufficient proof of his prowess. By him Sugriva, poorly and
living in the mount Rishyamukha, having all his desires
frustrated, was placed on the throne—that too even was
the sufficient proof-of his power. He (Ravana) from foolish-
ness did not like the becoming’ speech of Bibhishana
conducive to the acquirement of piety and wealth and
securing the welfare of the Rakshasas. Had the younger
brother of the lord of wealth (Ravana) observed the words of
Bibhishana, Lank& would not have been overwhelmed with
gtief and reduced to the state of a cremation ground,
Hearing of the destruction of the highly powerful Kumbha-
karna by Rima, of the irrepressible Atikdya by Lakshmana
aa well as of his beloved sun Indrajit, Rivana did not come
to his senses.* There is audible in every house of the
Rakshaeas, the cry,—'My son, my brother, my husband is
slain in battle.’ In conflict have been destroyed by the
heroic Rima, thousand cars, horses, serpents and infantry.
Perhaps Rudra, Vishnu, Mahendra or the performer of
bundred sacrifices, or even Death, in the shape of Rima,
is slaying us. By Rama all the heroes have been slain—
despair has taken possession of our minds—-we do not
behold the end of our lerror and are bewailing being


= One sioba has been omitted here by some of the editors, which
when translated stands thus When one monkey only Hanumis killed the
prince Akebaye and reduced the whole city to ashes with the fire of his tail
Riivane should have come to his seases. sf


1436 RAMAYANA,


deprived of our lords. Does not the Tea necked lero, who
has obtained boons (from Brahm) perceive that’a mighty
disaster shall befall him from Rama? -Neither the celestials,
Gandharbas, Pigachas nor Rakshasas shall be able to save
him from Rama in conflict. In every battle many an
accident befalls Ravana—this bespeaks of his destruction at
the hands of Rima. The great Patriarch, being pleased,
conferred upon Ravana the boon that no fear would proceed
unto him from the celestials, the Dinavas or the Rakshasas
—but he did not beg of him, security from men. Forsooth,
he is that fearful man who shall slay Ravana and the
Rakshasas, The celestials, being thus oppressed by Ravana,
who had obtained the boon, worshipped the great Patriarch
with severe austerities. And being propitiated-with them,
the high-souled Patriarch, for their welfare, addressed the
celestials, with the following pregnant speech. ‘From to-.
day shall the R&kshasas and Danavas roam for ever,
afraid of the celestials.” Thereupon the celestiats headed
by Indra engaged in propitiating Mahadeva, the slayer of
Tripura, and who rides upon a bull. And being pleased,
MahSdeva addressed them, saying,~~"For your welfare there
will be born a woman who shall be the cause of the destruc-
tion of the Rakshasas.” As hunger, being engaged by
the celestials, did destroy in olden time, all the Danavas,
so shall she (Sita) the root of the extinction of R&kshasa
race destroy us all with Ravana. Alas! for the foolish-
neas of the vicious-minded and insolent Ravana destruction
has faced us and we are overwhelmed with grief. We
do not see any such being in the world who can afford
us shelter. Raghava has attacked us like unto the fire of
dissolution. There is no refuge for us who have been
stricken with fear as no help reaches the clephints ia a
forest beset with fire. The high-souled Bibhishana did the
jast thing in proper time—'te took shelter of him from whom
he expected danger.” Thus bewailed pietoously and low ily


YUDDHARANDAM. 9437,


the she-demons holding each other by the neck and being
stricken with fear and grief.


SECTION LxLvI.


"Pserevron Ravana heard in every house of Lanka the
piteous cries of the she-demons possessed by sorrow. And
sighing hard he engaged in meditation for some time, And
terrible-looking as he was, Ravana was greatly worked up with
ire. Having his eyes reddened with anger, and gnashing his

-teeth and biting the lips, that one, irrepressible by other
Rakshasas, looked like the fire of dissolution incarnate. There-
upon the lord of Rakshasas,in anger,as if burning down every~
thing with his look,addressed the Rakshas who were near him
—Mahodara, Mab&pSrsha,Birupiksha—"Do ye speedily speak
to the soldiers that they should sally out for battle at my
¢ommand, Hearing his speech—those Rakshas, possessed
by fear, asked by the command of the king, the Rakshasa
soldiers to be ready. And thereat “all those grim-visaged
R&kshasas saying ‘so be it’ and performing benedictory
ceremonies proceeded to the buttle-field. And those mighty
car-warriors, worshipping Riivana, and desiring the victory
of their lord, stood before them with folded hands, Thereupon
Ravana, beside himself with anger, laughing, adddressed
those Rikshasas, Mabodara, MahSparsha, and Birup&ksha,
eaying—"To-day shall { despatch both Rama and Lakshmana
to the abode of Death with arrows resembling the sun at the
time of dissolution, discharged off my bow. And slaying
the enemies I shall repair the loss of Khara, Kumbhakarna,
Prahasta and Indrajit. The atmosphere, the quarters the
sky and the deep being enveloped with the cloud of afrows


1438 RAMAYANA.


shall become invisible. I shall slay to-day alf the heroic
monkeys with my winged arrows. Ascending my car gifted
with the velocity of the wind shall I churn today the
monkey host with arrow-like waves coming from the ocean-like
bow. I shall like an elephant distress to-day the monkey-like
pools having their countenances for the blown lotuses, and
the lustre of their bodies for the filaments. To-day in the
encounter, the leaders of the monkey hosts, with their heads
transfixed with arrows, shall cover the earth, like unto lotuses
with their stalks. I shall to-day with a single arrow, cleave
hundreds of heraic monkeys fighting with trees in their hands,
I shall wipe to-day the tears of those whose brother or son hag
been slain by destroying their foe. In the encounter to-day
I shall, with the monkeys deprived of their breath and clept
with my arrows, so cover the earth that it may not be scen
by any. I shall satisfy to-day with the flesh of the enemies
slain by my shafts, the crows, vultures and others who live
upon flesh. Get ready soon my car and bring my bow. And
let the remaining night-rangers follow. me in battle.”
Hearing his words Mahip&rsha addressed the leaders of the
army who were near him, saying,—"Get your soldiers ready.”
And the commanders too quickly went round all the houses
in Lank& and asked the Rikshasas to be ready soon.
Thereupon began to issue out in a moment terrible-looking
Rakshasas, emitting roars, having dreadful faces and with
various weapons in their hands—daggers, Pattigas, maces,
clubs, furrows, sharpened saé/ss, traps,various rods, sharpened
chakra, parashwadhes, vindipalas, satdghnis and various
other excellent weapons. Thereupon at the command of
Ravana the commanders brought one Mifuta (a hundred
thousand) cars, three Nijufa elephants, sixty million: horses,
asses and camels and numberless infantry. They arranged
the soldiers before the king and in the interval the charioteer
brought the car—filled with excellent celestial weapons—
richly adorned, containing many an armour, girt wilh wa


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1439


network of (inkling ornaments. crested with various jewels,
having jewelled - pillars and a thousand golden jars,
Beholding the car the Rikshasas were greatly astonished.
Aad Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, rising up all on a sudden,
ascended that car, brilliant like the flaming fire and the
axgregate rays of a million sun, quick-coursing, having @
charioteer, drawn by eight horses, huge and shining in its
native lustre. Thereupon proceeded R&vana, encircled by
many a Rakshasa as if rending the earth with the excess
of his prowevs. There arose a huge sound of bugies
accompanied with that of Mridangas, drums, conchs, and
kaldpas, The lord of the Rakshas—wicked, the slayer of the
Brahmins—the thorn of the celestials, and who hath brought
away Sit& by stealth, has come with his umbral and
chowries to fight with the foremost of Raghus-—this cry
was heard everywhere. And with his tremendous roar the
earth shook, And hearing all on a sudden that sound, the
monkeys fled away in fear. And the highly effulgent
Ravana, having huge arms and surrounded by his ministers,
came there being certain of gaining victory. Being command-
ed by Ravana, Mabip&rsha, Mahodara and the irrepresible
Birupiksha ascended the car, They, desirous of winning
victory, issued out emitting dreadful roars in delight and
as if rending the earth -therewith. Thereupon the highly
effulgent (Ravana) resembling Death, with uplifted bow,
sallied out for battle along with the army of Rakshas. And that
mighty car-warrior, went out in his chariot drawn by quick—
coursing steeds by that gate which led to where Rima
and Lakshmana were. Thereat the sua lost its brilliance
the quarters were enshrouded with darkness ; the birds sent
forth dreadful cries and the earth shook. The celestials
poured down bloody rains—the course of the horses was
slackened—the vultures sat on the banners and jackals
emitted inauspicious cries. His left eye and the left arm
began to shake—his countenance became pale and his voice


1440 RAMAYANA,


grew harsher. The Ten-neeked Rikehasa thus going out for
hattle there appeared many had omens indicating his destruc-
tien. From the sky fell a fire-brand accompanied with the
sound of thunder; vultures and crows emitted inauspicious
cries. Disregarding these dreadful omens which appeared
then, Ravana, incited by death, foolishly went out to slay
his (enemies). And by the wheel-sound of the chariots of
the great Rikshasas the host of monkeys calling each ‘other,
excited with anger and willing to gain victory, addressed
themselves for fight. Thereupon the Ten-necked one,
enraged, with his arrows feathered in gold, made a‘‘dreadful
slaughter of the army of monkeys. And some of those
leroic monkeys were beheaded by Rivana—some had their
hearts rent and others were shorn of their ears, Some had
their breath choked, some were killed and others had their
sides broken, Some had their bands cut off and others had
their eyes put out, Aud wherever in the encounter, the
Ten-headed Rakshasa, whirling his eyes in ire, went in his
car—the monkey leaders could not stand the vehemence of
his arrows.


SECTION Lxtivilk
—~a


Tasers the earth was covered with monkeys whose bodies
were rent with the arrows of the Ten-necked (Ravana). As
the flies cannot stand before the flaming fire so they could
not bear the vehemence. of Rivana’s shafts. Being thus
assailed with pointed atrows they fled away crying, like unto
elephants being burot by fire. And R&vana with his arrows
pursued in conflict the course of clouds. Thus slaughtering
the monkeys the lords of Rakshasas speedily reached in the


YURDHAKANDAM. 4a


' encounter where Righava was. And beholding the monkeys
assciled-and afraid Sugriva placing Sushena in charge of a
gulma* addressed bimaclf for the battle. And placing
that heroic monkey, bis equal in prowess, in that command
Sogriva sallied out with a tree in his hand to meet the
enemy. And followed him on all sides the leaders of tha
monkeys with huge crags and various trees. The heroic
Sugriva emitted terrible roars in the conflict and assailed the
heroic Rikshasas and many others. The huge-bodied
monkey-chief crushed the Rikshasas fike unto the wind
uprooting the trees at the time of dissolution. He began to
make a downpour of crags atthe R&kshasa host like unto
the cloud pouring down hailstorms at the birds in the forest.
And being beheaded by the crags discharged by that monkey
chief the Rakshasas fell down like unto mountains cleft.
The Rikshasas being thus attacked and shattered by Sugriva
and roaring and failing down on all sides, an irrepressible
R&kshasa, skilled in archery, by name BirupSiksha, pronounc-
iog his own name, got down from the car and mounted an
elephant. And mounted on the elephant that highly
powerful Birupiksha sent forth Jeonine roars and dashed
against the monkeys. Exciting the joy of the Rakshasas
and removing their anxiety he discharged dreadful shafts at
Sugriva and his army. And being assailed by the pointed
arrows of that Rakshasa that lord of monkeys roared in
anger aud made up his mind to destroy him. Thereupon
uprooting a tree the heroic monkey, skilled in warfare, leaped
and atruck that huge elephant down in his presence. And
being assailed greatly by Sugriva that huge elephant
proceeded a little within the range of the how and roared
and died. And being greatly enraged on the destruction of
‘that elephant the highly powerful Rukshasa dashed forward
to face the enemy. That one of quick movements took up

* The diviston of an army ; 2 body of troops consisting of nine platoons or
nine elephants, nine chariots, twenty-seven horses and forty-five foot.
181


Brrr ° RAMAYANA,


his dagger and armour and viliog, approached Sugriva. And
hehofding his movement Sugriva took up a huge crag
resenibling cloud and hurled it against Birupiksha. That
highly powerful leading Rakshasa, finding the crag about to
foll, turned a little away and struck the monkey with hia
dagger, And being assailed with dagger by that powerful
Rakshasa the monkey remained senseless for sometime on
the ground. And rising up all on a sudden he, clenching
his fist, struck that Rakshasa in the mighty encounter.on his
breast and got him down. Being struck with the fist the
night-ranger Birupiksha greatly enraged cnt down with bis
dagger Sugriva’s armour and tumbled him down with his
feet. And the monkey rising up again was about to deat
him a blow, hard aa a thunder-bolt, with a dreadful sound,
And receding a little, he baffled its aim and returned one on
Sugriva’s breast. Finding his aim baffted and himself struck
in return by the Rikshasa, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, was
excited with anger. And the monkey-chief was now on the
look-out for an oppurtunity to strike Birupaksha, And
immediately in anger he struck. him down with a blow on
his forehead. And being thus assailed with the fist
resembling the thunder-bolt of Mahendra, he fell down on
the earth bathed in a poo! of blood. And blood gushed out
of the person of Birup&ksha like unto water issuing out of
a fountain. And the monkeys beheld their enemy(BirupBkeha)
with his eyes disfigured in anger, bathed in a foam of blood,
his whole body discoloured, trembling, rolling and crying
piteously. Thereupon those too armies of the monkeys and
Rakshasas, being ready to engage in the encounter, began to
roar like unto two mighty oceans having their banks broken,
And observing that highly powerful Rakshasa, of discoloured
eyes, siain by the king of monkeys, the monkeys and
Rukshasa forces engaged in fight and leoked like the rising
Ganges.


VYUDDHAXANDAM. ° 1443.


SECTION


Liz unto a pond in the summer both the armies became
gradually reduced. Beholding his own army and Birup&ksha
slain, Rivana, the lord of Rakshasas, was doubly excited with
ire. And observing his army reduced and slain by the
heroic (monkeys) he perceived ill omens in the fight and was
accordingly pained at heart. And he addressed Mahodara,
who was near him, saying, “O thou of great arms, all my
hopes of success are now centered in thee. Do thou slay
the enemy’s force, O hero, and display thy prowess. Now
hath come the time of returning the favours of thy master.
Do thou fight bravely.” Being thus accosted that Rikshasa-
chief Mahodara, saying “so be it” entered the enemy's army
like unto a fly entering into aflame. Excited by his master’s
command and empowered by his own prowess that (Rakshasa)
gifted with great strength, began to assail the monkeys. And
the highly powerful monkeys too taking up huge crags dashed
against the dreadful army of the enemies and crushed all the
Ra&kshasas. And Mahodara, greatly angered, severed in that
mighty encounter, with his arrows feathered in gold, the
bands, feet and thighs of the monkeys. Then the monkeys,
in fear of the R&kshasas, fled away to different quartera and
some sought shelter of Sugriva. And bebolding his powerful
monkey force thus assailed in the conflict, Sugriva dashed for-
ward and fronted Mahodara. And taking up a huge and dread-
ful crag resembling a mountain,the monkey-king hurled it with
great yehemence to slay him. Thereupon. finding. that crag
about to fall, Mahodara fearlessly severed it with his arrows.
And being suedered into a thousand pieces by, the arrow
of that Rakshaga, it fell down on the earth like unto a ‘band
of vultures. And beholding that crag thus severed, Sugriva


sate 1° RAMA YENA


was beside himself with ire ; and uplifting a s47s tree hurled
itr and the heroic: Rakshasa, the slayer of enemy's force,
severed it into several pieces with his’ arrows. Thereupon
excited with wrath he saw a perigha on the ground. Aad
horling that flaming parighka and displaying his (light-
handeduess) he struck his exceljent horse therewith.
And having his borse slain, that hero—the Rikshasa
Mahodara, ascended his car, and in great anger took
up his club. Those two heroes, with club and parigha
in their hands, engaged in battle, roaring like two bulls or
clouds accompanied with lightoing. Thereupon the night-
ranger Mahodara, inflamed with ire, hurled at Sugriva, the
club flaming like the Sun. And beholding that dreadful
club about to fal} the highly powerful Sugriva—the Jord of
monkeys, uplifting his parigha struck it therewith. And
parigha, being sundered, fell quickly down on the earth.
Thereupon the effulgent Sugriva picked up from the ground
musala made of iron and ornamented with gold. Taking
that musa/a up he hurled it atthe Rakshasa and who again
hurled a club; and both of them being severed fell down on
the earth, Having their weapons baffied thus,those two heroes,
gilted with great prowess and effulgence and resembling the
burning fire, were ready to interchange blows. They,
emitting roars again and again, struck each other down on
the earth with their clenched fists. And rising up speedily
they again assailed each other. Thus those two heroes,
unsubdued, struck each other with their arms. Thereupon
both of them, bighly proficient in fighting with arms, were
gteatly exhausted. Thereupon th¢y took up daggers. And
uplifting them, (those two heroes) with their persons trembl-
ing in ire, proficient in fighting and skilled in the use of
weapons, dashed on roaring. And both of them enraged with
each other and anxious to score success, moving in circle
on ‘each other’s right side, addressed _ themselves: for
action. Thereupon the vicious-minded, heroic Mahodara;


VUDDHARANDAM. teas


gifted with great vehemence and proud of his own heroism,
flung his dagger at (the monkey's) armour. And as he was
about to extricate his dagger from the armour, that foremost
of monkeys severed with his dagger that R&kshasa’s head
with helmet and Aunda/as. And beholding the Rikshasa-
chief fall down on the earth with his head off, his forces
fled away from the field. And slaying him that monkey-chief,
delighted, began to roar along with other monkeys. ‘There-
upon the Ten-necked one became highly enraged and
Righava greatly delighted. And all the R&kshasas, with
their hearts broken and countenances rendered poorly and
stricken with fear fled away to different quarters, Slaying
and striking down on earth Mahodara like unto a portion of
a mighty hill severed, that son of the Sun appeared
resplendent in his own effulgence and became irrepressible
Vike unto the Sun, And winning victory in the action that
lord of monkeys was espied by the celestials, Siddhas and
Yakshas along with all creatures on earth, having their
eyes flushed with joy.


SECTION LXLIX.


“Moanovara being thus slain by Sugriva, the highly
powerful Mahfiparshwa, having his eyes reddened with ire,
looked towards him. And the Rakshasa, with his weapons,
assailed the dreadful army of Angada as well as the leading
monkeys. The Rikshasa severed the heads from the bodies
of the monkeys like unto the wind throwing away the
fruits from trees. And he cut off, with his arrows, the arms
ef some and some were. deprived of their sides. The
monkeys were thus assailed by Mahaparshwa with a ‘shower


aad RAMAYANA.


of shafts. All the monkeys were thus stricken with grief
and rendered senseless. And hearing of the anziety of -bis:
own army thus assailed by the Rikshasa, Angada, gifted
with great vehemence, taking his parigha made of iran
and resembling the rays of the sun, dastied on like the rising
deep during the lunar half of a month, And that foreniost
of monkeys encountered Mahfiparshwa, who, thua struck by
the monkey, became insensible with his charioteer and fell
down on the earth, Thereupon leaped on the battle-field
the highly powerful and effulgent lord of bears, having the
hue of red collyrium, with bis army resembling the cloud.
And excited with ire, he, taking up a huge crag resembling
the summit of a mountain, speedily struck down his horses
and broke down his car. And regaining his senses in a
moment the highly powerful Mah&parshwa, again assailed
Angada with many arrows. He struck Jimvabfin, the
lord of bears, on his breast with three arrows and assailed
Gab&ksha with many shafts. And beholding Jamvabin and
Gab&ksha overwhelmed with arrows, Angada, beside himself
with ire, took up a dreadful parigha, And holding with)
two hands that parigka made of iron and bright like the
rays of the sun, Angada, the son of Vali, with his eyes
reddened in wrath, hurled it at MahSparshwa who was
stationed at a distance, to slay him. And being hurled by
the highly powerful (Angada) the parigha, struck down from
his hands the bow with arrows and the helmet of the
Rakshasa. And approaching him vehemently, Vali's son,
gifted with great prowess, in anger, struck him, with
clenched fist, on his ears having excellent Zundalas. There
upon Mah&parshwa gifted with great vehemence and efful-
gence, highly angered, took up in his hands a huge
parashwedha, sharpened -with oit, bright and hard as iron
and discharged it at Vali’s son, and struck him: therewith on
his left shoulder. And Angada baffled that sarashwadha.
Thereupon that hero, powerful like his own father, clenching


YUDDHAKANDAM. tear


his fist, hard as thunder-bolt and resemb¥ing even Indra’s
a@gant, dealt it, in great anger, upon the Raksha’s breast. Aod
being struck with that fist the Rikshasa’s breast was shattered
and he fell down on earth. He falling down on earth slain,
his soldiers were greatly sorry and Rivana attained to aa
excess of ire in the conflict. The noise set up by the
detighted monkeys like unto a dreadful teonine roar, as if
vending the city of Lank& abounding in edifices and gates,
resembled the great roar of the celestials along with Indra.
And hearing the noise of the cefestials and monkeys, the lord
of Rukshasas, the enemy of the gods, in great anger, again
ptoceeded towards the battle field.


SECTION C,


‘Besourme Mahodara, Mah&parsha and the highly
powerful Birup&ksha slain in the encounter Ravana attained
to an excess of ire. And ordering his charioteer to hurry on
he gave vent to the following worde—“All my courtiers
have been slain and my city is shut up—I shall remove my
grief consequent on all these by slaying Rima and
Lakshmana. [ shall destroy Rama-like tree in the conflict
whose flower is Siti and whose branches are Sugriva,
Jambavin, Kumuda, Nala, Divida, Mainda, Angada,
Gandham§dana, Hanumf§n and all other leading monkeys.”
And resounding the ten quarters with the sound of ‘his
chariot wheels that mighty car-warrior proceeded quickly
towards Raghava. With that sound all quarters were filled,
and the earth, with rivers, mountains and forests’ shook and
all the lions, deer and birds were terrified: He created a


tags RAMAYANA,


Gread{ul darkness with the discharge of his sharp wespons
and hernt down the monkeys who fled away to different
directions, Dust was raised on the ground by those monkeys
assailed and flying to various directions. They were unable
ta withstand the power of that weapon made by Brahmi
hinself. Beholding his own army, assailed aad cut into
hundred peices by the excellent weapons of Ravana,
R&ghava dashed forward. And assailing the monkey-host,
that foremost of Rikshasas espied Rama, unconquered, at a
distance with his brother Lakehmana like unto Bisava with
Vishnu, holding a huge bow like one painted on the sky,
having expansive eyes like lotus-petals, long arms, and
always subduing the enemies. Beholding the monkeys slain
in the encountec and Rivana approach, the heroic and highly
powerful R&ma, with Sumitri’s son in his company,
delightedly set arrows on his bow. Aad as if rending the
whole earth with that dreadful sound he began to draw the
string of his excellent bow. With the sound of Ravana’s
arrows and the twang of Rama's bow hundreds of
Riukshasas fell down on earth. And coming within the range
of the arrows of those two princes, Ravana appeared like
Rahu in presence of the sun and the moon. And desiring
to fight with him first Lakshmana setting sharp arrows oa
his bow, discharged shafts at him resembling the flame of
fice, And the highly powerful Ravana too with his arrows
stopped the course of those shafts in the sky as soon as
thay were discharged by Lakshmana, skilled in archery.
And displaying his tight-handedness, he, with one arrow,
severed Lakshmana’s one, with three his three and with ten
his ten. Surpassing thus the son of Sumitra, Ravana, ever
victorious in battle, confronted Rama in the encounter,
standing like another hill. And approaching Righava,
Ravana the lord of Rakshasas, with his eyes reddened in
ive, began to make a shower of arrows. Thereupon beholding
the arrows shot off Ravana’s bow fall on all sides, Rima


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1449


speedily took up a val/a* And R&ghava sundered with his
sharp vadig his dreadful arrows flaming and resembl-
ing poisonous serpents. With various sharpened arrows
Raghava assailed Ravana, and he again assailed Rama in
return. And forming a circle, they passed each other by
the right side. Uprooting the earth with the vehemence of
their arrows, irrepressible by each other, fighting equally
discharging arrows, they looked dreadful like Death himself
and created terror in all creatures. The sky was filled
with their various weapons, like unto clouds in the rainy
season accompanied with lightning. And the welkin
appeared full of windows with that shower of arrows, sharp-
ened, shot with great vehemence and winged like vultures,
The earth was stricken with darkness caused by these arrows
like unto clouds appearing after sunset. There took place a
dreadful conflict between them, desiring to slay each other,
having their prowess unknown and fighting like Vitra and
Vasava. Both of them were proficient in archery, skilled in
the art of conflict and foremost of those conversant with
the use of weapons. And they began to veer round the
battle-field. And wherever they went, there appeared arrows
like unto waves of the deep roused by the winds. Then that
destroyer of creatures—Ravana—with his hand engaged
in discharging shafts, shot at Rima’s forehead a network of
arrows. And thereat Rama on his head bore that shower
of shafts shot from his terrific bow, having the lustre of
the petals of blue lotuses ; nor did he experierice any pain.
And then reciting a formula, the exceedingly energetic
Rama endowed prowese, wrought up with wrath,
engaged in incessantly shooting his shafts, taking his Raudra
weapon and again seizing his arrows, discharged them at
that lord of Rakshasas. And alighting at the impenetrable
mail of the Rakshasa-chief, resembling a mass of mighty
clouds, those arrows did not then occasion him any pain:


* An arrow with a crescent shaped head.
182


1450" RAMAYANA, -


Again Rama skilled in all weapons, from a powerlul
weapon discharged arrowa at the sovereign of the R&k-
shasas mounted on his ‘car. And piercing Ravana, those
like unto five-hooded serpents, resisted by him, entered
the earth, hissing. Having baffled Raghava’s weapon,
Ravana, transported with passion, took up a dreadful Asura
weapon; and discharged sharpened sha(ts having the faces
of lions and tigers, and the faces of dankas and kokas,*
and the faces of vultures and hawks, and the faces of jackals,
and the faces of wolves,—with gaping mouths,—and terrific
of aspect, five-mouthed and red-hued. And that highly
powerful one, enraged, sighing like a snake, by his power of
illusion shot at Rama other keen arrows having the faces
of mules and the faces of bears, and the faces of dogs and
cocks, and the faces of makarast and venomous serpents,—
these as well as others. Covered with that Asura weapon,
that foremost of the Raghus, himself resembling fire, dis-
charged an exceedingly vigorous weapon informed with fire 5
and shot various shafts having faces filled with live flames,
and faces like unto suns,—and‘hued like unto planets and
stars,—-and (urnished with faces resembling mighty meteors,
or resembling tongues of lightning. And those terrific shafts
of Ravana, resisted by R&ghava’s weapon, were annihilated
in the sky, and destroyed (monkeys) by thousands. And
seeing that weapon (of Ravana) destroyed by Rama of
uuticing deeds, all those heroes, the monkeys—headed by
Sugriva, capable of wearing forms at will, shouted, surround-
ing Righava. And the high-souled son of Dagaratha—
Raghava—having by his might destroyed that weapon
discharged by Rivana’s arms, was delighted; and the
monkey-chiefs, filled with glee, began to emit shouts.


© Koka—~e cuddy goose. It may also mean a lizard, a chamaleon, a wolf,
+ A marine monster, generally confounded with the alligator and the
shark ; but really a fabulous enimal.—T.


YVUDDHARANDAM, 43st


SECTION CL


a


On that weapon of his having been baffled, Ravana—
Jord of the Rakshasas—was fired with double fury, aad the
highly effulgent Ravana from wrath set about discharging
_at Riighava a dreadful Raudra weapon, which had been
conferred on him by Maya. And from his bow began to
issue forth in large numbers darts and maces and clubs,
flaming and having the might of thunder; and various kinds
of sharp clubs and daggers and nooses and flaming thunder-
bolls began to descend like unto the winds at the universal
tumbling. And thereupon the graceful and exceedingly
effulgent Raghava—foremost of those accomplished in noble
arms—resisted that weapon with a powerful Gindharva
weapon, Qn that weapon being baffled by the high-souled
Raghava, Ravana, with his eyes rendered coppery with
passion, toek up a Solar weapon. Thereupon from the how
of the wondrous vehement and intelligent Ten-necked one
rushed out discuses flaming and mighty. And the firmament
all round blazed up with those impendent (arms), as blaze up
the cardinal quarters on the Sun and the Moon and the
planets dropping down, Thereat R&ghava in the van of
that army by means of vollies of shafts cut off Ravana’s
wonderful weapons and discuses. And seeing that weapon
destroyed, Ravana—lord of Rakxhasas—with ten arrows
pierced Rama all through his vitals. And pierced by Ravana
with those ten shafts discharged from his mighty bow, the
exceedingly powerful R&ghava did not so much shake,
Then’ Raghava—victor in fight—waxing wondrous wroth,
with countless shafts pierced Ravana all over his person. In
the meanwhile Ri&ghava’s younger brother, the mighty
Lakshmana—destroyer of foes—growing enraged, took up
seven arrows. And with those highly impetuous arrows


rage AMA YANA,


that exceedingly effulgent one severed the human-headed
standard of Ravana. And the mighty and graceful
Lakshmana with a shaft cut off the head of the Nairita’s
charioteer, lumined with ear-rings. And then with five
sharpened arrows Lakshmana severed the bow of the
Rakshasa-chief, resembling the trunk of an elephant. And
Bibbishana, bounding up, with his mace despatched Ravana’s
excellent steeds, resembling hills or dark-blue clouds,
Thereat, leaping down from his mighty car, whose ‘horses
had been slain, Ravana was fired with high wrath against his
brother. And the powerful lord of Rakshasas endowed with
immense strength, hurled at Bibhishuna a dart resembling
the flaming thunder-bolt. And ere the dart had reached its
destination, Lakshmana severed it with three shafts; and
thereat in that mighty conflict there arose a mighty uproar
from the monkeys. And the dart dight with networks of
gold fell down in three fragments, as droppeth a migh ty
meteor from the firmament, flaming and shooting out
scinlillations, Then (Ravana) took up a huge dart, glowing
in its own energy, celebrated as being irrisistible, and
incapable of being borne by the Destroyer himself. On
being whirled by the impious and strong Rivana, the dart
possessed of excceding energy, flamed up. In the mean-
while the heroic Lakshmana swiftly came to the side of
Bibhishana,* whose life was placed in peril. And in order to
save him, that lero—Lakshmana—drawing his bow, covered
the dart-handed R&vana with showers of shafts, On being
covered with arrows shot by that high souled one, R&vana,
with his prowess baffled, made up his mind to let (his
brother) go. And seeing his brother delivered by Lakshmana,
Ravana, facing Lakshmana, spoke these words,~—“O thou
proud of thy prowess! as Bibhishana hath this wise
been delivered by thee, passing by the R&kshasa, this dart,


* The commentator explains: “Himself coming before the dart,
* Lakshmana saved Bibhishana."—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1453


discharged from my bludgeon of an arm, will depart,
depriving thee of thy life’? Having said this, Ravana,
waxing furiously enraged, discharged at Lakshmana that
dart forged by Maya with his power of illusion,furnished with
eight bells, having mighty sounds—incapable of being
resisted,—competent to finish foes ; and flaming in energy,—
and shouted simaltaneously. And hurled with terrific force,
the dart sending sounds resembling that of Vajra or the
thunder-bolt, vehemently alighted at Lakshmana in that
encounter. Thereat, as the dart descended, Raghava
addressed* it, saying,—"Peace be to Lakshmana! Be thou
fraustrated ; and let thy energy go out of thee.” But the
dart discharged in the encounter by the enraged Ravana,
resembling a venomous serpent, dived into the dauntless and
heroic Lakshmana ; and (the dart) exceedingly splendid and
blazing, possessed of dreadful impetuosity; and resembling
the tongue of the king of serpents, smote Lakshmana in his
mighty chest. And with his breast riven by the dart,
driving deep through the force of Ravana, Lakshmana fell
down to the earth, And R&ghava, standing by, seeing
Lakshmana in that plight, had his heart overspread with
sorrow. But reflecting only for a while, he, with his eyes
surcharged with tears, was filled with greater martial ardour,
and resembled the fire risen at the universal dissolution,
Then thinking—'This is not the time to indulge in grief ;’
he, gazing at Lakshmana, entered into a terrific encounter,
resolved upon slaying Ravana, laying under contribution his
dearest energies. And Rama saw Lakshmana with his
chest riven by the dart in the mighty conflict, lying drenched
in blood, and resembling a hill with serpents present in
it--And in spite of all their efforts, the foremost monkeys
failed to extract the dart which had been hurled by the
powerful Ravana.—And, further, they were (all the while)
sore assailed with showers of shafts by the foremost


* 4. eas RamAnuya remarks, addressed the deity presiding over it.—T.


1454 RAMAYANA.


“Rakshasa of them all. The dart, having pierced Sumitra’s
son, had entered the earth, In the encounter the mighty
Rama, grasping the dreadful dart with his hands, extracted
the same and wrathfully snapped it. As he (Rama) was
engaged in pulling the dart out, the mighty Ravana kept
pouring marrow-piercing shafts all over his person, Think-
ing nothing of those arrows, Rama, embracing Lakshmana,
spoke unto Hanum§n and the mighty monkey, Sugriva=~
“Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye stay here, surrounding
Lakshmana, The opportunity for putting forth my prowess
which Thad sought, is present. I shall slay this wicked-
minded Ten-necked one, who is resolved to pursue the
course of unrighteousness. Even as on the expiry of summer
the Chittaka is eager for the sight of clouds, { had long been
eager to obtain a’ sight of (R&vana.) Ye monkeys, this, I
swear unto you,—this very hour not long after ye will see
this world without Ravana or Rama. To-day having slain
R&vana in battle, I shall renounce all sorrow arising from the
loss of my kingdom, from my sojourn in the woods, from
my wandering in Dandaka, from the ravishment of Vaidehi,
from encounter with the Rakshas,—all the terrible evils that
1 have suffered, and all the troubles resembling hell, He
for whom I have brought over the monkey-forces, made
Sugriva king, slaying V8li in battle, for whom I have crossed
the ocean and constructed a bridge over the deep—the
same hath been come at by me in conflict, and the same
hath come within the range of my vision.—And having come
within my ken, Ravana will not live, even as one coming
within ken of @ serpent of poisonous sight, doth not live ;
or even as a serpent doth not live, coming within ken of
Vinat&’st son. Do ye. ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of

* ‘The commentator has a characteristic note, This dart, having pierced
the foe, used always to return to Ravana. But Rima, who was the Lord
himself, having spoken to it as he did, it could pot this-time go back; and
RAma snapped it, which none else could do.” !—T.

+ Garura.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1455


monkeys, seated at the brow of the mountain, behold the
battle between me and Ravana. To-day let the three
worlds with the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the
Ch&ranas, see that for which Rima is Rama. To-day I shall
do a deed of which the worlds with the mobile and the
immobile and the gods, shall speak as long as the Earth
sustaineth (creatures.)” Having delivered himself thus,
Rama, concentrating his attention, began to charge the Ten-
necked one in encounter with whetted arrows decked with
burnished gold.. Andin the same way Ravana showered
on Rama groat nérdchas and clubs, even as clouds pour
down showers, And there arose a tremendous uproar of
mighty arrows discharged by Rima and Ravana, smiting one
another, And the shafts shot by Rama and Ravana, severed
and scattered, with flaming heads dropped to the Earth.
And the mighty twangs of the bow-strings of both, terrifying
all creatures, were wonderful to behold.* And then even as
clouds disperse on being trampled by the Winds, Ravana,
covered with showers of arrowy networks by that high sculed
one and reduced to sore strails by that one (Rama) of a glow
ing bow, fled away in fear,


SECTION Cit


Scere the heroic Lakshnana brought down by the dart
discharged by the powerful Ravana, and lying drenched in
blood, he (Rima) after baving fought furiously with the
wickéd-minded Ravana,—and having showered volliea of
shafts, addressed Sushena, saying,—"This heroic Lakshmana


© Adbhutadarjana—w onderful t0 brhold,—wonderful to witness is the
sepse,—T. ?


1456 RAMs YANA.


brought down to the earth by the prowess of Rivana, lieth
like a serpent, enhancing my sorrow. Seeing this hero,
dearer to me than life, what power have 1, with my soul
overwhelmed with dole, to ight ? If this brother of ming
graced with auspicious marks, delighting in battle, breathe
his last, what shall life avail me or happiness? My prowess
is ashamed ; my bow falleth off from my hand; my arrows
droup; my sight is dimmed with tears; my limbs weakéa
as do those of men inadream; thought racks me; and I
even desire death.” Seeing his brother wounded by the
wicked-minded Ravana, crying in preternatural accents,
and sore stricken in bis vitals, (Rima) overcome by a mighty
sorrow, lamented with his senses wildered. “Seeing my
brother, Lakshmana, wounded, and lying over the dust of the
field, even victory, O hero, doth not seem to me sweet. If
the Moon is hid from the sight, whom doth he then delight ?
What have I to do with battle? What have [ to do with
life? Ihave nv more te do anything with fighting, seeing
that this Lakshmana wounded, lieth in the field of battle.
As this ,highly effulgent one had followed me into the
furest, so will I in the same way follow him to the abode of
Yama. Ever seeking my welfare and ever devoted to me, he
hath been reduced to this pass by Rakshasas fighting ia
crooked ways. In [and after land one meets with wives, in
land after land one meets with friends, but country find
1 none where a uterine brother may be met with. What,
O irrepressible one, shall [ do with the kingdom without
my Lakshinaua ? And what shall I say unto mother Sumitra,.
fund of her son? Aad 1 shall never be able to bear the
reproach Sumitr& shall cast upon me. And what shall [ say
unto Kaugaly&, and what unto mother Kaikeyi ? And what
shail {way unto Bharate, and what unto the exceedingly
powerful Satrughnay ‘Thou hadst gone to tbe woods with
him. Why then dost thou come (back) without him? ‘Tis
better (for me) to renounce my lile here, instead of bearing


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1457


the ceneure of friends. What a sin had I committed in
another birth, seeing that my virtuous brother, staying before
me, hath been slain? Ah, my brother! Thou best of men!
O master, who wert the foremost of heroes! Why, forsaking
me, dost thou repair to the other regions. Wherefore,
brother, dost thou not speak to me, who am lamenting ? Get
up. See! Why dost thou lie down? Look on me with
thine eyes. O mighty-armed one, in the woods and mountains
thou didst ever use to cheer me, tried by grief and pining in
despondency, with my mind overwhelmed (with woe).” As
Rama was speaking thus with his senses overwhelmed
with emotion, Sushena, soothing him, spoke these pregnant
words,—-“O foremost of men, cast eff this train of thought
tending to overwhelm thy understanding,—this anxiety giving
birth to grief, and resembling the shafts of foas in the van of
the embattled forces. Lakshmana enhancer of auspiciousness
is not dead. His face is not distorted or blackened. Do
thou look at his countenance, which is beautifully bright and
cheerful, His hands have palms resembling lotus-petals, and
his eyes are pleasant. O king, one dead doth not look thus.
(Therefore), O hero, do not grieve. O subduer of enemics,
this one is instinct with life. As he is lying down on the ground,
stretched at length, bis heart, O hero, trembling momentarily,
testifieth to his respiration.” Having spoken thus unto
Raghava, the highly wise Sushena thus addressed the mighty
monkey, Hanuma, saying,—O placid one, hieing hence to
the mountain, Mahodaya, which, O hero, had formerly been
mentioned unto thee by Jambavdn, bring hither the mighty
drug sprung at its right summit—Vigalyakaranf by name, and
Sivarnyakaran{,* and Sanjfvakarant, O hero, and the potent
medicine—Sandh&af. Do thou bring (these) in order that the
hero—Lakshmana—may be revived.” Having been thus in-
structed, Hanuman, repairing to the Medicinal mountain, was
wrought up with anxiety, not knowing the drugs, And then


* Lit—that which restores the former complexion —T.
183


1458 R4MAYANA,


the thought sprang up in the mind of the Wind-god’s offspring
of immeasurable prowess,—I shall go, even taking this
(entire) summit of the mountain. In this very summit must
that delightful drug have sprung. This I infer, inasmuch as
Sushena had forsooth said so. If I fail to take Vigalyakaranf,
I shall come by disgrace,—and if I spend much time (in
thought), that would be fraught with evil."* Having refiected
thus, the exceedingly powerful Hanumfin, foremost of monkeys,
—swiftly drawing up to that best of mountains, and giving
three shakes to the mountain filled with various flowering
trees,—raised it up with his hands, And taking that summit
of the mountain resembling dark-blue clouds chargéd with
rain, Hanuman from the earth bounded up into the sky. And
arriving (at his quarters), that wondrous vehement one, put-
ting down the mountain-peak,and reposing for a while, spoke
unto Sushena,—''] did not find the drug, O best of monkeys ;
and therefore have I brought this entire summit of the
mountain.” When the Wind-god’s offspring had spoken
thus, that foremost of monkeys—Sushena—praising him,
uprooted tlie herb and secured it. Seeing Hanum&n’s feat,
incapable of being done by even the celestials, the choicest
of the monkeys were amazed. Then crushing the healing
herb, that best of monkeys—the exceedingly effulgent
Sushena, made Lakshmana smell the same. And thereupor
the wounded Lakshmana,—slayer of hostile heroes—smelling
it, cured of his wound and ailments, speedily rose up from
the ground, Seeing Lakshmana rise up from the earth, the
monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, honoring Lakshmana
exclaimed, “Excellent? Excellent!” “Come!” said thal
slayer of hostile heroes—Ra&ma—and with his eyes fillec
with tears, he deeply embraced Lakshmana. And havin;
embraced Sumitra’s son, Raghava then addressed him


* Explains the commentator: ‘If I take any other medicine by mistaki
I shall make a fool of myself; f I spend much time in thought, Lakehmar
may die.—T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 4459


saying,—“By good fortune it is that, O hero, I see thee
returned from (the mansion of) Death.—Verily my life, or
Sit&, or Victory is worthless (without thee). And thou being
dead, what is my fife worthy? When the high-souled
Raghava had spoken thus, Lakshmana, aggrieved on account
of the words (of Raghava) expressive of infirmity of purpose,
said,—-"Having bound thyself by that vow, it doth not,O
thou having truth for prowess, behove thee to speak like one
fickle and feeble. Those speaking the truth, never falsify
their promise: the mark of a great one is even observance
of vow. O sinless one, do not suffer thyself to be overcome
by despair on my account. Do thou to-day by slaying
Ravana, make thy promise good. Thy foe coming within
the sway of thy shafts, will not hence, living, even like a
mighty elephant coming before a sharp-toothed roaring lion.
I wish the speedy destruction of this impious one, ere the
maker of day, having performed his work, has ascended the
Setting-hill. If thou wishest to slay Ravana in battle, if thou
desirest to recover the princess, then, O noble one, O hero,
to-day speedily set about what I say.”


BECTION Clit,


Hearne the words uttered by Lakshmana, that slayer
of hostile heroes—Raghava—endued with prowess, taking
his bow, set shafts on it, and in the brunt of battle began to
discharge dreadful arrows at Ravana. And mounted on
another car, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—rushed against
K&kutstha, even as Swarbhfnu rusheth against the Sun.
And even as amass of clouds poureth down torrents on a
mighty mountain, the Ten-necked one, mounted on his car,


4460 RAMAYANA,


smote Rama with shafts resembliagt thunder-bolts. And in
the encounter Rama, concentrating his thoughts, showered
on the Ten-necked one artows embellished with gold and
Jooking like living fire, And celestials and Gandharvas and
Kinnaras declared that there had been no other battle like
unto the encounter of Rima stationed on the ground and
the Raksha mounted on his car. Then the foremost of
celestials—-Sakra—hearing their ambrosia! speech, summon-
ing MAtalti, said—‘“Taking my car, hie to the best of the
Raghus. And reaching the earth, do thou, welcoming (him),
bring about great good unto the gods.” Thus accosted by
the sovereign of the celestials, Matali—celestial charioteer
—bending down his head, addressed that celestial, saying,—
“Speedily. shall I go, O lord of the celestials ; and I shall
also do the office of a charioteer (unto Raghava).” Then
yoking with steeds that best of cars, curiously wrought with
gold; adorned with hundreds of small bells ; resembling the
Sun new risen ; having its pole studded with lapises ; yoked
with excellent horses caparisoned in gold ; furnished with white
chowris,—drawn by steeds resembling the Sun; decked with
golden net-works,—and provided with a golden standard,—
the graceful car of the sovereign of the celestials,—M&tali,
commanded by the king of the immortals, ascending the car,
went out of the celestial regions and came to Kakutstha,
And with his hand holding the reins, the charioteer ef the
thousand-eyed (Deity) with joined hands addressed Rama,
saying,—"O Kakutstha, in order that thou mayst obtain the
victory, the thousand-eyed (god) hath sent thee this car,
And, O exceedingly powerful one! O graceful (hero)! O
thou that slayest thy foes! this is the redoubtable bow of
Indra—and this is the mail resembling fire,—and these are
the arrows looking like the very Sun; and this is the dart
shining and fraught with fair fortune. Ascend thou this car,


‘* This conversation between Rama and Lakshmana took place, says the
commentator, on the first day of the lighted fortnight —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1464


© hero. Slay the Rikshasa—Ravana, with me as thy
charioteer, even as the lord of the celestials slayeth
D&navas.” Thus addressed, Rama, going round the car
and saluting it, ascended the same, illumining the worlds.
with his splendour. And the encounter that took place
between the two cars with the mighty-armed RAma (on one
side),and the Raksha—R&vana—(on the other), was wonderful
to behold. And Righava highly proficient in weapons with
aG&ndharva weapon resisted the Gandharva weapon of the
Ra&kshasa king, and with a celestial weapon, his celestial
weapon. And then that lord of Rakshasas—the night-ranger
—fired with high rage, again discharged an exceedingly
dreadful Rakshasa weapon. And the gold-decked shafts
shot from R&vana’s bow, becoming furiously venomous
serpents, covered Kakutstha. And vomitting living flames,
they of terrific aspect, having flaming faces, showered over
Rama with gaping mouths. And those flaming venomous
serpents, having the feel of VAsuki himself, covered all sides
and enveloped all quarters, And seeing those serpents
descending in the encounter, R&ma employed a dreadful
G&rura weapon. And discharged from Raghava’s bow, those
arrows plated with gold at the feathered parts, and furnished
with the splendour of peacocks, becoming golden birds-—~
began to range (the field of battle) as the enemies of the
serpents. And the shafts of Rama capable of wearing forms
at will, turned into birds, destroyed all the exceedingly swift-
coursing arrows having the forms of serpents. On his
weapon having been baffied, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—
waxing wroth, poured tremendous showers of shafts on
Rama. And smiting Rama of untiring deeds with thousanda
of shafts, (Ravana) pierced M&tali with vollies of arrows.
- And with an arrow, Ravana severed the standard; and
having brought down the golden standard on the floor of the
car, Ravana wounded even Indra’s steeds with a net-work
of arrows. And seeing Rima hard pressed, celestials and


1463 RAMAYANA.


Gandharvas, and Ch&ranas along with Dinavas, and Siddhas,
and the supreme saints were overcome with sadness ; and the
foremost monkeys together with Bibhishana were agatieved.
And seeing a Moon of Rima Chandra in the grasp of a
Rabu of Ravana, that bringer of evil unto creatures—Budha
—stood, assailing the PrayApatya rtar—Rohini—beleved of
the Moon, And the enraged Ocean, heaving with smoking
surges,and flaming aa it were,swelled up,seeming to the touch
the Sun. And the Sun was blackened and assumed a stern
aspect, with his rays dimmed. And he was seen with a head-
less trunk on his lap, and he was in conjunction with a comet.
And that star of the Kogalas, relating to the deities—Indra
and Agni—Anglraka—stood in the sky, attacking Vigakb&.
And the Ten-necked one, having ten faces and twenty arms,
equipped with his bow, looked like the mountain—Main&ka.
And Rama reduced to sore straits by the Ten-necked Raksha,
could not discharge his arrows in the conflict. And then the
enraged Rama with his eyes slightly red, flew into a
tremendous passion, as if burning up the R&kshasas.
Seeing the face of the enraged Rama endued with under-
standing, all the creatures were overwhelmed with fear and
the Earth herself shook. And mountains abounding with
lions and tigers began to tremble, and trees to shiver. And
even the deep—lord of streams—-was wrought up wondrously.
And rough and terrific clouds in the sky sent forth fierce roars.
And stormy clouds rumbling went about the heavens. And
seeing Rima wrought up with a mighty passion, and the
fearful disastrous omens, all creatures were possessed by
fright and R&vana was struck with dismay. And then
etationed in the sky, celestials and Gandharvas and mighty
serpents and saiuts and Danavas and Daityas and those
related to Garura—fowls—beheld that conflict like unto the
universal tumbling, as the two heroes faught on with various
dire arms. And as they looked on the mighty encounter, the
eclestials and the Asuras, who had come to the conflict, from


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1463


feeling of regard,* cheerfully spoke (these werds). And the
Asuras staying there said unto the Ten-necked one, ‘Be
victorious ;' and the celestials again and again said unto
R&ma, ‘Be victorious In the meantime, the impious
Ravana, desirous of slaying Raghava, from wrath took up a
mighty weapon, fraught with the essence of the thunder-
bolt ; sending terrible sounds; capable of destroying all
foes,—furnished with forks resembling mountain-peaks ;
tending to strike terror unto mind and sight ; sharp-pointed,
resembling the smoking fire risen at the hour of universal
dissolution ; exceedingly terrible; irrisistible (in battle);
unbearable even by the Destroyer,—the terror of all
creatures—terrific ; and competent to rive (all things),
Flaming up with wrath, Ravana took this dart. And fired
with furious wrath, that powerful one took the dart in the
encounter, surrounded in that contest by many heroic
Rékshasas. And uplifting (the dart), the huge-bodied
R&vana, with his eyes reddened in passion, emitted mighty
roars, And the shouts of the Rakshasa sovereign made the
earth and the sky and the cardinal quarters and all sides
tremble. And at the roars of that wicked-minded and
huge-bodied one, all creatures were struck with terror, and
the sea was vexed.t And the exceedingly energetic Ravana,
taking that mighty dart, and sending up furious shouts,
addressed Rama in a harsh speech, saying,—"O Rama, I
in wrath uplift this dart having the strength of the levin.
This will utterly deprive of life thee who art assisted by thy
brother. O thou that delightest in battle, to-day swiftly
slaying thee, I shall make thee even with those heroic
Raksbas slain in the van of the forces. Stay now. O
Raghava, thee shall I slay with this dart.” Saying this, the
lord of the Rakshasas hurled the dart. And discharged from
R&vana’s hand, (the dart), surrounded with garlands of


* i. ¢. each party out of regard for the warrior to whom it wished well—T,
t ‘The still-cezed Bermoothes,’—Zempes?.


£464 RAMAYANA.


lightning, furnished with eight bells, sending mighty roars,—~
rising to the sky, looked exceedingly splendid. Seeing the
dart, flaming and of terrific aspect, Raghu’s son—R&ma—
endowed with prowess, drawing his bow, discharged arrows.
And with vollies of shafts Raghava resisted the descending
(dart), even as Vasava extinguisheth the fire of doomsday
with his showers. Then even as a flame consumeth insects,
the mighty dart of Riivana burnt up those shafts shot from
the bow of Rama. Seeing those shafts reduced to ashes and
crushed on coming in contact with the dart, as they were
coursing in the sky, Raghava was transported with passion,
And then waxing wondrous wroth,—Raghu’s son—Raghava
took up a javelin, liked by Vasava himself, brought by
M&Btali. And on being wielded by that strong one, the
javelin, resonant with bells, made the welkin blaze up, like
a burning meteor on the occasion of universal rack. And
when hurled, it alighted on that same dart of the Rakshasa-
chief. And thereat, with its splendour lost, the mighty dart,
riven, dropped (to the earth.) Then Rama, shooting
straight-speeding arrows, pierced his (Ravai
fleet steeds. Aud then he pierced Ravana in the chest with
whetted arrows, And the energetic Raghava hit (Ravana)
in the temples with three feathered shafts. And thereat with
all his limbs pierced (with arrows), and bis body laved in
blood, the lord of R&kshasas furnished with many limbs,
looked like a flowering Acoka. And with his person pierced
with the shafts of Rima, the lord of night-rangers having his
body drenched with blood, was stricken with sadness in the
midst of his forces,—-and was also overwhelmed with terrific
wrath.


YUDVHAKANDAM. 1485


SECTION Civ.


a


Ow veing greatly harassed by Kakutstha in anger,
Ravana, delighting in battle, came under the sway of a
towering passion. And with his eyes aglow, that powerful
one from wrath and fury assailed Raghava in mighty
encounter. And even as clouds pour down from the sky on a
pool, Ravana showered thousands of arrows on Raghava.
And covered with vollies of shafts discharged from (Ravana’s)
bow-in the conflict, Kakutstha like unto a mighty mountain
did not shake, And that one endowed with prowess stood
in the field, resisting those networks of arrows, and took up
shafts resembling the rays of the Sun. Then the fleet-handed
night-ranger, fired with rage, discharged a thousand arrows
at the chest of the high-souled Raghava.—And thereat in
that encounter Lakshmana’s elder brother, with his body
bathed in blood, appeared like a mighty Kinguka tree in a
forest. And with his ire aroused by the blows he received,
the exceedingly energetic Kakutstha took up arrows
resembling the Sun risen at the time of the universal
dissolution. And in the darkness spread by the arrows
(discharged), Rama and Ravana both fired with wrath could
not be discovered of ¢ach other. Then that hero—Dagaratha’s
son—Rama, overcome with wrath, addressed RAvana,
Jaughing, in a harsh speech, saying,—"Thou vilest of
Rakshasas, in consequence of having through lack of sense
carried off my wife from Janasthana and brought her under
thy subjection, thou hast been deprived of thy prowess.
Having forcibly carried away Vaidehi staying in that mighty
forest, forlorn and without me, thou thinkest—‘I am a hero,’
Outraging the helpless wives of others,—doing this craven
deed, thou thinkest—'l am a hero.’ O thou having thy dignity


184


9466 RAMAYANA.


destroyed! O shameless wight! O thou of volatile character,
having through thy violence brought ‘destruction on thyself,
thou thinkest,—‘I ama hero. A great and famous act hath
been performed by thee,—a hero, and the brother of the
Bestower of riches, surrounded with thy forces! To-day
receive the mighty fruit of that infamous act done through
pride, productive of evil.* O wicked-minded one, thou
thinkest of thyseli—‘I am a hero ;’ but thou that hast taken
away Sit like a thief, hast no feeling of shame. Hadst thea
forcibly outraged Sit& in my very presence, thou, slain by my
shafts, wouldst have seen thy brother—Kh: By tuck,
© thou of an evil soul, thou hast come within the range of
my vision, To-day by means of sharp shafts shall 1 bring
thee to death’s door. To-day beasts of pray will drag thy
head having burning ear-rings, severed by my shafts and
covered with the dust of the battle-field. O Ravana, vultures
will alight on thy breast, as thou wilt lie low on the ground ;
and, athirst, they will drink the blood gushing out from thy
wounds, To-day fowls of the air will keep pulling at thee
pierced with my shafts, and lying lifeless, as birds do
serpents.” Having spoken thus, that slayer of foes—Raima—
showered arrows on the lord of Rakshasas, staying before.
And the prowess and strength and spirits and force of arms
of R&ma burning for the destruction of his foe, were doubled.
And all the Weaponst presented themselves before that one
cognisant of self; and the fleet-handedness of that
exceedingly powerful one increased immensely from
exhilaration of spirits. Seeing all these auspicious omens
coming of themselves, Rama, finisher of Rakshasas, set about
smiting his foe more energetically than ever. And assailed
with stones by the monkeys and showers of shafts by
Raghava, the Ten-necked one felt his heart undergoing a


© Remarks RamAnuya, ‘here and in the next world!
4+ 4.0. the presiding deities of them.


VUDDHAKANDAM.


revolution.* And when through the stupifaciion of hi
zelf, he could not discharge any weapon, or draw his bow, or
put forth his prowess, (Rima) did not persist in smiting
him, And the shafts and various arms discharged by him
betokeued his death ; and his last moments were present.
And his charioteer, driving his car, perceiving this, calmly
took the car away from the field of fight. And then, seeing
the king shorn of prowess, and drept, his charioteer, struck
with fear, swiftly turned away his dreadful car having the
clatter of clouds, and went away from the field of battle.


SECTION CV.


Avra gradually regaining his senses, Ravana, urged on
by the force of the Finisher, getting into a furious passion,
with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed the charioteer,
saying,—"O thou of perverse sense, disregarding me as
devoid of prowess, and incompetent, and bereft of vigor—
as cowardly, light, nerveless and shorn of energy,—and
as divorced by the power of illusion and debarred by
arms,—-thou actest on thine own understanding. Wherefore
disregarding me, and not minding my purpose, hast thou
taken away my car fcom before the presence of the enemy ?
© abject one! by thee have my long-earned renown and
energy and prowess and credit been brought to naught. In
the very sight of an enemy of renowned prowess, and one
@apable of being gratified with valorous deeds, hast thou
made me, burning for battle, look as if 1 were a coward. As,
O wicked-minded one,thou dost not even through heedlessness,


‘* Vighurnzhridayeh : had his heart paralysed, according to the comment:
ator, I prefer the sense given as more graphic —T.


2468 RAMAYANA,


take the car to the field of battle, I infer for certain that thaw
hast been bribed by the foe. The act that thou hast done,
doth not appear as that of a friend seeking our welfare ; but
to-day thou hast acted like an enemy. If thou hast been
maintained by me, if thou rememberest my merit, do thou
swiftly turn the cat before my enemy has departed.” Thus
admonished by him of slender sense, the charioteer possessed
of intelligence, humbly spake unto Ravana ‘words fraught
with good,—“I am not afraid, nor stupified, nor have I been
bribed by the foe, nor am I-negligent, And I have not
forgotten thy affection or thy good offices. And studious of
thy welfare, I have saved thy fame; and with a mind over.
flowing with affection } have done (unto thee) this unpalatable
good, O mighty monarch, for this, thou shouldst not, like
a frivolous and base one, criminate me that am ever engaged
in what is good and dear unto thee. Listen! I shall render
thee reason why I turned away from the field the car, rushing
dike a river when the sea is swelled up.* I knew that thou
hadst been fatigued in consequence of thy mighty exertions
in the fight. And I could not perceive that thy prowess
then stood superior (to that of the foe).t And the steeds
of my car were worn out by carrying it; and they were
battered, and helpless. and perspired like kine in a shower,
And bad omens fast sprang up before us. And on these
occurring, 1 perceived that things would go against us. O
thou endowed with exceeding might, a charioteer should be
conversant with season and place, with omens, and the
expressions of emotions; as also with depression of spirits,
exhilaration, and grief. And he should have a knowledge of
low, level and uneven grounds, and the time for conflict,
and he should be able to perceive the shortcomings of the
enemy. And acharioteer mounted onacar, should know


* On the ascension of the Moon.
4 Two negatives in this verse amounting to an “Alfirmative, This is the
only instance of double negatives in Valmiki—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1469


when to draw near an enemy, when to turn away from him;
when to stay ; and when to turn round from before the foe—
all these (he should know), What I, for bringing respite
unto thee as well as the horses of the car, have done by way
of removing the terrific exhaustion, is proper, {did not, O
hero, turn away the car of my own sheer will. What I have
done, O lord, had been dictated by my affection for thee.
Command me. What thou sayest, O destroyer of foes, I will
do every way, O hero, with my whole soul.” Thereat, well-
pleased with the speech of the charioteer, Ravana, eager
for éncounter, after praising him in various ways, said~-"O
charioteer, do thou swiftly take the car towards Raghava.
Without slaying his foe in fight, Ravana turneth not away
(from the field).” Speaking thus,Ravana—lord of Rakshasas
~~gave the charioteer on the car an excellent ornament for
the hand. Hearing Ravana’s words, the charioteer drove the
car, And urged on by the speech of Ravana, the charioteer
drove on the steeds,—and in a moment the mighty chariot
of the Rakshasa-chief appeared before Rama in the field of
battle.


SECTION CVI.


Tren the revered Agastya. who, desirous of witnessing
the fight, had along with the deities come there,—seeing
Ravana spent with the toil of conflict, staying in the field
plunged in thought, and stationed before Rama for engaging
in encounter,—addressed Rama,drawing near to him, saying,
—"Rama, Rama, O mighty-armed one, hearken to the
eternal secret, whereby, my child, thou wilt conquer all foes
in fight,—Aditya-hridaya,* sacced, capable of destroying all


‘+ Lit.-The heart of the Sun—the designation of a Vedic Hymn,


1470 RAMAYANA.


foea, bringing victory—the recitation, enduring and in-
destructible,—-and supremely good ; fraught with all welfare,
removing every sin,—chasing away anxiety and grief, bring-
ing length of days; and excellent. Do thou worsbip
Vivagwata’s offspting—the Sun—lord of the world, furnished
with rays,—who maketh people engage in work, and who is
bowed down to by deities and Asuras. This effulgent one,
producing rays, is instinct with the spirits of all the deities; -
and he with his rays ruleth all creatures—and the hosts of
celestials and Asuras, This Sun is Brahma and Vishaw
and Siva and Skanda(«) and Praj&pati,® and Mahendra and
Dhanada and the Destroyer—Yama—and Soma(4) and the
Lord of waters; and the Pitris,@) and the Vasus, and the
Sadhyas(/)and the two Agwinis() and the Maruts and Manu,#)
and the Wind-god and the God of fire and the creatures and
the Creator of life and the seasons. And he is Aditya and
SavitaG@ and Suryya@) and Khaga® and Pusha(™) and


(a) The celestial generallissimo, The commentator gives a spiritual
interpretation. ‘He that by means of his rays openeth up the five organs
of perception.”

@) The lord of all creatures, by virtue of his bringing forth all beings
through his energy.

(©) Dispenser of riches, a name of Kavera.

(@ Furnished with splendour, a name of the Moon. According to some
‘endowed with energy." 7

(cit. the ancestral manes. Here the generator of everything.

@) An order of semi-divine beings. Here, ‘He who is adored by tho
spiritual.’ 3

() In virtue of his omnipresence and his being the healer of all ailments,

(A) All-knowing and being the primxval sovereign.

@ ‘He from whom all deriva sustenance,’ é,

G) ‘Tha producer of heart and the spiritual faculties by heat, and corn, e¢c.
by showers”

(4) ‘Coursing alone, according to the commentator. It may also means—
‘He that sets people to work.’

@ ‘Coursing the highest heavens,’ or says the commentator ‘ih heaveos

of the heart.’

(m=) ‘The maintainer’


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1470


Gavastim’n,@ and the Golden-looking and Bhinuf) and
Hiranyaret8@ and Divakara.@® And he is Haridagwaf and
Sahasrarchi@? and Saptasaptite) and Marichimin.@) And
he subdueth darkness, and he is Sambhu@® and Tashtl@) and
Martandaka(® and Angumin.® And he is Hiranyagarbha,(~)
Sicica,@) and Tapana, and Ahaskara() and Ravi,( and
Agnigarbha,®) and Aditi’s son,() and Sankha@® and
Siciranfigana,) Byomanatha,) and Tamabheda,() the one
proficient in Rik, Yajus and Sama; and Ghaaavrishti,(*) and


(c) Gavastiman—‘Ray-turnished, or baving the all-permeating Spirit of
Auspiciousness,’

@) Bhénw—baving brightness.’

(©) Hiranyaret4—'instinct with the cosmic energy’

{d) Divdkara—'maker of day!

©) Haridapoa—'pecvading all sides,’ or ‘having black steeds.’

(/) Sahasrdrchi—'thousand-rayed, The commentator explains spiritually,
He whose cognition points in infinite directions.’

(@) ‘He from whom proceed the seven organs of sense of people.’ Or ‘he
who has seven steeds.’

@) ‘Having rays?

(‘He from whom proceed the several sorts of happiness.’

43) 'He who removes the misfortunes of his votaries’

G1) ‘He that infoses life into the lifeless mundane exe.’

@ ‘Having

(m) The cause of the creation, preservation and destruction of the
Universe.

() ‘Good-natured?

(0) Tapa—means ‘wealth,’ Tapona—the possessor of all riches,

() Ahas—day and Kara—maker,

(@) Rauti—teacheth—Ravi—he that teacheth,

©) Lit. fire-wombed. He that carries the fire of doom within himself.

(2) Aditi—'without destruction’—means "Brahma knowledge?

{#) Supreme happiness.

() The remover of intellectual stupor or evil-mindedness.

{») Lord of the welkin,

()  Dispeller of darkness.

G) He from whom floweth the fruit of acts: or he from whom come
downpours, The latter epithet is justified on grounds of Physical Geography
vain being ultimately dependant on solar heat,


1472 RAMAYANA,


the friend of the Apas,@) and he that swiltly courseth in the
Vindhya way. And he is Atapi(® andMandali@ and Mrityu.@
And he is Pingala, and the destroyer of everything, and the
Omniscient, and be having the universe for his form,() and
the exceedingly energetic one,and the beloved of all,and that
one lording it over all kinds of actions. And he is the lord(s)
of stars and planets and constallations, and the origin of
everything, and the one powerful pre-eminently of powerful
things,@)—and the one having twelve forms. I bow unto thee
(having these forms and functions). Salutation unto the
Eastern mount and the mount of the West. Salutation unto
the lord of the stellar bodies and salutation also unto the lord
of day, Salutation and salutation unto him that. bringeth
victory, and the joy that springeth up from victory ; and unto
him of yellow steeds. Salutation,salutation,O thousand-rayed
one | Salutation and salutation unto Aditya. Salutation unto
him that Keepeth his senses under subjection ; Salutation
and salutation unto the Hero,() and unto Saéranga¢) and unto
him that awakenest the Lotus. And (salutation) nnto thee,
O fierce one. Salutation unto the Lord himself of Brahma,
Ig&nat™) and Achchyuta,() and unto Sura) and unto him


(a) Apas may mean either ‘the good,’ or ‘water’ Vindbya way mean
either the way knowa as Brabmaniri or the orbit of the Sun,

(6) He that is intent on creating the cosmos.

(©) Ray-crowned or adorned with gems.

(@)_ The bringer of death.

© The motive force of the blood-tube called Pingala,

(/) Or the ornament of the Universe.

{g) 4.¢. the controller of them, remarks Rimé4naja.

(@) Such as, observes the commentator; as fire,

@ é.¢. the months of the year.

() Him that leadeth the senses, and that is endowed with the prowess of
slaying Tripurd ec,

@) Him that deservest the pranaba, the holiest formula in all Hinda
Scripture,

() That awakenest the external lotus as well as the lotus of the heart—

@» Siva, () Vishou, @ The suo,


YUDDHARKANDAM. 1473


that constitutes the knowledge of Aditya, and unto him that
unfoldeth me and not-me; and unto the devourer of all, and
unto the form of the destroyer of the darkness of ignorance.
Salutation unto the destroyer of darkness, and unto the
destroyer of enemies, and unto him of immeasurable Soul,
and unto the destroyer of the ingrate, and unto the deity,
and unto the lord of all stellar bodies. And salutation unto
him that boasteth of the splendour of burning gold, unto the
destroyar of all mental obscurity,—and unto the maker of the
universe. Salutation unto the remover of darkness ; unto the
illuminator of the Soul ; unto the all-bebolding one of all the
worlds, The lord createth everything and verily destroyeth
it. And with his rays he sucketh up, and destroyeth and
createth (everything). When all are asleep, this one waketh,
and he is resident in the hearts of all creatures. This one
is both Agnibotra as well as the fruit reaped by the sacrifices
thereof. And he constitutes the gods and the sacrifices and
the fruit also thereof ; and he is the lord of all acts that are
performed by creatures. If a person recites this (hymn), he,
O Raghava, doth not come by misfortune, when he is in peril
of his life, or is ill, or in a lonely place, or in fear. Do thou,
with concentration, worship this god of gods, this lord of the
universe. By reciting (this hymn) instinct with the three
virtues, thou wilt obtain victory in battle, This very instant,
© mighty-armed one, thou wilt conquer Ravana.” Having
said this, Agastya went whither from he had come. Hearing
this, that exceedingly energetic one had his grief gone.
Then, well pleased, Raghava, exerting himself, contemplated
(the hymn). And reciting this, he beholding the Sun,
attained excess of joy. And sipping water again and again,
and becoming purified, that powerful one, taking up his bow,
and viewing Ravana, advanced with a. delighted heart, to
obtain victory. And he became iatent on his death with his
dearest energies. Then exceedingly delighted, and filled
with rejoicings, the Sun, in the midst of the celestial hosts


185


1474 RAMAYANA.


knowing that the destruction of the Sovereign of the
night-rangers was at hand,—spoke unto Rama "Bestir
thyself.”


SECTION CVII,


ars the charioteer fully drove with speed Ravana’s car,
capable of bringing down the hosts of foes, resembling in
form a city of the Gandharvas, having elevated streamers,
yoked with surpassingly superb steeds, engarlanded in gold ;
stocked with war-like implements; furnished with ensigns
and standards ; appearing to devour the welkin ; making the
earth herself resound; destructive to hostile hosts; and
filling its own party with delight. And as it speedily
descended, the monarch of men beheld that Rakshasa-king’s
resounding car, having huge standards, yoked with black
chargers, and endowed with fierce splendour ; as if flaming
in the firmament ; having the resplendance of the Sun
himself ; with thronging lightning pennons ; displaying the
glow of Indra’s weapon ;* showering arms; and resembling
rain-charged clouds, Seeing the enemy’s car resembling a
mass of clouds having a chatter resembling the sounds sent
by a cleaving mountain rived by the thunder, Rama,
vehemently drawing his bow curved like the infant moon,
addressed Matali—charioteer unto the thousand-eyed
(deity ),t saying—~"O Matali, behold the enraged chariot
of my foe as it courseth on. From the furious speed
with which he is again wheeling at my right, it appeareth
that he hath set his heart on slaying me in encounter. Do


* The rain-bow.
+ Indra.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1475,


thou therefore heedfully drive the car right against the
vehicle of my foe. I wish to destroy this one even as the
wind scattereth clouds that have appeared. Do thou with
all thy wits about thee, without trepidation, and holding thy
heart as well as thy eye in calmness, swiftly drive the chariot
ruled by the reins. Worthy of Purandara’s car, thou ought
aot to be taught by me. Desirous of encounter and my
whole soul bent on fight, I simply remind thee—not teach
thee.” Pleased with these words of R&ma, the excellent
celestial charioteer—M&tali—drove the car. Then leaving
Ravana’s mighty car on the right, he enveloped Ravana with
the dust raised by the wheels. Thereat the Ten-necked one,
enraged, with his eyes coppery and dilated (in passion),
covered with arrows Rima staying in front of his car.
Enraged at the smiting, Rama, with his ire aroused, but
summoning up patience, took up in the encounter the bow
of Indra endowed with exceeding vehemence ; as well as
highly impetuous shafts having the resplendance of the
solar rays. And then there began a furious encounter
between those (two) eager for slaying each other ;
confronting each other like unto flaming lions, And then
desirous of destruction of Rdvana,—celestials with
Gandharvas, and Siddhas and supersaints assembled to go
to behold the encounter taking place between the two cars,
And for the destruction of Ravana and the success of
Raghava, there occurred round about the cars terrible bode-
ments capable of making people’s down stand on end, The
god poured down showers of blood on the car of Ravana ;
and a violent tornado eddied on his right. And a mighty
swarm of vultures, wheeling in the heavens, pursued the car
wherever it moved. And Lanka was enveloped with evening
resembling the red javd flowers and even in day appeared
ablaze. Lightnings and firebrands accompanied by a terrible
sound began to fall down on all sides. And beholding these
omens inauspicious unto Ravana all the Rakshasas were


1476 ‘RAMAYANA, ¢


greatly sorry, And wherever Ravana moved the earth shook
and the hands of all the R&kshasas fighting were as if
paralysed. The copper coloured, the yellow, the red, and
the white rays of the sun falling before Ravana appeared
like melted metals of a mountain, And’ the jackals
followed by vultures, vomitting forth fire and casting their
looks at him, began to emit inauspicious cries, And in that
battle-field the unfavourable wind began to blow raising dust
and obstructing the vision of the king of Rakshasas. On
the Rakshasa host on all sides dreadful lightnings were
showered without the sound of the clouds. All the quarters
were enshrouded with darkness and the welkin became
- invisible being covered with darkness. And setting up a
dreadful quarrel hundreds of terrible Sharcéas* began to fall
down on his chariot, The horses emitted forth sparks of fire
from their hips and tears from their eyes. These and various
other dreadful omens arose there announcing the destruction
of Ravana. And there appeared on all sides many an
auspicious and good sign intimating the approach of RAma’s
victory. And beholding all those auspicious marks announc-
ing Rima's success, Lakshmana was greatly delighted and
considered Rivana as slain, Thereupon beholding all those
auspicious signs, Raghava, well qualified to decipher them
attained an excess of deligtit and became anxious to display
a greater prowess.


* A kind of bird (Turdus Salica, Buch).


YUIPDHAKANDAM. ss 1477


SECTION CV It.


Tizrzveon there ensued a mighty and dreadful encounter
of two cars between Rama and Ravana, creating terror
unto all people. And the army of Rakshasas and the mighty
host of the monkeys, although they had weapons in their
hands, became stupified (for the time Leing). And beholding
them (Rama and Ravana) fight, all the Rakshasas and
monkeys, having their minds agitated,were greatly surprised.
With various weapons and hands uplifted for fight, they,
greatly wondered, stood there beholding them and did not
address themselves to fight with each other, The R&kshasas
beholding Ravana, and the monkeys beholding Rama with
wonder-stricken eyes, the whole army appeared like #
picture. And espieing all omens Raghava and Ravana
began to fight, undaunted, firm, resolute and unagitated by
anger. And determining that Kakutstha would win victory
and Ravana would die, they began to display, their own
prowess. Thereupon the highly powerful Ravana, setting
his arrows in anger, discharged them at the pennon stationed
on Raghava’s car. Those arrows reaching the flag staff
of the Purandara chariot and perceiving its might fell down
onthe earth. Thereupon the Highly powerful R&ma, wroth,
stretching his bow, made up his wind to return the blow.
And aiming at Ravana’s flag staff he discharged a sharpened
shaft flaming unbearably by its own lustre like a huge
serpent. And the effulgent Rima discharged a shaft aiming
at (Ravana’s) banner which, piercing the Ten-necked demon’s
flag fell, down on the earth. And beholding his flag staff
thus broken down the highly powerful Ravana became ablaze
as if burning down every thing with his unbearable ire.
And being possessed by wrath he began to make a downpour


1478 RAMAYANA, *


of shafts. Ravana then, with flaming arrows, pierced Rama's .
steeds. The celestial horses were not bewildered thereby
nor their course was slackened. And they remained
thoroughly unagitated as if they were stricken with lotus
stalka. Beholding the steeds thus unmoved Ravana was
again exercised with wrath and began to discharge afresh
his various weapons—gadés, parighas, chakras and musalas,
mountain tops, trees, darts and paraskus and thousands of
other shafts by virtue of his illusive powers. And unmoved
was his energy. And that downpour of various weapons
became huge and terrible in the conflict creating terror and
making a dreadful noise. Thereupon leaving aside Raghava’s
car he began to assail the monkey-host and enveloped the
sky with a continual discharge of arrows. The Ten-necked
demon Iet loose many a weapon even at the risk of his own
life. And beholding Ravana in the encounter thus actively
engaged in the discharge of arrows, Kakuthstha, smiling, set
up pointed shafts, and discharged them by hundreds and
thousands. Beholding them Ravana again filled the welkin
with arrows—and thus with shafts discharged by them both
another flaming sky was created. None (of the arrows)
missed the aim, none of them failed to pierce another and
none of them was fruitless. And the arrows discharged by
Rama and Ravana stricking each other fell down on the
earth. And they standing on their right and left began to
make acontinued downpour of arrows and enveloped the
sky entirely. And they opposing each other, Ravana’ slew
Rama’s steeds and Rama in his turn slew Ravanan’s, They,
thus enraged fought with each other and for sometime there
ensued a terrible encounter capable of making ones
down stand on end. And the highly powerful Ravana and
Rama* fighting with each other in the conflict by means of
sharpened arrows, the lord of Rakshasas beholding his


* The epithet in the text is Lakshmana’s elder brother.


VULUIABANDAL, - 1479


flag staff broken down became enraged with the foremost of
Raghus,


SECTION CIxX.


Rasa and Ravana thus opposing each other in battle,
all the animals beheld them, stricken with astonishment.
And those two great heroes, highly angered, began to dash
towards and assail each other; and being determined to
slay each other they looked greatly dreadful. And their
charioteers drove the cars on, displaying their skill by
moving io circles, in rows and diverse other ways. And
those two excellent heroes, discharging their shafts and
influenced by illusions, assailed each other proceeding and
receding, Rama attacking Ravana and Ravana withstanding
him, And these two cars coursed the earth for sometime like
clouds accompanied by showers. And displaying many a
movement in the conflict they again stood facing each
other, the forepart of one car touching that of the other and
the heads of the steeds touching each other ; and the pennons,
stationed on one touched those of the other, Rama, with
four sharpened arrows, shot off his bow, removed the flaming
horses of Ravana to some distance. And finding lis steeds
thus removed he was exercised with wrath. And the
Ten-necked one discharged sharpened arrows at Raghava.
And he was pierced by those arrows coming from the
powerful Ten-necked demon. He was neither overwhelmed
nor pained therewith and he again discharged arrows
resembling the thunder-bolts. And the Ten-necked demon
again discharged arrows at the charioteer, which fell with
great vehe merce on the person of Matali. Matali was not


taBe RA.


YANA.


the least pained or overwhelmed in that encounter. And
beholding his charioteer thus assailed. Rama was excited with
wrath and overwhelmed his foe with a net of arrows, And
the heroic Raghava showered on his enemy’s chariot shafts by
twentys, thirtys, sixtys, hundreds and thousands, And the
lord of R&kshasas, Ravana, who was stalioned on the car,
wroth, attacked Rama ia the conflict with maces and
Musalas. And there again ensued a terrible conflict capable
of making one’s down stand on end. And the seven oceans
were overwhelmed with the sound of maces, musalas,
Parighas and gold feathered arrows, And those inhabiting
the regions under the agitated oceans, all the Danavas and
thousands of Pannagas were greatly pained. And greatly
shook the earth with her mountains, forests and gardens,
The Sun was shorn of its resplendance and the wind blew
very rough. Thereupon the celestials, with Gandharbas,
Siddhas, great saints, Kinnaras and serpents,were all worked
up with anxiety. And beholding the dreadful encounter
between Rama and Ravana capable of making people’s down
stand on end, the celestials with ascetics began to pray,—
“May good betide the Brahmins and cows, may people live
in peace and may Raghava defeat Ravana, the lord of
Rakshasas, in the conflict.” And the crowd of Gandharbas
and Apsaras beholding that wonderful battle between Rima
and Ravana, said,—“The ocean resembleth the sky and the
sky resembleth the ocean—forsooth this encounter between
Raima and Ravana befits them only.” Thereupon Rama of
long-arms, the enhancer of the glory of Raghu’s race, enraged,
set his arrow, resembling a se:pent, on his bow, and cut
assuuder RAvana’s head wearing shinning Kundalas. And
that head in the presence of the inhabitants of the three
regions fell down on the earth. Instantly there arose
another head resembling the former; and it was speedily
cut off by the light-handed Rama. As soon as the second
head was chopped off in the encounter.by means of shalts


PUULUAnANDAM. 14ot


another appeared again. And that was again severed by
Rama's shafts resembling thuader-bolts. And thus were
severed hundred heads all equal in brilliance. But the end
of RAvana’s life was not seen by him. Thereupon the heroic
Raghava,conversant with the use of ail weapons,the enhancer
of Kaugatyi’s joy, began to reason within himself in various
ways,—Verily these are the arrows by which Maricha
was killed, and Khara with Dushana was slain—~Viradha was
destroyed in the forest of Krauncha—the headless demon
in the forest of Dandaka—Salas and mountains were broken
-=-the ocean was agitated—and V4&li was killed ;—I do not
perceive the reason, why they are becoming fruitless when
discharged at Ravana.” Thinking thus Raghava made himself
ready in the conflict and began to shower arrows on Ravana’s
breast. Thereupon Rf&vana too, the lord of; Rakshasas,
seated in a car and highly enraged, assailed Rama in the
conflict with a downpour of maces and Musalas. That
dreadful and huge conflict, capable of making hairs stand on
end, continued for seven nights before the eyes of the
celestials, Danavas, Yakshas, Pisichas, Uragas and serpents
stationed in the sky, on the earth or on the mountain-tops.
Neither for the night nor for the day, nor for a moment did
the fight between Rama and Rivanacease. And beholding
the conflict between Dagaratha’s son and the lord of
R&Skshasas, and Raghava’s victory, the bigh-souled charioteer
of the lord of the celestials spake speedily unto Rima engaged
in the conflict.


186


RAMAYANA.


SECTION CX.


"Puereuron Matali,reminding him,spake unto Righava-»
“Why dost thou, O hero, as if not knowing, fear him? Do
thou, O lord, discharge at him the weapon obtained from the
great Patriarch. The time for (his) destruction, as described
by the celestials, hath arrived.” Being reminded by those
words of M&tali, Rama took up the flaming shalt, breathing
as if like a serpent. The great Rishi Agastya first conferred
this upon him. This is a huge and dreadful shaft
given by Brabm& and highly useful in battle. Tt was
made by Brahm& of undecaying prowess for Indra and
conferred by him upon the Lord of celestials desirous of
acquiring victory. In its wings there is wind, in its head
there is fire and the Sun, iu its body there is the sky
and in its weight there are the (hill) Meru and Mandara.
It is resplendent by its own lustre, well feathered and
adorned with gold—made of the essence of all objects and
bright as the rays of the Sun. It is like the fire of
dissolution enveloped in smoke—like the flaming serpent,
capable of piercing men, serpents and horses and was
swift-coursing. (It can) rend the gateways, Parighas
and hills—is soaked in blood, dipped in marrow, and
extremely dreadful. It is hard as the lightning—producing
a dreadful sound, assailing various (divisions of the) army,
creating terror unto all, dreadful and (as if) breathing like a
serpent, It is terrible as the Death in the conflict and
provides food always for the herons, vultures, cranes,
jackals and the R&akshasas. It is the enhancer of the
monkey-leaders’ joy and the repressor of the Rakshasas and
is feathered like unto a bird with many a picturesque wing.
And the highly powerful Bama, consecrating’ in accordance
with the mantras laid down in the Vedas, that huge ehaft—
the foremost of all in the world, removing the fear of the


YURBHAKANDAM, 1483


Ikehw&ku race, destroying the fame of the enemies and
conducing to the joy of its own party, set it on his bow. And
that excellent arrow being mounted on his bow by Righava
.all the animals were stricken with fear and the earth shook.
And (Rima) highly enraged, and greatly wary, suppressing
(his breath) discharged that shaft at Ravana—piercing to
the vitals. (That Brahma weapon) irrepressible as the
thunder, dreadful as the Death and discharged by Rama, fell
down on Rivana’s breast. And that shaft, capable of
bringing about death and gifted with velocity, when
discharged, cleft the breast of the vicious-souled R&vana.
And that body-ending arrow, bathed in blood, stealing away
the life of Ravana, entered the earth. That shaft, slaying
Ravana, soaked in blood and successful, again entered the
quiver* humbly. And from his band, who was deprived of
his life, fell down instantly on earth his shafts and bow.
And fell down on the earth from the chariot, the highly
effulgent Ravana, gifted with dreadful velocity and shorn of
his life. And beholding him thus fallen down, the remaining
night-rangers, deprived of their lord and stricken with
terror fled away to various quarters. And beholding the
destruction of the Ten-necked (demon) and the victory of
Raghava, the monkeys, fighting with trees, pursued them on
all sides. And being assailed by the monkeys and having.
their countenances full of tears in consequence of their lord
being slain they fled away to Lanka in fear. Thereupon the
monkeys being greatly delighted roared out the victory of
Rima. The celestial bugle was sounded in the sky and
there blew the excellent air carrying the celestial fragrance.
Flowers were showered upon R&ma’s car which was
covered therewith. The celestials in the sky began to
chaunt the glory of Rama and praise him. And Ravana, the
dread of all people, being slain, the celestials with the

* In seme texts there is “wapwnarabishet” i. ¢. did‘uot enter the
quiver.—T.


148s RAMAYANA,


Charanas were greatly delighted. And slaying that foremost
of the Rakshasas,Rama satisfied the desire of Sugriva,Angada
aod Bibhishana. Thereupon the celestials attained their
peace, the quarters were delighted, the atmosphere was
clear, calm air began to prevail all over the earth, and the
Sun appeared in its full rays. Thereupon Sugriva,
Bibhishana and Lakshmana, welcomed R&ma, of unmitigated
prowess, singing his glory. And there appeared beautiful
at the battle-field Rama of firm promise, slaying his enemy
‘and encircled by his army and friends, like unto the Lord of
the celestials surrounded by the gods.


SECTION CXI.


——


"Benorowe his brother defeated, slain and lying down
on the battle-field, Bibhishana, overpowered with the weight
of his grief, began to lament—“O hero, well-known for thy
prowess, wise and conversant with polity, thou wert used to
excellent beds, why dost thou lie down on the earth,
spreading (on the earth) thy long and actionless arms,
always adorned with Angadas and being shorn of thy helmet
having the resplendance of the Sun? O hero, thou hast
come by what I had anticipated and what did not please thee
who wert possessed by delusions. Prahasta, Indrajit,
Kumbhakarna, Atik&ya, Atiratha, Nar3ntaka, yourself and
others—none of you paid heed, out of haughtines, to what 1
had said which hath now been brought about. Oh! the
bridge of the pious hath been broken, the figure of the virtue
hath been spoiled, the refuge of the strong and powerful hath
disappeared and thou hist attained to the state of the
heroes! Tne sun hath fallen down on the earth, the’ moon


VYUDDHARANDAM. 1485


hath been shorn of its lustre, the fire hath been extinguished
and virtue bath desisted from its action, this heroe, the
foremost of those using weapons, falling down on the earth.
O thou the foremost of the Rikshasas lying down in the dust
on the battle field like one asleep, whom else have these
remaining (Rakshasas) deprived of their power and energy,
got? The huge tree, of the lord of Rakshasas, having
patience for its leaves, velocity for its flowers, the power
of asceticism and heroism for its firm rools, hath been
uprooted by the Réghava wind. Mad-elephant-like Ravana,
having prowess for its tusk, family rank for its back bone,
anger for its legs, and delightedness for its trunk, hath been
laid low on the ground by the lion of the Ikshw&ku race.
The powerful Rakshasa-fire, having prowess and energy for
its rays, angry breath for its smoke, own strength for its
power of burning, hath been extinguished in battle by Réma-
like cloud. The R&kshasa bull ever defeating others and
powerful as the wind, having R&kshasas for its tail, hump
and horns, and fickleness for its ears and eyes, hath been
slain to-day by Rdma-tiger.” Hearing these words,pregnant
with sound reasonings from Bibhishana and bebolding bins
overwhelmed with grief Rama said,—(This Jord of
Rakshasas) of dreadful prowess hath not been slain in battle
disabled. He is gifted with great prowess and energy and
devoid of the fear of death.* The heroes abiding by the
virtues of the Kshatriyas, who fall at the battle field for
enhancing their glory, when dead, should not be mourned
for. This ig not the time to mourn for him although
possessed hy death, by whom gifted with intellect, Indra
with the three worlds was terrified in conflict. Besides
success in battle is not perpetual ; either one slays his enemy
or meeta with his destruction at his hands in the conflict.
‘This procedure of the Kshatryas was laid down by the


he has accidentally met with death.


1486 BAMAYANA,


ancient preceptors that a Kshatrya, when slain in battle
should not be mourned for. Beholding this to be certain
aad attaining calmness, do thou be freed from thy sorrow
and think what should be done now. Thereupon
Bibhishana stricken with grief addressed the powerful
son of the king speaking thus with words tending to
his brother’s well-being. “Thou hast, like the ocean
breaking down its banks, broken him down, who had not
been ere this even defeated by Basava and the celestials, By
him were conferred many a gift on those who wanted them,
were'enjoyed many a luxury,were maintained many a servant,
distributed wealth unto friends and slain the enemies. He
propitiated, fire, performed great austerities, was conversant
with the Vedas and the great performer of sacrifices. 1 desire
to perform, by thy instructions, his becoming obsequies.””
,Being thus addressed by Bibhishana with piteous accents,
the high-souled son of the lord of men, gifted with great
energy,ordered him to perform his obsequies and said. “With
death our enmity hath terminated and our object hath been
accomplished : he is as dear unto me as unto thee : perform
(therefore) his funeral cites.”


SECTION CXxIL


: Busotowe Ravana slain by the bigh-souled Raghava
Rakshasees, ‘stricken with grief, issued out of the inner
appartments. Stricken with grief and with dishevelled haira
they rolled in the dust albeit prevented again and again like
‘unto cows separated from their calves. And coming out by
the northern gate along with the Rakshasas, entering the
dreadful areha of battle and searching their slain lord the


YUDDHARANDAM. 1487


she-demons cried piteously—"O lord, O husband, O our
all” and moved along the battle field soaked in blood and
filled with headless corpses. With eyes full of tears and
overwhelmed with the grief of their husband they began to
move about like she-elephants without the lord of their herd.
Thereupon they beheld there on the earth the huge-bodied
and the highly powerful and effulgent Ravana slain like red
collyrium. And beholding their, lord lying down op the
battle-field they all fell on bis body like creepers torn
assunder. Some wept embracing him respectfully—some
holding his feet and some placing themselves around his
neck, And some taking up bis hand rolled on the ground
and some were beside themselves (with grief) beholding the
slain (Ravana’s) countenance. And some placing her head
on his lap, and beholding his face, wept, bathing it with tears
like a lotus enveloped with snow. Seeing their husband
Ravana thus slain on the earth, they stricken with grief,
bewailing again and again in sorrow, wept profusely. He
by whom the king Vaisrabana was deprived of his flower
car, who terrified the high-souled Gandharbas, ascetics and
the celestials in battle field, who did not know of any
fear from the Asuras, celestials and the Pannagas, hath now
been overpowered by a man. He, whom the celestials, the
Danavas and the Rakshas could not slay, hath been slain
in conflict by a man walking on foot. He, who was incapable
of being killed by the celestials, Yakshas and Asuras, hath
met with death like one devoid of prowess at the hands of
a mortal.” Speaking in this wise, the she-demons, over-
powered with sorrow, wept and bewailed again and again
(saying),—"Not hearing (the counsels) of thy friends, always
pointing out thy welfare, thou didst bring Sitk for thy
destruction as wel! as that of the R&kshasas. Although thy
brother Bibhishana addressed thee with words pregnant
with thy welfare—thou, for thy own destruction, out of thy
misgivings, didst_excite his anger and hast (now) seen (the


£488 RAMAYANA,


result thereof). Hadst thou returned Sit the daughter of
the king of Mithila to Rama, this mighty aod dreadful
disaster, destroying the very root, would not have befallen us.
Rama’s desire would have been encompassed—his friends
would have been successful (through Bibhishana)—we would
not been widowed and our enemies would not have got
their desires fulfilled. By thee, Siti was kept by force in
captivity in a ruthless manner, and the Rakshasas, ourselves
and thyself—all three equally have been slain. O foremost
of the Rakshasas, forsooth this is not thy own folly—it is
Accident that uniteth all things and it is Accident again
that bringeth about destruction, O thou of huge arms—the
destruction of the monkeys and the R&kshasas as well as
that of thyself hath been brought about by Accident. When
the course of accident is about to bring about result—wealth,
desire, prowess or command—nothing is capable of with-
standing it.” Thus wept piteously the wives of the lord of
Rakshasas like unto so many she-elephants—rendered poorly,
stricken with grief and with tears in their eyes.


SECTION cx.
ee


"Tue foremost of the wives of the Rikshasa (king)
bewailing piteously cast her looks poorly towards her
husband, And beholding her Ten-necked husband slain by
Rama of inconcievable actions Mandodari bewailed there
Piteously—"O thou of huge arms! O younger brother of
Baishravana! Even Purandara feared to stand before thee
when enraged. The great Rishis—the far-famed Gandharbas
and the Charanas, fled away to different quarters in thy fear.


YODDHAKANDAM. 1489 *


And then (how) hast tho been overpowered in battle by Rima
who isa mere man? Why is it that thou art not ashamed
‘of it, O king, O lord of the Rakshasasy Conquering the
three worlds with thy prowess thou didst attain thy glory;
and it is unbearable, that a man, ranging in the forest, hath
slain thee. Thou, who art capable of assuming shapes at
will, hast been in conflict by Raima, in the city of
Lank& unapproachable by men. I do not believe that thy
destruction,—who hadst always been crowned with success,
before the forces, is work of Rama. (Methinks) Death
(himself) came there in the shape of Rama and spread
illusions unconsciously for thy destruction, O thou of great
strength, Or thou hast been slain by V&sava—(no) what
power has he got to face thee in the conflict gifted with great
strength, prowess and energy and an enemy of the celestials
as thou art? Itis evident that the great ascetic Vishnu,
having truth for his prowess—the soul of all beings,ever exist-
ing, without beginning, middle or end, greater than the great,
the Preserver of the Nature, holding conch, discus and club,
having Sribatsa* on his breast, always beautiful, incapable
of being conquered, without destruction, devoid of end,
and the lord of all men, assuming this shape of a man and
encircled by the celestials, assuming monkey shapes, hath
for the behoof of mankind, sfain (thee) the dreadful
enemy of the gods with all (thy) family and Rikshasas.
Subduing all thy passions, thou didst conquer the theée
worlds—remembering their grudge they have now over-
powered thee. Rama is not a man since he slew at Janasthina
thy brother Khara encircled by many a Rakshasa. We were
sore-distressed when Hanuman, by bis own prowess, entered
the city of Lanka incapable of being approached even by the
celestials. And I prevented thee from creating enmity with


* A particular mark usually sald to be a curl of hair on the breast ot
Wishnu, The emblem of the tenth jina-or the mark above ascribed to Vishnw
or Krishna. sets eee


187


4490 RAMAYANA,


Raghava, but thou didst not pay heed to my words and
this is the result (thereof). O foremost of Rékshasas—O
thou of a vicious understanding, for the destruction of thy
wealth, thyself and thy relatives, thou didst suddenly cherish
atnour for Sit, greater than (even) Arundhuti and Rohini.
Forsooth thou didst perpetrate an unbecoming deed by
distressing the adorable Sit& ever devoted unto her lord, an
earth* even unto Earth herself and a Sreet even unto Sree
herself, And having brought in a false guise from the solitary
forest the sorrowful and chaste Sith, having a blameless
person, thou didst bring on the destruction of thy family,
Thou didst fail to encompass thy desire for the company of
Sit& But now, forsooth, O my lord, thou hast been burnt
down by her devotion who is devoted unto her husband.t
Thou wert not burnt down when thou didst captivate that
middle-statured (damsel) whom fear all the celestials beaded
by Indra and Ag#i.§ O lusband, (proper) time appearing
the perpetrator gets the result of his vicious deeds : there
is not the least doubt in this. The performer of the good
receives good (result)—the perpetrator of the vicious (deeds)
meets with bad (result). Bibhishana hath attained to happi-
ness and thou hast met with this thy end. There are damsels
in your seraglio far more beautiful than she but thou
possessed by cupid couldst not perceive this. Maithilee is
not my equal nor superior either in birth, beauty or accomplish-
ments, but thou didst not perceive this by thy misgivings,
Death doth not always visit all men without any cause—and
Maithilee is the cause of thy death. And death, in consequence
of Maithilee, hath taken thee far away. And she, shorn of


“ The Earth is an emblem of patience but Sit is more patient than the
Earth.—T. 7

+ Sree is the goddess of wealth and good fortune—but Sitd is more
fortunate than fortune herself.—T.

$ de, that thou wert not burnt down there and then shows her greatness of
mind.—T, § The god of Fire.


VUDDHARANDAM. 14gt


all sorrow, shall enjoy in the company of Rama, and I, of
limited piety, am now sunk in the the ocean of grief.
Roaming at large with thee in a car unequalled in beauty
on the hill Kailiga, Mandara, Maru, inthe garden of Chaitra-
ratha and all other celestial gardens, beholding many a
country, wearing variegated clothes and garlands, I have
been deprived of all pleasures and enjoyments, O hero,
by thy death, And I am a. widow now. O fie on
fickle fortune! O king, in lustre of countenance thou art
like the Sun, in grace like the Moon, in beauty like the lotus;
thou art graceful, O thou having excellent brows ; thou hast
got excellent skin, high nase and thy countenance is graced
with a brilliant crown and Kxadalas. Oh how beautiful,
thou didst look with various garlands when thy eye
whirled with intoxication on the drinking ground and how
beautiful were thy smiles, O lord. Thy countenance doth not
shine now—being severed with Rama’a shafts, bathed in a
pool of blood, having thy back-bone and brain deranged and
covered with the dust raised by the wheels of the chariots,
Alas! by my ill-luck I have attained to that after state
making me a widow which I did never think of. My father
is the king of Danavas, my husband the lord of Rakshasas,
and my son the subduer of Sakra. I was greatly proud of
this and always confident that my protectors were undaunted,
dreadful,repressors of the enemies and famous for their strength
and manliness. O ye foremost of the Rakshasas, how could
this fear from man overwhelm you ail who were so powerful ¢
{This thy body) is cool, green like /udraneela, high like
‘a huge’ mountain, and adorned with Keyura, Angada, jewels
and garlands of flowers. It was graceful in places of enjoy-
ments and incapable of being looked at in the field of battle.
It was brilliant, being decked with ornaments like unto clouds
accompanied by lightnings. And this thy person bath been
pierced with shafts to-day ; (and knowing) that it is not
easy of attainment for me I am incapable of embracing


1493 RAMAYANA.


(it), covered with shafts piercing through the very vitals. O
king (this thy body) green-hued (but now) blood-red is now
lying on the ground like unto a mountain shattered with
thunder-bolts. That thou wouldst be slain by Rima was
like 2 dream, but it hath proved true! Thou wert like death
unto Death himself, why hast thou been possessed by him
then? Thow wert the enjoyer of the three worlds’ wealtt:
and dread unto them ; thon wert the conqueror of the deities
presiding over various quarters ; thow didst shake Sankara
(bimself)—thou wert the subduer of the proud and thy
prowess was well-known ; thou didst repress the people and
slay many a pious man—thou didst, by thy prowess, use to
give vent to haughty words before the enemies ; thou wert
the maintainer of thy kinsmen and servants and ‘the slayer
of many perpetrating dreadful deeds ; thou wert the destroyer
of thousands of celestials, Dacavas and Yakshas; thou wert
the subbuer of Nivata Kavackas in the encounter; thou
didst hinder the performance of many sacrifices and wert the
protector of thy relatives; thou wert the obstructer of pious
observances, creator of illusions in conftict and thou didst
bring away from hither and thither the daughters of the
celestials, demons and men; thow didst aggrieve the wives
of thy enemies; thou wert the leader of thy own men, the
protector of the island of Lank& and the performer of many
‘a dreadful deed; thou didst confer upon us the enjoyment
of many a pleasure—and wert the foremost of car-warriors.
Beholding such a husband slain by Rama, ] am, deprived
of my dear lord, still maintaining my being; {forsooth)
my heart is very hard. O lord of Rakshasas, used ere to
many a valuable bed, why art thou sleeping on earth
covered with dust; When my son Indrajit was slain by
Lakshmana in conflict I was greatly pained—but to-day f am
slain. Deprived of my friends and relatives, separated from
thee O my lord,deprived from the enjoyment of many pleasures
I shali“tament for thee perpetually. Thou hast, O king,


VUDDHARANDAM. 1493


reached the way, long and hard to be treaded-edo thou take
me, who am stricken with grief and who shall not be able
to live without thee. Why dost thou wish to go leaving me
behind who have been rendered poorlyp Why dost thou
not welcome me, unfortunate and poor, who am bewailing ?
Why art thou not angry, O lord, beholding me, having put off
my veil, walk out on foot by the city-gate? O beloved of thy
wives, do thou behold thy wives—-who have thrown off their
veils. Why art thau not angry seeing them all come out (of
the city)? I was thy companion in sports, O my tord;!
long for having thee; why art thou not consoling and
welcoming me? O king, being imprecated by those damsels,
not one, devoted to their husbands, pious and ever engaged
in attending upon their superiors, who had been widowed
by thee, thou hast been overpowered by thy enemy. The
curse, proceeding fram them who had been ill-treated by thee,
hath borne fruit. O king, the saying, that the tears of chaste
damsels do not uselessly fall on the ground, hath been
verified (here) forsooth. O king, conquering the worlds with
thy prowess, how couldst thou, always honored by the king,
cherish the vile desire of stealing away women? Taking
away Rima and Lakshmana from the hermitage by an illusion-
aty deer, thou didst steal away Rima’s spouse. I remember
to have never heard thee lamont in battle. Forsooth, it is
out misfortune and the sign of impending death (that thou
didst do thie) conversant as thou art with the past, present
and future. Beholding the daughter of the king of Mithila
brought (in the city of Lanka) what, thy younger brother
Bibhishana, thinking and sighing, said, hath now proved
true, O thou of long-arms. This destruction of the leading
R&kshasas hath proceeded from the disaster arising from thy
anger and lust. For thy (vicious) deeds all our good fortune
is lost—(and° from them) hath proceeded the great disaster
exterminating the race. And by thee all the Rakshasa families
have been deprived of their lords. Thou, well-known for thy


1494 RAMAYANA,


strength and manliness, art not worthy of being grieved by
me, Qn account of my effeminate nature my-understand-
ing is posseased by sorrow. Carrying thy pious and
iniquitous deeds thou hast attained to thy own state—I am
only lamenting for me who have been sorry for thy destruc-
tion, O Ten-necked one, thou didst not hear the words
of thy friends and brothers, who spoke those -well
meaning words out of affection. Thou didst not obey the
words uttered by Bibhisana, duly and mildly, pregnant with
meaning and reasoning and tending to thy welfare. Maddgn-
ed with thy own prowess thou didst not hear the words of
Maricha, Kumbhakarna as well as those of my father—and
this is the result thereof. O thou resembling the red clouds,
O thou wearing yellow cloth and excellent Angada, stretch-
ing thy person on the gronnd why art thou in the long rua
bathed in blood ? Why dost thou not, like one asleep,welcome
me who am stricken with grief? Iam the grand-daughter
of the highly powerful Rakshasa Sum&li who never flies away
from the field of battle: why dost thou not welcome me?
Rise up! rise ap! why dost thou lie down (on this occasion
of) new discomfiture? To-day have the rays of the Sun
entered fearlessly the city of Lank&. The Parigha, by which,
brilliant as the rays of the Sun, thou didst distress the
enemies in conflict, which was always adored by thee like the
thunder of the wielder of thunder-bolt, which slew macy in
battle, and which was adorned with golden nets, aow lieth
shattered into thousand pieces by atrows. Why dost thou
lie oa the battle-field embracing her like your beloved
spouse? Why dost thou aot wish to welcome ime like pone
not beloved unto thee? Oh fie on thi rt of mine which
és not sundered into thousand (pieces) all distressed with
the grief of thy death ” Bewailing thus, she, with profuse tears
in ber eyes, and with her heart overflowing with affection,
became senseless. And being beside herself she flung herself
on Ravana's breast, like unto the bright lightning appearing


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1495


on red evening clouds. Thereupon the other wives, of
Ravana,gréatly distressed and weeping,and rasing her up who
was greatly weeping, began to console her saying :-—“Dost
thou not know, O worshipful dame, that the life of beings is
very uncertain, and with adverse circumstances even the royal
fortune becometh fickle 2” Being thus accosted she again
wept aloud, bathing with tears her breast and beautiful
countenance. In the meantime Rima to Bibhisana,~~
"Do thou perform the funeral ceremonies of thy brother and
console his wives.” Whereto the intelligent Bibhisana
replied with the following words—pointing out wealth and
piety, and judging by his understanding what is proper. “I do
not think it proper to perform his cremation ceremony who
had renounced all pious deeds,was wicked, cruel, liar and who
had ravished others’ wives. He is my enemy in the shape
of a brother ever engaged in doing injury unto others—
and Ravana is not worthy of my adoration albeit he is
adorable by virtue of his being my elder brother. O Rama,
perhaps people of this earth will call me cruel but they will
again recognise my act as good when they will bear of
his vicious deeds.” Hearing those words, Rama, the foremost
of the pious and conversant with the skill of speech,
greatly delighted, spoke unto Bibhishana (equally) skilled
in speech,—-"It behoveth me to encompass thy welfare
since by thy help I have gained the victory. O lord of
Rakshasas, forsooth, thou shouldst hear my well-meaning
words. Although this night-ranger perpetrated many vicious
and impious deeds still he was ever powerful, heroic and
strong in warfare. [ have beard that this high-souled Ravana,
gifted with strength and a dread unto all people, was not
defeated (even) by the celestials headed by the performer of
hundred sacrifices, Enmity extendeth up to death—so it
hath ended; there is no necessity (of carrying it on). Do
thou (therefore) perform his cremation ceremony—he is unto
thee as he is unto me. © thou of long-arms it behoveth thee


e496 RAMAYANA,


to perform, speedily with due rites and religious ceremonies,
his funeral ceremony—thou shalt be the object of praise
(unto people).” Hearing the words of Raghava, Bibhishana
hastened on and began to make arrangements for the crema~
tion of his slain brother Ravana. And entering the city of
Lank&, Bibhi: a, the ford of Rakshasas, speedily got out
R&vana’s Agnthotra,* carts, brass utensils, fire, (and brought)
Fajakas,f sandal-wood, other woods, essences, Agura, other
fragrant substances, precious stones, pearls and corals.
Thereupon arriving immediately accompanied hy R&kshasas
and Malyavina he engaged in the performance of cremation
ceremony. Thereupon the twice-born ones, with tears in
their eyes, covered the Rakshasa-king Ri&vana’s body, with
a silken cloth and placed it on a golden celestial litter. With
the sound of various bugles they began to chaunt his praise.
And taking up this litter adorned with various charming
paintings and flags and carrying fire woods, all the
Rakshasas headed by Bibhishana proceeded towards the
South.t The Brahmins, versed in Fayur Veda and with burn-
ing fire in their hands, proceeded and were followed by the
attendants, And the damsels of the seraglio followed
speedily leaping (being ever unused to walking). And
placing Ravana on the cremation ground, they, greatly
stricken with grief, prepared the funeral pyre according
to due rites with sandal-woods, Padmakas,§ Ushiras\| and
sandal and spread an antelope-skin thereon. They (then)
performed the excellent obsequies of the manes of the lord
of Rakshasas. And raising an altar at the south-east corner
they placed fire at the proper place. They then poured curd
and clarified butter upon (Ravana’s) shoulders. And placing


* A pot for preserving sacred fire.

+ The Brahmins who periorm obsequies,

$. Cremation-place!

§ A sort of drug commonly called Padmakas,
i ‘The root of a fragrant grass,


VODDHARANDAM. 1497


Sakata on his legs, Ulukkala* on his thighs, and the brass
untensils, Arunis and Musals in their proper places, they
celebrated (the obsequies of his manes). Thereupon slaying
beasts according to the rites laid down in Séstras and
pointed out by the great saints, the Rakshasas (made a
coverlet dipped in their marrow and clarified butter) and
placed it on the face of the lord of R&kshasas. And decking
Ravana with fragrant garlands and various clothes, the friends,
of Bibhishana, with depressed heart and tears in their eyes,
showered dried paddy (on his person). And Bibhishana
according to due rites put fire to his (funeral pyre), Bathing
and with wetted cloth, offering duly linseed and sacrificial
grass mixcd with water and consoling (R&vana's) wives again
and again, he entreated them to go back. They then entered
the city, And those damsels having entered the city,
Bibhishana, the lord of Rakshasas, approaching Rama, stood
by his side gently. And Rama too, along with his army,
Sugriva and Lakshmana, was greatly delighted after
his enemy like unto the wielder of thunder-bolt after slaying
(the demon) Vitra. Thereupon leaving aside his bow with
arrows, and the huge armour conferred by Mahendra and
renouncing ire after the destruction of his enemy R&ma
assumed gentle mein.


SECTION CXIV.


Besorvixe the destruction of Ravana the celestials,
Gandharbas and Danavas ascending their respective cars
went away chanting this excellent theme. And talking
of R&vana’s dreadful destruction, Raghava’s prowess, the


* A wooden mortar used for cleaning tice.
188


1498 RAMAYANA,


excellent warfare of the monkeys, the counsels of Sugriva,
the devotion and prowess of the Wind-God's son and
Lakshmana and Sita’s devotion unto her husband, those high
souled ones, delighted, repaired to their respective quarters.
And R&ghava, baving long arms, permitting the charioteer to
take back the celestial car bright as the sky sent by Indra,
honoured him greatly. And being commanded by RAghava
Matali, the charioteer of Sakra taking the celestial car,
rose up in the welkin. And that charioteer rising up into
the celestial region, Raghava, the foremost of car-warriors,
greatly delighted, embraced Sugriva. And embracing
Sugriva, bowed unto by Lakshmana and worshipped by the
monkey he repaired to the camp of his soldiers. Thereupon
Kakuthsha spoke unto Lakshmana—the son of Sumitr&
gifted with auspicious marks who was near him—"O gentle
one, take this Bibhishana to the city of Lank& ever devoted
and attached unto us, and who had done us good. This
is my great desire that | may behold Bibhishana the younger
brother of Ravana installed on the throne of Lank&.” Being
thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, the son of
Sumitr&, saying—“So be it’ and greatly delighted, brought
a golden jar. And placing that jar at the hands of the lord
of monkeys, that one, gifted with great energy, ordered them
to bring water from the Ocean, And repairing speedily
those excellent monkeys came back with water from the
ocean. And taking that jar and placing him on an excellent
seat Saumitri with that water sprinkled Bibhishana as king
of Lank& in the presence of all the Rakshasas, at Rima’s
command, And (Lakshmana) encircled by friends sprinkl-
ing him according to rites laid down in the Vedas, all the
Rakshasas, devoted unto kim, his counsellors and the monkeys
attaining incomparable delight, sang the glory of Rama.
And beholding Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas installed
in the city of Lanka’, Raghava along with Lakshmana
attained to an excess of delight. And consoling his subjects


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1499


he went to Rama. And the monkey citizens, delighted,
brought him curd, fried grain, sweetmeats, fried paddy
and flowers. And taking all those things indicating auspi-
ciousness, he, irrepressible and gifted with energy, conferred
them upon Raghava and Lakshmana. And beholding
Bibbishana crowned with prosperity and success, Rama
accepted them all for his satisfaction. Thereupon Rama
spoke unto the heroic monkey Hanum&n, resembling a
a mountain and standing before him humbly with folded
hands, saying—“O gentle one, obtaining permission from the
king Bibhishana, do thou enter the cily of Lanka and
enquire after Maithili’s welfare, Do thou, O foremost of
monkeys, inform Vaidehi of the destruction of Ravana in
conflict after communicating unto her mine health as well
as that of Lakshmana and Sugriva. O lord of monkeys, it
behoveth thee to return with the tidings of Vaidehi afler
informing her of this pleasant news.


SECTION CxVv,


Bae thus commanded, Hanuman, the son of Maruta,
worshipped of the night-rangers, entered the city of Lanka,
Entering the cily with Bibishana’s permissiom, Hanumfn,
again permitted, entered the Briksha Vatika* And entering
there duly, the monkey, who was already known to Sit,
espied her, having her person not cleansed, like Rohini,
oppressed by Rabu, sitting at the foot of a tree, devoid of
joy and encircled by she-demons. And approaching her and
bowing unto her, he stood there humbly and unmoved. And
beholding the highty powerful Hanuman arrived there the


* A garden in the city of Lanké.—T.


1500 RAMAYANA.


worshipful dame stood silent for sometime and then ~
recognising him became greatly delighted. And beholding her
gentle countenance, Hanuman, the best of monkeys, began
to relate unto her what Rima had said—"O Vaidehi, it is all
well with Rama Sugriva and Lakshmana. He hath enquired
after thy welfare. He hath accomplished his end subduing
his enemies—and his enemy is slain. O worshipful dame, the
powerful Ravana hath been slain by Rama, helped by Bibhi-
shana and accompanied by the monkeys and Laksbmana,
T do relate unto thee this pleasant news, O worshipful dame ; 1
do again delight thee ; it is by thy grace, O thou conversant
with piety, O Sita, victory hath been gained. Do thou be
consoled and relieved of thy anxiety. The enemy Ravana
hath been slain and the city of Lank& hath been brought
under submission. (Rama said)—'For discomfitting thy
enemy a bridge was constructed over the sea by me who
was determined and who did not sleep (for days) and thus
.my promise hath been fulfilled. Do thou nut be afraid for
living in Ravana’s abode for 1 have placed at Bibhishana's
hands the sovereignty of Lank& Do thou be consoled
thinking as if thot thou art living in thy own house, To
behold thee, Bibiishana, delighted, shall soon proceed.”
Being thus accosted the worshipful Sita, having a moon-like
countenance, and her voice choked in delight, could not
utter any thing. And beholding Sit& incapable of replying
the foremost of monkeys said,—"What art thou thinking of,
O worshipful dame? Why art thou not welcoming me?”
Being thus addressed by Hanuman Sit, ever treading the
paths of morality, greatly delighted, replied with words
suppressed by tears. “Hearing this pleasant news concern-
ing the victory of my husband—and being brought under
the control of joy I am specchless for sometime. O monkey,
1 do not.perceive any such thing which I can confer
upon thee, in return, for this pleasant news. I do dot see
any such thing on this earth which can match thy pleasant


YUDDHARA. NDAM, 1g0t


tidings and bestowing which upon thee J ‘may be happy.
Silver, gold, or diverse jewels or the kingdom of the three
worlds—nothing is a becoming return for thy speech.” Being
thus addressed by Vaidehi the monkey replied—folding his
hands with delight and stationed before Sita,—"O blameless
damsel, forsooth this excellent speech becometh thee, who is
ever engaged in the welfare of thy husband and ever desirous
of his victory. I do consider, O worshipful dame, these words
of thine, far greater than the wealth, jewels or even the
sovereignty over tho celestials. Forsooth lhave gained the
kingdom of the celestials and’ other things since I have
beheld Rama, slay his enemy, victorious and peaceful.
Hearing those words of (Hanuman) Maithili the daughter
of king Janaka spoke unto the Wind-god’s son far
more excellent words—“Thou art capable of speaking
words, chaste, pleasant and significant of eight sorts of
knowledge. Thou art the praise-worthy son of the Wind-
god and greatly virtuous; strength, prowess, heroism,
knowledge of Séstras, noble-mindedness, energy, forgiveness,
patience, endurance, humility and many other excellent
qualities crown thee.” Thereupon not being elated the least,
he again, humbly folding his hands with delight and
stationed before Sita, said—"If dost thou permit me I may
slay all these she-demons who had tortured thee before,
distressed thee in the forest of Agoka, stricken with grief of
thy lord, and who are cruel, have grim eyes and who
perpetrate always dreadful deeds, O worshipfut dame, I
have heard that these grim-visaged she-demons distressed
thee greatly with harsh words at the command of R&vana.
I desire to slay all these dreadful, crooked, ugly (she-demons)
having fearful eyes, meting out onto them various punish-
ments. I wish to slay all these she-demone, who had used
harsh words and had always offended theo, stricking
them with fists, fingers, arms, dreadful knee-joints, teeth,
chopping off their ears and noses, and pulling them by their


1508 RAMAYANA,


hairs: do thou confer upon me this permission, O far
famed lady, I shall slay them by these various means, by
whom, dreadful as they are, thou hadst been distressed
before.” Being thus addressed by Hanuman, she, ever kind
unto the poor, thinking and meditating, said to him—
“QO foremost of monkeys, why art thou angry with these
she-slaves, who subject as they are to the command of their
lord, have done this in accordance with another's order, For
my adverse fortune and vicious deeds perpetrated in another
birth Ihave been subject to such a plight and been suffering
the consequence thereof. Do thou not speak thus, O thou of
huge arms, Such is the course of Fortune. Forsooth by my
ill-luck I have met with (this misfortune). I forgive, out
of pity, all these she-servants of Ravana ; they used to torture
me at the command of that Rakshasa. And he being slain
they shall not repress me any longer, O son of the Wind-
god. Dothou, O monkey, hear of a S/oka, related in a
Puréna aud pregnant with religious import, which was -
uttered by a boar to a tiger. ‘No one taketh upon himself
the iniquity of a perpetrator of vicious deeds. So it
behoveth the pious crowned with an excellent character to
observe the rules (of piety), So it is proper to show compas-
sion even upon those who perpetrate crimes and are worthy
of being slain. Who is there who doth not commit a
crime? It is not proper to act cruelly even by them who
take delight in killing men, although they commit various
iniquitous deeds.” Being thus addressed by Sita, Hanuma,
skilled in speech, spoke unto the blameless Rama's spouse,
saying—"Thou art the worthy spouse of Rima, religiously
wedded and crowned with many qualities. Permit me,
O worshipful dame, to proceed where Raghava is.” Being
thus accosted by Hanum&n, Vaidehi, the daughter of king
Janaka, said,—I wish to see my lord, ever fond of those
who are devoted unto him.” Hearing these words, the
high-minded Hanum§n, the son of Maruta, pleasing Maithili


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1503,


said—"Thou shalt behold Rama, having a countenance like
the full moon, with Lakshmana, surrounded by his friends
and having his enemies slain as Sachi beholdeth Indra the
king of the celestials.” Addressing these words unto Sit®
appearing like Sree herself the highly effulgent Hanumln
returned where Raghava was. Thereupon Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, related duly all what did the daughter
of king Janaka say unto Raghava resembling the lord of the
celestials.


SECTION exvi,


ee


"Tuereuron bowing unto Rama, the foremost of bow-
men, having eyes, resembling lotus-petals, the highly wise
monkey said—‘It behoveth thee now to see Maithilee,
stricken with grief for whom thou didst initiate all these
works and the fruit whereof hath now been attained. Hearing
of thy victory Maithilee, possessed by grief and having
eyes full of tears, expressed her desire to see thee. And
I was told by her,confident of her previous trust, with profuse
tears ia her eyes,—“I wish to see my husband.” Being
addressed by Hanuman, Rama the foremost of the pious
being bathed in tears, engaged instantly in meditation.
Thereupon sighing hard and casting his looks upon
the ground he spoke unto Bibhishana resembling clouds,
who was near him. “Do thow speedily bring Sith here
—the daughter of the king of Mithila—bathed, sprinkled
with celestial paste and adorned with celestial ornaments.”
Being thus addressed by Rima, Bibhishana hastened on
and entering the inner appartment sent information unto
3ith through the female attendants. And beholding the


1504 RAMAYANA.


great Sita, the graceful lord of Rikshasas—Bibhishana,
humbly and placing his joined palms on his crown, said,
“O Vaidehi, may good betide thee ; sprinkled with celestial
paste and adorned with celest ornaments do thou ascend
this car; thy husband wisheth to see thee.” Being thus
addressed Vaidehi replied unto Bibbishana,—"O lord of
Rakshasas, without bathing even I wish to see my husband.”
Hearing those words Bibhishana replied, —It behoveth thee
to do what thy lord Rima hath said.” Whereto the
chaste Maithilee, regarding her husband as God and filled
with devotion unto her husband, replied saying “So be
it." Thereupon placing SitS, bathed, performing the due
rites wearing valuable clothes and adorned with valuable
ornaments, on a palanquin, carried by many a capable
R&kshasa,brought her (unto Rama). Thereupon approaching
the high-souled Rama, who, being informed of (Bibbisha
approach) was engaged in meditation, Bibhishana bowing
down and delighted communicated unto him the arrival of
Sita. And hearing of her arrival who had lived long in
the abode of the Rakshasa Raghava, the slayer of enemies
attained (simultaneously) to anger, delight and depression.
And considering Sita, who was in the palanquin, over-
whelmed with grief, Raghava delighted addressed Bibhishana
with the following words. "“O lord of Rakshasas, O gentle
(king), O thou ever engaged in encompassing my success,
do thou speedily bring Vaidehi nearer to me.” Hearing
these words of Raghava, Bibhishana, conversant with piety
speedily cleared (the people out of that place). And
attendants with armours and head-dresses on and with cane
and drums in their hands began to move about driving
away the crowd thereform. And the crowds of bears,
monkeys and Ra&akshasas being driven on all sides began to
fly at a distance. And they being thus driven there arose a
huge uoise resembling that of the ocean when agitated by
the wind. Beholding the monkeys driven on all sides and


YODDHAKRANDAM. Ty05


troubled, Raghava out of anger and compassion prevented
him. And thereupon as if burning (every thing) with his
angry eyes Rama addressed the highly intelligent Bibhishana
with the following angry words—"Why dost thou insult me
by destroying all these? Do thou remove their anxiety—they
are all my own men. Neither the houses, clothes, walls nor
reception like these are the veils of women. There is no
sin consequent upon seeing women in danger, difficulty, war,
Svyambara® sacrifice and marriage. She is now in great
danger and difficulty—there is no sin in seeing her specially
in my presence. Therefore ieaving behind the palanquia
let ber come here on foot and let the monkeys behold
Vaidehi in my presence.” Being thus addressed by Rama,
Bibhishana,being sorry,humbly brought Sit near him. There-
upon heating R&ma’s accents, Lakshmana, Sugriva and the
monkey Hanum&n were greatly sorry. As if hiding herself
in hee own person in shame Maithili, folowing Bibhishana,
approached her husband. And she, having a _ gentle
countenance and always regarding her husband as_her god,
fixed her looks upon her lord’s face out of surprise, joy and
Jove. And beholding the gentle countenance of her dearest
Jord, resembling the full moon she removed her mental
distress. Thereupon she appeared (benititel having the
countenance of the clear moon.


* It isa form of marriage in which the bride selects a bridegroom for
herself.


189


1506 RAMAYANA. >


SECTION CxXVtt.


te tee
Besouoine Maithili standing humbly by bim, Rima
began to give vent to his pent-up feelings—"O gentle one,
destroying all the enemies in the arena of battle I have

subdued thy enemy—lI have done all that can be accomplished ©
by mantiness. I have reached the other end of my anger,
rubbed off (the insult) for my spouse being taken away by the
enemy ‘and have killed simultaneously my disgrace and
" enemy, My manliness hath been displayed to-day, my labour
hath been crowned with success and to-day I have fulfilled
my promise by my own prowess. That accidental misfortune,
under the influence whereof thou wert carried away by the
fickleeminded R&kshasa in my absence, hath been subdued
to-day by me, aman. What is the use of his manliness,
who when insulted, cannot remove it? Even if he be a great
man he may be called mean. The praise-worthy works of
Hanum&n—the crossing of the deep and the devastation of
Lank&, have been crowned with success to-day. The labour
of Sugriva with his army, who displayed valour in the
encounter and gave me good counsels, hath borne fruit
to-day. To-day also the labour of Bibhishana hath borne
fruit—who renouncing his brother, devoid of all good
qualities, came to my side.” Hearing those words of Rima,
Sita began to look wistfully like a hind,with eyes full of tears.
And bebolding his beloved spouse near him and afraid of
popular ignominy his heart was broken into two. Thereupon
he spoke unto the exquisitely beautiful Sité, in the midst
of the monkeys and Rakshasas, having eyes resembling lotus-
petals and black and curling hairs, saying,~As the southern
quarter, incapable of being got at by the people, was
conquered by the self-controlled great ascetic Agastya, so


YUDDHARANDAM, 507


for thee slaying Ravana, I, (always) anxious to have honour,
have removed my insult—as is the duty of aman. May
good betide thee—do thou know that all my labour, in the
battle-field, backed by the prowess of my friends, is for thee.
To uphold the dignity of my well-known family, to remove
the ignominy consequent upon thy being stolen away as well
as to wipe off my own insult I have encompassed this. I
have suspected thy character; thou, (therefore) standing
before me,art distressing me like unto a lamp before one who
is subject to an eye-desease. Do thou therefore proceed,
O daughter of king Janaka, wherever thou likest to one of
these ten quarters. I permit thee, O gentle one. Ihave
nothing to do with thee. What powerful man, born in a
high family, take back his wife considering her as friend
out of lust, who hath lived long in another’s house? Thou
wert taken by Ravana on his lap, beheld by him with sinful
eyes; how can J, taking thee back, bring disgrace upon my
great family? The object, with which I have gained thee
back, hath been accomplished. I have got no attachment
for thee—do thou go wherever thou wishest, O gentle one,
I speak these unto thee impelled by my sense of duty. If
thou wishest thou mayest live with Lakshmana, Bharata or
Satrughna or with Sugriva or Rkshasa Bibhishana. Do
thou settle, O Sil, where you may find thy own pleasure.
O Sita, (1 do not think) Ravana hath overlooked thee, who
lived in his house, beholding thee so graceful and beautiful,”
Thereupon hearing those unpleasant words from her beloved
(husband) Sita, always sensitive and who had never heard
such unpleasant words, trembling like a creeper torn by the
trunk of an elephant,began to weep shedding tears profusely.


1508 RAMAYANA.


SECTION exvilt.


‘ Bane thus addressed by Raghava, enraged, with those
harsh words Siti was greatly pained. And hearing those
words of her lord, unheard of, before the great assembly
Maithili was greatly humiliated with shame. As if entering
unto her own person (with shame) and greatly pained with
these arrow-like words the daughter of king Janaka began to
shed tears. Thereupon wiping the tears off her countenance,
she with sorrowful words, addressed her husband—Why
dost thou, O hero, like a common man addressing an ordinary
woman, make me hear these harsh and unbecoming words
painful unto ears ? O thou of long arms, I am not what thou
hast taken me to be. Do thou believe me~I do swear by
my own character. Seeing the ordinary women thou art
distrusting the whole sex. Do thou renounce this suspicion,
since thou hast tried me. O lord, though my person was
touched by another--but it was not in my power ; nor was it
an wilful act {of mine); accident is to blame in this. My
heart is under my control and that is in thee ;—~and what
could I do of my body which was subject to another and of
which I was not the mistress. O thou the conferrer of
honour—our affection towards one another was increased by
our living continually for a long time ; even then if thou hast
not been able to understand me 1 am ruined for ever. O
king, when the great hero Hanum&n was despatched by thee
to Lank& to see me why didst thou not renounce me then ?
Hadst thou deputed the monkey with that message I would
have renounced my life there and then, O hero. Thou
wouldst not have been required to undergo this toil at the
risk of thy own life and giving unnecessary trouble to thy
friends, O foremost of kings, being subject to ire—thou


YUDDHAKANDAM. : ig09


dost not perceive anything but womanhood in me, like an
ordinary man. Although I am known to have a lather but in
fact} am born of the earth. Thou dost not sufficiently
honour my character, O thou conversant with characters,
Thy marriage with me in boyhood shall be disproved and
thou art not sufficiently considering all my devotion and
good conduct unto thee.” Saying thus with accents choked
in tears and weeping Sita spoke unto Lakshmana, poorly
and engaged in meditation. ‘Mako a funeral pyre for me,
O Saumitri, that is the only remedy for this disaster. Being
thus branded with an unfounded stigma I do not like to keep
my life. To adopt the proper course for me who had been
renounced before this assembly by my disaffected busband
I shall enter this.” Being thus addressed by Vaidehi,
Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies, being possessed by anger,
looked towards R&ghava. And understanding Rama's
intention by gestures and at his command the powerful
Saumitri prepared a funeral pyre. None dared there request,
speak with or even look at Rama like unto Death ut the
time of dissolution. Thereupon circumambulating Rima,
standing with his head down, Vaidehi approached the burning
fire, And bowing unto the celestials and Br&hmanas,
Maithili, with folded hands, spoke before the fire :—"As my
heart. hath never gone away from Raghava, may thou protect
me, O fire, the witness of the people. As Raghava
considereth me vile, who have got a pure character, may
fire, the witness of the people, protect me on all sides,”
Saying this and going round the fire, Vaidehi, with undaunted
heart, entered the flaming fire. The great assembly there,.
young and old, overwhelmed with grief, saw Maithili enter the
flaming fire. And (Sit4) resembling the burning gold entered
the flaming fire in the presence of all people. All beheld
Sith, having expansive eyes, enter fire like unto a golden
altar. “The ascetics, celestials and Gandbarbas saw that
greal damsel enter fire like unto a full oblation in the sacrifice,


1510 RAMAYANA.


And beholding her fallen into the fire like unto Vasudkird,
vanctified by Mantras in a sacrifice, all the females began to
weep, And the three worlds—the celestials, Gandharbas
and Danavas saw her fallen like unto a celestial from the
heaven when imprecited. She having entered the fire,
jamentations, unheard of before, rose from all sides from
the Rakshasas and monkeys,


SECTION cxix,


—


Hearne the lamentations (of the Ra&kshasas and
monkeys) the virtuous-souted Rma, with a poor heart and
having his eyes full of tears, engaged in meditation for some
time. Thereupon the king Vaisrfvana, Yama with his
progenitors, the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials, Varuna,
the lord of water, the three-eyed graceful Mahideva—the
rider of bull, Brahm& the creator of the world and the
foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahma
—all these arriving at the city of Lank& in their cars bright
asthe rays of the sun, approached Raghava, Thereupon
raising up their buge hands, decked with various ornaments
and folding them, those foremost of the celestials said unto
Raghava—"O lord, thou art the preserver of all the worlds
and the foremost of the wise, why dost thou neglect Sith
entering into fire? Why dost thou not understand thyself.
the foremost of the celestials? Thou wert before the
Patriarch of all Vasus,* by the name of Kratadhima. And
thou art thyself, O lord, the creator of the three worlds.
Thou art the eighth of the Rudrast and the fifth of the

* A kind of demi-god of whom eight are enumerated.


+ A demi-god—an inferior manifestation of Siva: they are eleven in
namber.


VUDDHAKANDAM. Isis


Séddhyas ;* the Acwinis are thy two eara and the aun and the
moon are thy eyes. © slayer of enemies, thou appearest at
the begining and the end of the creation. Why dost thou
neglect Vaidehi like an ordinary man?” Being thus
addressed by the deities presiding over quarters, RAghava,
the Tord of people and the foremost of the pious,
spoke unto those leading celestials, saying:—"l know
myself to be man—R&ma, the son of Dagaratha. Let
the great Patriarch tell me, who J am and whence ‘ft
have come.” Thereupon Brahma, the foremost of those
conversant with the knowledge of Brahma, spoke unto
Kakdtstha, who had spoken thus, saying,—"Do thou hear
my true words, O thou having truth for thy prowess. O
lord, thou art the great and effulgent, N&rdyana holding
discus and mace ; thou art the boar having one tusk; thou
hast conquered the'past, present and future ; thou art undecay-
ing and without end, O Raghava; thou art the great virtue
of the pious—thou art the propounder of all laws and art four-
armed ; thou art the holder of bow of time—the subduer of
senses—the execllent Purusha (person), unconquerable by
sins; thou art Vishnu holding. dagger, Krishna and of
incomparable strength ; thou art the army, the minister—the
universe—the understanding, forgiveness and control of
passions; thou art the’creation and destruction; Upendra and
the slayer of (demon) Madhu; thou art the creator of
indra; thou art Mahendra ; thou hast a lotus-like navel and
thou art the slayer of enemies. The celestials and the great
saints style thee as the refuge of those who seek for
shelter, Thou art the foremost of Vedas with its thousand
branches and hundred regulations. Thou art thyself the
creator of the three worlds, O lord. Thou art the refuge of
the Siddhast and Sddhyas, thou art the Purvaja,t the

* An inferior deity or demi-god, one of a class of twelve,

+ Saints of accomplished picty.

£ Produced or appearing before creation.


asta * RAMAYANA.


sacrifice, Vashatkar,* Omt and Pardétpara.t No one is
conversant with thy birth and destruction—thou art manifest.
in all creatures—cows and Brahmins—in all quarters, in
the sky, in the mountain, and in the river. Thou art gifted
with thousand: Jegs, thousand heads and thousand eyes.
Thou dost uphold all creatures, ‘the earth and all the
mountains, Thou appearest like the great serpent in the
water underneath ‘the earth, O Rima, thou dost uphold:
three creations--the celestials, the Gandharbas and the
Dinavas, © R&ma—i am thy heart, the worsbipfal
Swaraswati (Goddess of learning) is thy tongue and all other
celestials, O lord, created by Brahmi are thy down. The
closing of thy eye is the night and the opening is the day.
‘The Vedas are significant of thy desire and the control
thereof—none hath got independent existence but thee, The
whole universe is thy body, the earth is thy patience, the
fire is thy anger—the sun and the moon are thy delight ;
thou hast got Sreedatsha (a peculiar curl of hair); thou didst
before tread ‘the three worlds with thy three foot steps 5
thou didst get the dreadful Bali bound and make Mahendra
king; Sit@ is Lakshmi and thou art Krishna and Vishnu
the Preserver of people. For Ravana’s destruction thou hast
assumed the human shape. Thou hast accomplished that
work of ours, O thou the foremost of the pious, Q Rima,
Ravana hath been slain. Do thou go up to heaven delighted.
Sure is thy godly energy and never goes for nothing thy
prowess, Q Rima, never is fruitless thy view and the
chanting of thy glory. And always successful shal! be these
persons on earth who shall be devoted unto thee. Those


* Burnt offering, oblation with fre—from the exclamation used on the
octasion.

+ Om-the Brat term of the Mantra, Om or Onkéra is well-known asa
combination of letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar sanctity.

te Greatest of the great. es


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1513


who shall be devoted unto thee at‘one with Puréna* and
the excellent Purasha,t shall attain all their desires both in
this world and the next. Those persons shall, never be
unsuccessful both in this world and the next who shall ‘chant
this theme—excellent, instinct with the knowledge of Brahma
and describing the old history.


SECTION CXX.


“Haarine those excellent words uttered by the great
Patriarch rose up ibhdbasut with Vaidehi on his lap
shaking the funeral pyre. With the daughter of the king
Janaka, the receiver§ of sacrificial offerings, being incarnate,
rose up. And carrying on his lap Vaidehi, wearing a red
cloth, resembling the newly risen sun, adorned with
ornaments of burning gold—having black curling hairs and
decked with fresh garments, Bibiébasu gave her unto Rima.
Thereupon the Deity of Fire, the witness of the people,
spoke unto Rama, saying—‘O Rima, here is thy Vaidehi—
no sin hath visited her. Neither by words,mind,anderstanding
nor eyes, she, good-natured and beautiful—hath deviated
from thee who hath got a good character and is heroic. She
was in the solitary forest separated from thee, poorly ané
having no control over herself and hence she was carried
away by the Rakshasa Ravana having enough prowess in
him, Although shut up in the inner appartment—well
protected and guarded by the dreadful she-demons she had


* A class of writings considered saered by the Hindus.

+ Great or supreme spitit—Purasha meaning that which abides ot i
-quiesent in body.

$ The Deity of Fire.

4 Fire.


199


agig RAMAYANA.


alwaye her mind in thee and was devoted unto thee,
Although tempted in many a way and remonstrated with
she did not thiuk of that R&kshasa in her inner mind. Her
heart is pure and she is not spoiled with sin—do thou
therefore take back Maithil Do thou not speak other-
wise—I do command these.” Therevpon hearing those
words-—=the virtuous-souled Rima, the foremost of those
skilled in speech, with his eyes agitated with delight,
meditated for sometime. Being thus addressed, the highly
effulgent and intelligent Rima, of unmitigated prowesa—
the foremost of the pious, spoke unto that best of celestials
saying—Beautiful (Sita) lived in the inner appartment of
Ravana for a long time so she needs this purification in the
presence of all people. If I would take the daughter of
Janaka without purifying her, people would say that Rama
the son of king Dagaratha is lustful and ignorant of the
morality of the people, I know it full wall that Maithili,
the daughter of king Janaka, hath her mind devoted unto
me and hath not given it to any one (else), As the ocean
cannot go beyond its banks so Ravana could not approach
her having expansive eyes protected by virtue of her own
chastity. The greatly vicious-souled one could not even by
his mind get Maithili, who was beyond his reach like unta
the burning flame of fire. Her mind could not have been
moved although she lived in the inner appartment of
Rivana-sha belongs to none else ; Sit& is mine as the rays
belong to the Sun. Maithili—the daughter of Janaka hath
been purified before the three worlds—So I am incapable
of renouncing her as a self-controlled person cannot forsake
his (ows) reputation. It behoveth me to carry out the well,
meaning words of you all—the lords of people who have
spoken them out of affection.” Saying this, the victorious,
highly powerful, well renowned Raghava, worthy of enjoying
happiness, and having his praise chanted in consequence of
his noble action, regaining his spouse, attained to happiness.


YUDDHARANDAM. W515


SECTION CxXt.


FHreazine those excellent words uttered by Righava,
Maheswara (Siva) spoke far more important words—"O
thou having lotus-eyes, O thou having huge arms and a
Spacious breast, O thou the slayer of enemies, O thou the
fore most of the pious—it is a good fortune that this hath
been done by thee. It is by good fortune, O Rama, the
dreadful and increasing darkness—the fear of all people
—Ravana, hath been removed by thee in the encounter.
Consoling the poor Bharata and the famed Kaugalya,
beholding Kaikeyi and Sumitr& the mother of Lakshmana,
obtaining the kingdom of Ayodhya, pleasing all thy friends,
establishing the prestige of thy family, O thou of great
strength, performing horse-sacrifices, attaining fair fame and
conferring riches upon the Brahmins do thou repair to
heaven, This king Dagaratha stationed on the car is thy
father. He was thy superior on this earth, O Kakutstha,
Obtaining thee as his son, that graceful (king) hath
repaired to the region of Indra. Do thou bow unto
him with thy brother Lakshmana.” Hearing the words of
MahSdeva, Raghava, along with Lakshmana, bowed unto
their father who was seated on the top of the car. He with
Lakshmana beheld their father shining in bis own effulgence
and wearing an unsullied cloth. Thereupon beholding his
son dearer than his life, attaining great delight (in
consequence thereof) placing him on his lap and embracing
him with bis arms, the great king Dacaratha, having loag
arms and seated on an excellent seat in the car, said~—"'[
am now in heaven and am equal with the celestials, bat
without thee, O Rama, I do aot like it—this is true-—I do
sweat by thee. O thou the foremost of those skilled in
speech, I have still in my mind the words which were uttered.


9506 RAMAYANA,


by Kaikeyi for sending thee away to the woods, Beholding
thee all well and embracing thee with Lakshmana I am now
shorn of grief like unto the sun, devoid of dues. I have
heen emanéipated, O my son, through thee—a good and
high-souted son, as the virtuous-souled Brahmana Kapila
was by Asthabakra, © gentle one, I have heard from the
celestials, (that thou art) the excellent Purusha in the guise
(of a man) for the destruction of Ravana. Blessed is
Kaugaly’, O R&ma, who shall be greatly delighted, on
beholding thee, the slayer of enemies, gone home from the
forest. Blessed are those men, O Rama, who shall behold
thee installed in the city as the king of the world, 1 wish
to behold thee reconciled with Bharata, devoted powerful,
pure and performing pious observances. O gentle one, thou
hast spent fourteen years in the forest with Sit4 and
Eakshmana. The term of thy exile is over—thy promise
hath been fulfilled ; and slaying Ravana, in the conflict thou
hast pleased the celestials, Thou hast performed a mighty
deed and attuined to excellent fame, O slayer of enemies ;.
and placed in charge of thy kingdom do thos with thy brothers
attain a long life.” The king speaking thus Rama spoke
mnto him with folded hands saying,—"O thou conversant
with piety, do thou be propitiated with Bharata and Kaikeyi..
Thou didst imprecate Kaikeyi, saying,—"1 renounce thee
with thy son’—may not that dreadful curse visit her and
her son.” Saying “'so be it” unto Rama with folded hands and
embracing Lakshmana the great king said to him :-—"U thou
conversant with piety and fame on this earth, thou shalt
attain lo heaven and excellent state there. O thou the
enhancer of Sumitr&'s joy——do thou attend upon R&ma ;
may good betide thee ; R&ma is ever engaged in the welfare
of all beings. All these celestials headed by Indra, Siddhas
and Great saints, bowing unto this high-souled and excellent
Purusha, worship him. Rama, the subduer of foes, is the
indescribable and undecaying letter Arahkma, which has been


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1517


described (in the Vedas) as the heart and secret of the
celestials. For serving bim along with Sit&, the daaghter of
king of Videha, thou hast attained piety and excellent fame.”
Addressing Lakshmana thus, the king spoke unto his
daughter-in-law, who was standing before him with folded
hands, saying :—"It doth not behove thee, O Vaidehi, to be
enraged (with Rama) for renouncing thee; for purifying
thee this was done by him ever wishing thy welfare. What
thou hast performed, © daughter, to establish the purity of
thy character, is hard to perform. What thou hast done,
shall glorify all other females. Though there is no necessity
for giving thee any instruction as regards thy duty towards
thy husband-still I should say that he is thy great god.”
Having thus instructed his two sons and Sith, he repaired, in
his ‘car, to the region of Indra, Having advised his two sons
along with Sit&, ascending the car, and shining in his
effulgence, that excellent king, greatly delighted, repaired
to the region of the king of celestials.


SECTION cxxil.


Dasararna having repaired,Mahendra greatly delighted
spoke unto R&ghava, stationed there with folded hands,
saying :—°O Rama, O foremost of men, this our presence
here, must not be fruitless, we are pleased—do thou ask for
what thou wishest.” Being thus accosted by the high-
souled Mahendra—delighted, Riighava spoke, with a pleased
heart—-“‘O lord of the celestials, O thou the foremost of those
skilled in speech, if thou art propitiated with me, | shall pray
for (my wished-for-object); do thou grant it. Let all these
highly powerful monkeys, who have been despatched to the


1518 RAMAYANA.


abode of Death, on my account, regaining their life, stand
up. © thou the conferror of honour, I wish to see all those
delighted monkeys, who were separated from their wives and
children on my account. O Purandara, do thou revive all
these heroic and powerful (monkeys) who did not care for
death, and who worked hard and were distressed (for me).
May ail those, by thy favour, who were ever devoted unto me
and did not care for death (even) regain their tife—this is the
boon I pray for. O conferror of honour, I wish to see all
these monkeys, Golangud/as and bears, pale and hurt, unheart
and gifted with strength and prowess like before. Let there
he ftowers, fruits and roots, even out of season wherever
these monkeys shall live—and let rivers there be full of clear
water.” Hearing those words of the high-souled Raghava
Mahendra replied with words instinct with delight—“O my
boy, O foremost of the Ragbus, mighty is the boon thou hast
prayed for--my words shalt never be falsified, so let them be
be fulfilled. Let all those bears and Goldngu/as rise up who
were slain in the conflict by R&kshasas and had their heads
and arms severed. Let the monkeys gifted with their
pristine strength and prowess rise up unhurt and healthy as
if after the end of sleep. And being reconciled with their
friends, relatives and kinsmen let them attain to excellent
joy. O thou the weilder of a huge bow, all the trees shall be
filled with flowers and fruits and all the rivers shall be filled
with water even out of season (wherever they shall live).”
Thereupon all these leading moekeys who had their persons
wounded but now healed up, rose up like those asleep. And
all those moskeys were greatly wondered, saying, “What
is it?" And beholding Kakutstha of accomplished end and
eulogizing Rima and Lakshmana, ail the cetestials, greatly
delighted, said—“Do thou, O king, repair to Ayodhyi—
despatch all the monkeys—conscle the famed Maithilee,
ever devoted unto thee-~bebold thy brother Bharata observ-
ing ascetic vows in consequence of thy grief—and the


1 UDDHARANDAM. 1519


thigh-souled Satrughna and all thy mothers, O slayer of foes.
And being installed on the throne do thou conduce to the
joy of all citizens.” Having thus addressed Rama along
with Lakshmana, the thousand-eyed Deity, delighted, went
away along with the celestials, in their cars resembling the
Sun (in brilliance). And saluting all the celestials, Kakutstha,
with his brother Lakshmana, ordered the encampment of
the army, Thereupon that famous and well-pleased huge army
of the monkys protected by Rama and Lakshmana, appeared
tesplendant on all sides like unto a night beautified with the
says of the Moon.


SECTION cxxi.


Rama having spent that night happily and risen up the
next morning, Bibhishana, chanting his victory, spoke unto
that slayer of foes, with folded hands, saying "Here
are various articles for bathing, pastes, clothes, ornaments,
sandal and various excellent garlands, . And here are
present women having eyes like lotuses and conversant with
the art of decking. Let them perform their duty, O
Righava.” Being thus accosted Kiikutstha replied unto
Bibhishana, saying:—'Do thou invite all these monkeys
headed by Sugriva to bathe. The virtuous-souled Bharata,
having huge arms and ever used to comforts, is greatly
distressed on my account. Without Bharata the son of
Kaikeyi, ever performing pious rites, I do not value bathing”
or these clothes and ornaments. Do thou so manage that
we may go to the city of Ayodhy& speedity. For difficult
is the way leading to Ayodhy’.” Being thus accosted


1530 RAMAYANA.


Bibhishana relied unto Kakutstha"O son of the lord of
earth, may good betide thee, I shall soon take thee to that
city. The car Pushpaka resembling the Sun, belonging to
my brother Kuvera, was brought by the powerful Ravana.
O thou of unequalled prowess, that celestial and excellent
car, going everywhere at will, since the destruction of
Ravana in battle, is ready for thee. And that car resembling
the cloud is in the city of Lanka, in which thou shalt,
relieved of thy anxiety, repair to Ayodhy&. If 1 am worthy
of being favoured by thee, if dost thou remember any
accomplishment of mine—if thou hast any friendship for
me, do thou, O wise one, wait here with thy brother
Lakshmana and spouse Vaidehi till I accomplish all my
desices by worshiping thee. And then thou shalt go (to
Ayodhy&) G Rama. I shall worship thee with great delight
and do thou, O Rama, with thy frieads and army, accept that
adoration. O Rima, out of Jove, honor, and byotherly
feeling, I do crave thy permissing, 1 am a servant I cannot
command thee.” Being thus addressed, R&ma replied unto
Bibhishana in the presence of all tie Raksbasas and
monkeys, saying:—1 have been worshipyed by thee, O
hero, with thy excellent counsels,with thy earnest endeavours
and with thy great friendship. Do not think, O lord of
Rakshasas, that I do not comply with thy request—my heart
hastens me to behold my brother Bharata, who, to lake me
back, did come to the mount Chitrakuta, whe laid low bis
crown at my feet and whose words I did not keep. (1am
anxious to see) Kaucaly&, Sumitr&, Kaikeyi, with my frieads,
citizens and villagers. Do thou regard me, O Bibbishana,
© gentle one, as wnrshipped, O {friend do thou be not
angry—I request thee. Do thou speedily being the car for
me, O lord of RAakshasas—my work is done—how can I wish
to live here long.” Being thus addressed by R&ma,
Bishishana the lord of Rakshasas, speedily brought the car
resembling the Sun,


VYUDDHARANDAM. 1528


“Thereupon arrived there the car adorned ali over with
gold paintings, altars crested with Batdurja jewels,
having upper rooms, silvered ail over, adorned with white
flags and @agstaffs, beautified with gilt lotuses, adorned
with golden houses, covered with a network of girdles,
having windows made of pearls and ‘jems, girt on ald
sides with a net of bells, giving forth melodious sound,
resembling the summit of the mount Meru, constructed by
Vigwakarmé (the architect of the celestials) adorned with hage
apartments beautified with silver and pearls—having ils
base crested with crystal, containing excellent seats made
‘of Batdurja, abounding in valuable coverlets and immense
wealth, incapable of being broken down and coursing at will,
And communicating unto Rama (the arrival of that car)
Bibhishana waited there. Beholding that flowery car,
coursing at will and resembling a huge mountain, Rama, o€
@ generous spirit, along with Saumitri, attained to an excess
of astonishment.


SECTION ecxxiv.


Hawe ‘brought that car Pushpaka, adorned with
flowers and having stationed himself at a distance, Bibhishana
the lord of Bakshasas, being incited to hurry on, humbly and
with folded hands, spoke unto R&ma, saying, "What shall
1 do, O Raghava 7’ Hearing those words the highly
powerful Raghava, in the presence of Lakshmana, gave vent
to the following accents out of affection—“All these
monkeys and bears have brought about the accomplishment
of my work with great care. Do thou, satisfy them, @
Bibhishana, with diverse jewels and riches. With these and


192


1532 RAMAYANA,


thee, I conquered the city of Lank&, O ford of R&kshasas,
They all fought with a delighted heart, having renounced
all fear of life and who did never go away from the battle-
field. Do thou, with a gift of riches and jewel, make good
the work of these monkeys and bears who encompassed the
accomplishment (of my end). Being honoured and delighted
by thee grateful, all these leading monkeys shall repair (to
their respective quarters). (If thou art found to be)
sacrificing, self-controlled, compassionate and (the just)
- collector of revenues, all shall be attached unto thee. For
this I do address you (thus). © lord of men, the soldiers,
disgusted, renounce that king who is void of all royal
accomplishments, and who uselessly slays soldiers in the
conflict." Being thus accosted by Rima, Bibhishana, with
a distribution of jewels and riches, honoured all those
monkeys. And beholding all those leading monkeys
worshipped with jewels and riches Rama ascended that
excellent car, taking the bashful, and high-minded Vaidehi
on his lap and accompanied, by his powerful brother
Lakshmana, a skilled bowman. And being stationed on the
car K&kutstha honouring all the monkeys, the highly
powerful Sugriva and Bibhishana, said-—“O foremost of
monkeys, ye have performed a friendly service—it hath
been appreciated by me~do ye repair to your wished-for
quarters. O Sugriva, thou, ever afraid of impiety, hast
performed all that a loving and well-wishing friend should
do. Do thou, encircled by thy army, proceed towards
Kishkindh&. Do thou, O Bibhishana, live in thy kingdom,
Lank&, conferred upon thee, by me. Not even the celostials,
sheaded by Indra shall be able to assail thee. I wish to return
to AyodiyS, the'capital of,my father’s (kingdom). I wish to
obtain your permission (and for this) I have invited you all.”
Being thus addressed by Rima, all the leading monkeys
bears as well as the Rakshasa Bibhishana said with folded
hands—"We wish all to goto Ayodhy&. Do thou take us,


VUDDHARANDAM. 1523


We shall all range with delight at forests and gardens.
Beholding thee installed and bowing unto Kaucaly&, we
shall soon return to our respective homes, O foremost
of kings.“ Being thus accosted by the monkeys with
Bibhishana, the virtuous-souled Rama, spoke unto them
and Sugriva and Bibhishana, saying—Dearer than the
dear, I shall attain to, when returning my city, along
with you all, I shall enjoy in the company of all my
friends and relatives. O Sugriva, do thou soon ascend
the car along with the monkeys. Do thou ascend too, O
Bibhishana, lord of R&kshasas, with all thy courtiers.”
Thereupon ascended that celestial car Pushkpaka, Sugriva,
greatly delighted with the monkeys and Bibhishana, with
his courtiers. And they all having got up, the excellent
car,'of Kuvera at the command of R&ghava, rose up in the
welkin. And in that car coursing at will and drawn by
effulgent ganders, Rama greatly delighted appeared like
Kuvera (himself), And all the monkeys, bears and the
highly powerful R&kshasas sat in that celestial car un-
obstructed and at their pleasure.


SECTION cxxv.


ete Eee


Bae commanded by Rama, that excellent car, drawn
by ganders, with a huge noise, rose high up in the welkin.
And casting bis looks on all sides, Rama, the descendant
of Raghus, spake unto Siti, the daughter of the king of
Mithila, having a moon-like countenance, saying,—“O
Vaidehi, do thou behold Lank§, situate on the summit of
the mount Chitrakuta, resembling that of Kaillica and
constructed by Vigwakarmd. And behold, O Sitd, that


rg7g RAMAYANA


Buge arena of battle, bathed in the blood and flesh of the
monkeys and Rakshasas. Do thou behold, O thou having
expansive eyes, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, the repressor
of people and who obtained.a boon, lying there, slain by
me on thy accownt. Kumbhakarna was slain there, the
night-ranger Prahasta, as well, and DumrSksha, were stain by
the monkey Hanum&n. Bidyutmali was slain there by the
high-souled Sushena—and Indrajit, the son of Ravana, was
slain there in the encounter, by Lakshmana. The Rakshasa
named Bikata was slain there by Angada—and BirupSksha,
hard to fook at and Mahaparsha and Mahodara. And the
powerful Akampana was slain (there) and all other
Rakshasas—Trishir’, Atikdya, Devantaka and Narantaka—
and the two leading and powerful Rakshasas, mad after
conflict—the sons of Kumbhakarna—Nikumbha and Kumbha,
Bajradanstra, Danstra and many other Rakshasas were slain
and the irrepressible Makar&ksha was slain (there) by me
in the conflict. Akampana was slain—and the powerful
Sonitaksha. And Yupiksha and Prajangha were destroyed
(there) in the great conflict. The grim-visaged Rakshasa
Viddutsjmha was slain there—and Yajn4satru and the highly
powerful Suptaghna. (And there was slain) Sury&satru
and Brahmasatru. (And there bewailed for R&vana) his
spouse Mandodari, surrounded by his thousand other wives.
O thou having an excellent countenance, do thou behold
the descending place of the ocean, where I spent the night -
after crossing the deep for thee. © thou having expansive
eyes, for thee, this difficult construction of the bridge was
made by me over the deep by the help of Nala, Do thou,
O Vaidehi, behold the unagitated deep—the abode of Varuna,
appearing as if without the other end, roaring and abounding
in conchs and pearl oysters. O Maithili, do thou behold the
golden mount, which rose above the deep for affording a
resting place unto Hanum&n. And on the bank of this
ocean I halted with my soldiers. And here Mab&deva, the


YUDDHARANDAM. 1525


lord of the celestials, was propitiated with me. I belioveth
thee to behold this descending place of the high-souled
Ocean, known as Setuéandhe,* worshipped of the three
worlds, highly sacred and destroying even the worat sin.
There, Bibhishana, the king of R&kshasas first came
to me. Do thou behold,O Sita, Kishkindha, having beautiful
gardens, the pleasant city of Sugriva, where Vali was slain
by me.” And beholding the city of Kishkindh&, ruled over
by V&li, Sitd, incited by her love, addressed Rama, with
worthy words, saying—“O king, I wish to repair to Ayodhy®
thy capital with thee, in the company of Tar®, the dear wile
of Sugriva,as well as of the wives of other leading monkeys.”
Being thus addressed by Vaidehi Raghava replied—saying,
“this shall be done” and getting at Kishkindh& he stopped
the ‘car, And having beheld the car stationed he spoke unto
Sugriva, saying—°O- foremost of monkeys, do thou speak
unto all the leading monkeys that they may go to Ayodhy&
accompanied by their wives. O thou of great strength—
they may all go with Sit. Do thou hurry them on, O
Sugciva, We shall (soon) go, O thou the lord of mankeys.”
Being thus addressed by Rama, of unmitigated prowess—
the beautiful lord of monkeys, encircled by them, entered
speedily the inner apartment and beholding Tara there,
said—*-O dear, at the command of Raghava and the kind
desire of Sit&, do thou soon go, taking with thee the wives
of all the high-souled monkeys. We shall see Ayodhy’ and
the wives of Dagaratha”? Hearing the words of Sugriva,
Tara, having a pecfectly beautiful person, assembling all the
wives of the monkeys, said—"You have been ordered by
Sugriva to repair (to Ayodby8jwith the monkeys ; ~to behold
Ayodby&, is also a dear object of mine. (‘‘I shall behold)

© This is still to be seen in the shape of a delapidated bridge near
Rdmermar a place of pilgrimage. Pilgrims go there Via Madura, a district
in South Madras. The Raja of Ramoud in whose Zemindari it is situate is
called Setupsti.—T. %


1536 RAMAYANA,


Rana enter the city with the citizens and villagers and the
wealth and riches of the wives of Dacaratha.’ Being thus
commanded by Tird,the wives of the monkeys, putting on all:
their ornaments and circumambulating (her) ascended the car,
with a view to behold Sit. And beholding the car going
up with them all, Righava again spoke unto Sila, near the
mount Rishyamuka, saying,—"Do thou behold there, O Sita,
the huge and foremost mount Rishyamuka abounding in
gold and various metals, like unto clouds aecompanied with.
lightnings. There I was joined by Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys. And there I entered into an agreement, O SitS,
for the destruction of Vali. And there is (the lake) Pamp
abounding in lilies and skirted by picturesque forest where:
separated from thee, ! bewailed piteously. Andon its bank
I beheld the pious Savas, And there I slow Kavandha and
Yoyanavéhu. Behold there, O SitS, a beautiful tree, in
Janasthana, where, O thou ever used to luxuries, for thee,
the highly powerful and energetic Yat&yu, the foremost of
birds, was slain by R&vana. Do thou behold there, O thow
of a beautiful person, O thou of auspicious looks, our
hermitage and the beautiful cottage of leaves, wherefrom
thou hadst been carried away by force by the lord of
R&kshasas. Do thou behold there the beautiful and sacred river
Godiveri having cleac water and the hermitage of Agastya,
surrounded by plantain trees. Do thou behold there,
O Vaidehi, the great hermitage of Sarashanga, where came
the thousand-eyed, Sakra, the subduer of enemies’ cities.
O worshipful dame, O thou having a middie stature—amongst
all those ascetics, thou beholdest, there lived Atri, the lord of
our family—resembling the fire of the Sun. There was slain
the huge-bodied Biridha by me. There thou didst behold,
O Sit&, the female astectic (the wife of Attri) ever performing
pious observances. There cometh in view, O thou having
a beautiful person, the king of mountains, Chitrakuta, where
to ptopitiate me, came the son of Sumitri. Behold the


1UDDHAKANDAM. 1597


beautiful Yamun3, having picturesque forest: on its bank and
the pleasant hermitage of Varadw&ya. Behold there the
sacred river Ganges, dividing itself into three branches.
Behold there the city of Sringabera, where I made friendship
with Guha, Behold there, O Sith, the capital of my father.
Do thou bow unto Ayodhy&, O Vaidehi.” Thereupon all
the monkeys and R&kshasas along with Bibhishana rose up
delightedly and saw the city. Thereupon the monkeys and
R&kshasas beheld the city abounding in white houses having
‘spacious compartments, filled with elephants and horses and
tooking like Amaravati, the capital of Mahendra.


SECTION CXXVI.


oe


Hawne completed the fourteen years (of exile), the self.
controfied elder brother of Lakshmana, arriving at the-
hermitage of Varadw&ya on the fifth day, saluted the ascetic.
And bowing unto Varadwaya, having asceticism for his
wealth, he said,—“O thou gifted with six sorts of wealth,
hast thou heard of the prosperity and well being (of my
city)? Is Bharata still engaged (in guarding the people)?
Are my mothers living ?” Being thus addressed by B&ma the
great ascetic Varadwiya replied, delighted, and smiling,
unto that foremost of Raghus,—‘‘Abiding by thy command
and with matted locks, Bharata is waiting for thee, always
honoring thy sandals. And all others are well in thy house.
O subduer of thy enemies, I was greatly pained, when I saw
thee before entering the huge forest, wearing bark, three
with thy wife,* deprived of thy kingdom for piety only,

* éa, thyself, Lakshmana aod Sit.


1ge8 , RAMAYANA.


walking on foot, renouncing every thing, obeying the
command of thy sire, deprived of all comforts, like a celestial
banished from heaven, deprived of thy kingdom at the
words of Kaikeyi, and living on wild roots and fruits ; but
beholding thee now of accomplished end, with all thy
friends having vanquished the enemy, I have attained to
highest delight. OQ R&ghava, 1 am apprised of immense
gtiefs and happinesses which befell thee when thou didst
live in Janasthana. Thy blameless spouse was carried away
stealthily by Ravana engaged as thou wert in the behoof
of the Br&alimanas,and in the protection of all the ascetics. The
view of M&richa—the carrying away of Sitd,—the beholding
of the headless demon,—thy going te (the lake) Pampa,—
thy friendship with Sugriva, where V&li was slain by thee—
the enquiry of Vaidehi undertaken by the son of Wind-god,—
the construction of the bridge by Nala after the whereabouts
of Vaidebi had been kaown—the conflagration of Lank& by
the delighted and the leading monkeys—the destruction,in the
conflict, of Ravana proud of his own strength, along with
his sons, friends, courtiers, army and steeds—the arrival of
the celestials on the destruction of Ravana, the thorn of
gods and the grant of boon by them—I have known all these
by virtue of my asceticism, O thou fond of virtue. My
disciples used to go hence to that city to bring tidings. &
shall even now grant thee a boon, O foremost of those using
weapons. Do thon accept my Arghya* and then repair
to Ayodhy& to-morrow.” And respectfully abiding by his
words, that effulgent son of the king, delighted, begged of
him the boon. “O thou gifted with six qualities, on my way
while proceeding to Ayodhy&, let all the trees, bearing fruits
out of season,and producing honey,bear many a nectar-smelling
fruit.” No sooner he replied saying —"Thy promise shall be
fulfilled” than all the trees there became like those of heaven,


“ Avrespectful oblation to gods or venerable men of rice, durva grass,
Mowers &c with water in a smal! boat-shaped vessel.


YODDHARANDAM. way


Trees without fruits were filled therewithat and trees
without flowers were covered with them. All the trees,
whose leaves were dried up, were enveloped with foliage
and all of them began to pour honey. The way to Ayodhya
for three Yopanas was thus filled all over (with trees). There-
upon thousands of monkeys, living, at pleasure and delightedly,
on various celestial fraits, thought as if they were in heavem


SECTION CXxVi,


Taerevron beholding Ajodhy&, Rima, the descendant
of Raghu, of light movements and desirous of affording
delight unto others, thought of welcoming (them). Think-
ing thus the intelligent and effulgent (Rima) cast his
fooks towards the monkeys and spoke unto Hanuman,
saying—"O foremost of monkeys, speedily reparing to
Ayodhy& do thou learn of the welfare of ali people in the
palace of the king. Arriving at the city of Sringavera,
do thou communicate unto Guha, the king of Niskadhas®
having the forest as his kingdon, my well-being, at my
command. Hearing that I am hafe and hearty and relieved
‘of all troubles, Guha, my friend like my own self, shall attain
to delight. And Guha, the tord of Nishadhas, delighted,
shall inform thee of the way to Ayodhy& and the well being
of Bharata. Do thou ask of Bharata his well-being at my
words, and communicate unto him my (arrival) with Laksh-
mana and my spouse after having made good the vow


© A low caste aboriginal Hindu corresponding to our Chanddias always
lividg in the forest. The Raja of Ramund in the district of Maduré in Madras
traces his descent from this Guba.


192


1530 | RAMAYANA.


(of my. sire)—the carrying away of Sith by the powerful
Ravana—the friendship with Sugriva and the destruction of
Vali in the conflict—the search of Maithili instituted by
thee having got over the huge lord of rivers—the advance (of
the monkeys) te ihe banks of the deep—the view of the
ocean, the construction of the bridge—the destruction of
Ravana,—the grant of boon by Mahendra,Brahma and Varuna
—my meeting with my father by the favour of Mahadeva.
Do thou, O gentle one, communicate unto Bharata, my
arrival here with the lord of Rakshasas and king of monkeys.
(Tell him) ‘vanquishing his foes and attaining to excellent
fame Rama hath arrived at the gate of the city with his
valiant friends, having satisfied the vow (of his sire)’ Thou
shouldst read the signs expressive of joy or sorrow that
Bharata shall display on hearing this and infer therefrom
his attitude towards me. Thou shouldst know, from the
colour of his countenance, his looks and his words, all the
movements and actions of Bharata. Whose mind doth not
change obtaining such an ancestral kingdom, filled with all
prosperity and abounding in elephants, horses and chariots ?
If the effulgent Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, ruling
over it, wisheth the kingdom for himself, let him lord over
the entire earth. Therefore, O monkey, it behoveth thee to
come back speedily apprised of his intention and movements,
before we proceed further.” Being thus commanded,
Haounida, the son of Wind-god, assuming a human shape
speedily proceeded towards Ayodhya. Hanum&n the son of
Maruta rose up in the welkin with velocity like unto Garuda
ready to fall upon a huge serpent. Then crossing the Wind-
path and the abode of the birds, getting over the terrible
confluence of the Ganges and Yamuni, reaching the city of
Sringavera avd meeting Guha, the energetic Hanuman,
delighted ,(addressed him) with the following excellent
words—"Thy friend Rima, the descendant of Kakutstha,
Laving truth for his prowess, with Sila and son of Sumitr&,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 531


hath enquired of thy welfare. Having spent five nights#
till to-day, he, having obtained permission from the ascetic
Varadwdja, shall proceed to-morrow.” Having said this the
highly energetic monkey, not caring for the exhaustion of
travel, greatly delighted and with hairs erect, rose up with
great velocity, Beholding the holy river sanctified with the
name of Parasurima, the rivers—Balukini, Baruthi, Gomati,
the huge forest of Sé/a trees, the various countries populated
with thousands of people, and proceeding a great distance
speedily, that foremost of monkeys got at the trees near
Nandigrémt like unto those of Chaitraratha, the garden of
the lord of celestials the flowers whereof were being plucked
off by many a damsel accompanied by their children decked
in various ornaments. He saw at a distance of one crosa
from Ayodhya Bharata wearing the skin of an antelope,
poorly, greatly reduced, tiving in a hermitage, wearing matted
hairs, having his body covered with dirt, greatly pulled dowa
in consequence of his brother’s disaster, living on roots and
fruits, self-controlled, living the life of an ascetic, observing
pious observances, with a bundle of clotted hairs on his
head, wearing bark and deer skin, having control over his
passions and senses, effulgont like Brakmarshis, ruling the
earth always placing the sandals before him, protecting
people of four Varnas against all fear, with courtiers, priests
leading a holy life and soldiers all wearing red clothes,around
him. All those citizens, fond of piety, did not like to use
good clothes beholding the prince use bark and deer skin.
Thereupon Hanuman, the son of Maruta spake with folded
hands unto him, conversant with piety like virtue incarnate,
saying—"Kakutstha, living in the forest. of Dandaka with
bark and matted hairs, for whom thou art lamenting, hath


* Having spent five nights after the expiry of fourteen years of exile he is
living at the hermitage of Veradwdja. He shall leave that place to-
morrow.—T.
$ The ccuntry of Bharata’s maternal uncle —T.


2532 RAMAYANA.
enquired after thy welfare. Do thou, O worshipful sire,
speak.out thy welfare and renounce the dreadful grief,
Thou shalt in this moment be reconciled to thy brother
Rima. Slaying Ravana, and regaining Maithili, Rama,
having accomplished his end, hath arrived here with bis.
valiant friends, The highly effulgent Lakshmana and the
famed Vaidehi (have also come) Sit& fareth well with
Rima like unto Sachi in the company of Mahendra.”
Being thus addressed by Hanum&n, Bharata, the son of
Kaikeyi, delighted, fell down all on a sudden in a swoon of
joy. Thereupon rising up in no time, and welcoming him,
Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, spake unto Hanumin
communicating the pleasant tidings, the following words.
And embracing the monkey respectfully the graceful Bharata
sprinkled him with profuse tears not out of grief but of
joy. He said,—‘Art thou a man or god who hast kindly
come here? O gentle one, I shall confer upon thee, who
hast communicated unto me this pleasant tidings, hundreds
and thousands of kine, hundreds of prosperous villages,
sixten young wives, pious, wearing excellent Kunda/as,
golden-hued, having beautiful noses and breast,having moon-
like countenances, decked with all ornaments and born of
respectable families.” And hearing from that leading monkey
of that wonderful return of Rama, the son of the king,
delighted became anxious to behold him and again addressed
joyously Hanumin with the following words.


JUDDHARANDAM. 1533


SECTION cxxvill.


—__——


oe

T HEAR the tidings of my brother affording me great
delight who hath been living in the huge forest for many a
year. The saying of the people appeareth to me as instinct
with well meaning that a man, if alive, may attain to joy
even after a century. Do thou relate truly unto me, how
and in what country the union between Raghava and the
monkeys was brought about.” Being thus accosted by the
prince and seated on Kuga, he, thereupon, began to describe
Rama's life in the forest. ‘How Rama was exiled, the two
boons conferred upon thy mother, how king Dacaratha
died in consequence of (his) son’s grief, how by emissaries,
O lord, thou wert brought up from the house of thy maternat
uucle, how thou didst not wish for the kingdom having
entered Ayodhy&4, how thy brother,.the repressor of enemies,
was solicited by thee for accepting the kingdom, reparing
to the mount Chitrakuta, who hast ever wended the track
of the pious, the renouncement of kingdom (by him) abiding
by the words of the king, thy return after taking the sandals
of thy revered (brother)—all these, O thou of long-arms,
are known to thee. I shall relate unto thee all that happened
after thy retura, Thyself having returned thence, all the
birds and animals were overwhelmed with terror and that
forest appeared as if distressed. Thereupon he entered the
sotitary and huge and dreadful forest Dandaka distressed
by the elephants and abounding in lions, tigers and deer.
And they entering the dense forest there appeared before
them the powerful Biradha* emitting a dreadful sound. And
taking him up roaring aloud like an elephant Rama threw
him with his arms upwards and face downwards into a pit.


* A demon of that name,


1534 RAMAYANA, . e


Having accomplished that difficult work the two brothers
Rama and Lakshmana, arrived in the evening at the pleasant
hermitage of Sarabhanga. And Sarabhanga having attained
to heaven, Rama, having truth for his prowess, saluting
all the ascetics, repaired to Janasthina, And by the high-
souled Raghava, living there, fourteen thousand inhabitants
of Janasthina were slain. In the company of one person
only and at the commencement of the fight, by Rama, within
the one fourth part of a day, were exterminated all the
highly powerful and valiant inhabitants of the forest of
Dandaka always putting obstructions in the way of the
ascetics. All the R&kshasas were grinded (to death) by
Raghava. Khara was stain in the conflict ; Dushana being slain
first Trishir& was slain thereafter by him, Thereafter (a
she-demon) named Surpanakh&, came to the side of Rama.
Thereupon being commanded by Rama, the highly powerful
Lakshmana rose up all on a sudden and taking a dagger
chopped off her ears and nose, Being thus insulted by him
that she-demon came to Ravana. Thereupon a dreadful
Rakshasa named Maricha—an attendant of Ravana, assum-
ing the shape of a jewelled deer, allured Vaidehi. And
beholding it, Vaidehi spake unto Rama, saying,—'Do thou
catch it ; with it when caught our hermitage sball be more
charming” Thereupon R&ma, with bow in his hand, pursued
that deer and with one shaft destroyed it. O gentle one,
Raghava going out on ‘hunting, and Lakshmana having
issued out of the hermitage, the Tev-necked (demon) entered
therein. And he speedily got hold of Sita, like unte Rohini,
possessed by the planet in the sky. Thereupon slaying
the vulture Yatdyu in the conflict desirous of rescuing her
and getting hold of Sita that Rakshasa speedily repaired
{to his capital). Thereupon some monkeys resembling
mountains, stationed on the summit of a mountain, stricken
with wondrous fear and astonishment, beheld Ravana, the
lord of Rakshasas proceed with Sif. Ascending the car


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1538


Puskpaka, going at witl, with Vaidehi and hastening his
course that highly powerful Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas
entered Lanka. And entering the huge and excellent golden
palace RAvana consoled Maithili with (diverse) words,
But she regarded that foremost of Rakshasas and his-words
as straw. And Vaidehi was placed in the forest of Aseka.
Thereupon returned Rama after having slain the deer in
the forest, Having returned and seen the vulture, dearer
than his father,slain, Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha was
pained. And searching Vaidehi and ranging at the banks
of God&veri and forest-lands covered with flowers, Rama
with Lakshmana, met in that huge forest a Rakshasa named
Kavandha, Thereupon at the words of Kavandha, Rama,
having truth for his prowess, repairing to the mount Rishya-
muka, was united with Sugriva. There had grown mutual
love in them before they were known to each other. Sugriva
was driven away by his angry brother Vali. And informed
of each other’s affairs their friendship grew closer. There-
upon slaying the huge-bodied and highly powerful Vali in
the conflict by virtue of the strength of his own arms Rama
obtained (for Sugriva) his own kingdom. And being placed
on the throne with all the monkeys, Sugriva promised unto
Rama the enquiry of the Princess (Sita). Being commanded
by the high-souled Sugriva, the. lord of monkeys, ten
hotis of monkeys repaired to (various) quarters. Among
them some of us lost our way in a cavity of the Vindhya
mountaig, and were striken with great terror—and accord-
ingly much time was lost. The powerful brother of the
king of vultures named Sampati communicated unto us the
residence’ of Sita in the palace of Ravana. Thereupon
removing the grief of my relatives stricken with sorrow and
resorting to my own prawess, I jumped over hundred
yoyanas and beheld her placed in the forest of Asoka,
wearing a red cleth, pale, deprived of all joy aad observing
strict penances. And then nearing her and beholding her


1538 RAMAYANA.


of a perfectly blameless person I bestowed upon her an ensign
ating with Rima’s name engraven on it. And obtaining a
jewel as an ensign, I, with my object accomplished, returned,
And having returned [ presented Rima of unwearied actions
with that ensign of a brilliant gem. And hearing (of the
news of Vaidehi) Rama regained his life like one on the
verge of death regaining his being after drinking nectar.
And exciting (his soldiers) for making preparations like unto
Fire about to destroy all people he made up his mind for
the devastation of Lank’. Thereupon arriving at the banks
of the ocean he had a bridge constructed by Nala by which
the army of monkey-heroes cfossed (the deep). Nala
destroyed Prahasta, Raghava slew Kumbbakarna,Lakshmana
killed the son of Ravana and Rama himself slew Ravana.
He was then met by Sakra, Yama, Varuna, Siva, Brahma
and Dagaratha. And that graceful descendant of Kakutstha,
the slayer of foes, obtained the boon from them as well as
from the saints assembled there—(celestial and otherwise).
Having obtained the boon he, delighted, met the monkeys
and in the car Puskpaka reached Kishkindhi., Again reach.
ing the Ganges he is living with the ascetic; it becometh
thee to behold him to-morrow under the auspices of
of Puskya,* without any hindrance.” Thereupon being
delighted with the sweet accents of Hanumin, Bharata
addressed him, with folded hands, with words affording
delight, saying,—“‘Aftee a long time my desire hath been
fulfilled.”


© The lunar asterism comprising three stars of which ona is the Cancer,


VODDHAKANDAM. ‘537


SECTION GXXIX.


Hesse those words affording great delight, Bharata,
the slayer of enemies, having truth for his prowess, delighted,
ordered Satrughna, (saying),—“Let all people being perified
worship all the deities and altars of the city with fragrant
garlands and diverse music. Let all the bards conversant
with the chanting of the pedigree, the fatterers, all those
conversant with music, the dancing girls, the queens, the
courtiers, the soldiers with their wives, Brihmanas,
Kehatryas, and people of all other castes, issue out to behold
the moon-like countenance of Rama.” Hearing the words of
Bharata, Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, divided the work
amongst the servants, (saying),—Do ye level the high and
low ground from Nandigrim to (Ayodhy4). Do ye perfectly
water the ground with cold water. Thereafter sprinkle alt
the places with flowers and dried paddy; hoist wp Aags aft
over the city; decorate ali the houses, before the rising of
the moon with garlands, jewels, flowers of gold and things
of five other colours, Let hundreds of men watch the thorough-
fares.” Hearing the command of Satrughwa, issued out
with delight Dhristi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddartha, Arthasa-
dhaka, Asoka, MantrapBla and Sumantra. Thereupon issued
out men on horse back and in cars with thousands of mad
elephants well-decked with pennons and she-elephants with
golden seats (on their back). And some heroes proceeded
encircled by thousand excellent steeds and persons carry-
ing Sadtt, Ristht, maces and pennons and thousands of
infantry. Thereupon proceeded Sumitr& and all other wives
of Dagaratha placing Kaugalya before them and seated in
excellent conveyances. And hearing of the return of his
brother and attaining to delight, the high-souled and


593


1538 RAMAYANA,


pious Bharata, reduced with fasting, poorly, wearing bark and
skin of an antelope and conversant with religion, issued
out to receive back Rama in the company of his counsellors
and encircled by the twice-born ones, the people of diverse
castes, his own relations and kinsmen and ministers with
garlands and AModeka* in their hands, eulogized by the
bards, having his arrival announced with the sound of conchs
and bugles and placing the sandals of his worshipful
brother on his head and taking white umbrella adorned
with white garlands and white Chowrtes decked with gold
and worthy of being used by the kings. Thereupon with
the sound of the herses’ hoofs and cars, conchs and
hugles the earth shook. And the whole city went to
Nandigram, And beholding the Wind-god's son, Bharata
said,—"Didst thou not resort to the usual fickleness of the
monkeys? We do not behold the worshipful Rama, the
descendant of Kakutstha--the slayer of foes, Nor do we
behold the monkeys assuming shapes at will.” Having
been addressed with those words, Hanum&n replied, commu-
nicating unto Bharata, having truth for his prowess, the truth,
—"Having reached the trees, covered by the favour of Vara-
dwaja, with fruits and Aowers and pouring honey, the monkeys
are emitting noise like maddened black bees. O slayer of
foes, this boun was granted him (Rama) by V&sava,
(Varadwaya) is treating him with his army with all hospitali-
ty. Hear the dreadful noise of the delighted monkeys.
Methinks the monkey host hath crossed the river Gomati,
Behold the huge upheaval of dust towards the Sala forest.
Methinks the monkeys are agitating the graceful Sd/a forest.
Behold there at the distance the car resembling the Sun.
This celestial car Pashpaka, constructed by Brahma’s mind,
was obtained by the high-souled (Rima) after having slain
Ravana with. his friends, This celestial car, resembling the
neuty risen Sun, coursing at will and carrying Rama (was


* Akind of sweet meat.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1539


gained) by the favour of the Giver of wealth. (There are}
the two heroic borthers—the descendants of Raghy with
Vaidehi, the highly effulgent Sugriva and the RAkshasa
Bibbishana, Thereupon with the sound of “there is Rama”
there arose a joyous noise reaching the abode of the celestials
from among women, children, the young and the old.
Thereupon descending upon the earth from chariots,
elephants and horses all people beheld him (Rama) stationed
on the car like unto the moon in the sky. And facing
Raghava and with folded hands Bharata delightedly
worshipped him with agreeable words, Arghya and water to
wash his feet. There appeared in the car constructed by
Brabma’s mind the elder brother of Bharata having expansive
eyes like the immortal weilder of thunder-bolt. Thereupon
Bharata humbly saluted bis brother Rama seated on the top of
the car like unto the Sun on the summit (of the mount Meru).
And commanded by Rama that excellent car drawn by ganders
got down on the earth with great velocity, And ascending
that car, Bharata, baving truth for his prowess, reaching
Raima, delighted, again bowed unto him. And raising
Bharata up who had been seen after a long time and placing
him on his lap Kakutstha, delighted, embraced him. There-
upon Bharata, the slayer of foes, bowed unto Vaidehi and
welcomed Lakshmana. And the son of Kaikeyi (then in turn)
embraced Sugriva, Jambabana, Angada, Mainda, Dwivida,
Nila and Rishava. And he then embraced Sushena, Nala,
Gabaksha, Gandham&dana, Sarabha, and Panasa. And
assuming human shapes, those monkeys, assuming shapes
at will, delightedly enquired after Bharata’s well-being.
And embracing Sugriva, the foremost of moukeys, the
highly effulgent prince Bharata, the foremost of the
pious, said—O Sugriva, thou art our filth brother.
From brotherliness groweth friendship and doing injury
is the sign of an enemy.” And Bharata then address-
ed Bibhishana with soothing words—"It- is by fortune that


1530 RAMAYANA,


through your help he hath accomplished such a difficult
work.” Thereupon the heroic Satrughna saluting Rama and
Lakshmana, respectfully bowed unto Siti. And having
approached bis mother, pale and pulled down with grief,
Raima humbly touched her feet and enhanced her delight.
And thereupon saluting Sumi famed Kaikeyi and all his
mothers he approached the priests. Thereupon all the
citizens with folded bands welcomed him saying—"Welcome
att thow, O thou of long arms! O thou the enhancer of
Kaugalya’s joy !” And the elder brother of Bharata observed
the folded hands of the citizens like so many blown lotuses.
And himself taking the sandals of Rama, Bharata, conversant
with piety, placed them at the feet of that lord of men.
Thereupon Bharata with folded hands spoke unto Rama,
saying—"This all thy kingdom, which thou didst leave to
my care, I return thee. Blessed is my birth to-day and
accomplished is my desire, since I behold thee again as king
in Ayodhy& after thy return. Do thou examine thy wealth
treasury, palace and army. By thy favour I have increased all
these ten fold.” Hearing Bharata speak in that wise and
beholding him devoted to his brother all the monkeys and
the Rikshasa Bibhishana shed tears, Thereupon placing
Bharata, in delight, on his lap, Raghava, with his army in that
car, proceeded towards Bharata’s abode. And reaching
Bharata’s palace Raghava with his army descended upon the
earth. Thereupon Rama said to the excellent car—"Do
thou (now) goto Vaisrévana—I do permit thee.” There-
upon being thus commanded by Réma, that excellent car,
proceeding towards the north, reached the abode of the Giver
of wealth, That celestial car Pushpaka had been taken
away by the Rakshasa (Ravana); but now at the words
Rima it reached (again) the Giver of wealth. And touching
the feet of his priest the powerful Raghava sat on a separate
and excellent seat like unto Sakra, the lord of immortals
(by the side of) Vrikashpate,


VYODDHARANDAM. 1S4t


SECTION cxxx.


Trereuron having placed her palms on his head
Bharata, the enhancer of Kaikeyi’s joy. spoke unto his elder
brother Rama, having truth for his prowess, saying, —Abid-
ing by my mother’s request thou didst confer this kingdom
upon me; Ido return thee the kingdiom thou didst give
me. Like unto a young one unable to carry a heavy burden
thrown off by a powerful bull I am unable to carry this huge
burden (of the kingdom). I do consider this kingdom
infested with thieves, difficult to govern, as it is difficult ta
re-construct a bridge broken down by a powerful current
of water. As an ass cannot follow the course of a horse and a
crow cannot follow that of a gander, so I am unable, O herg,
O slayer of foes, to follow thy footsteps. Ifa tree, planted
inthe inner appartment of a house, growing huge with a
big trunk and many ‘branches, is dried up as soon it
blossoms without bearing fruits, his object for whom
it is planted, becomes fruitless. And this simili, O
thou of long-arms, shall prove good in thee, if dost thou
not, our master, govern us, O lord of men, who are thy
servants. Let the world, O Raghava, behold thee installed
(to-day) like unto the powerful mid-day Sun burning in
effulgence. Do thou sleep and rise up with the sound of
stringed instruments, womens’ girdles and Nupuras and
charming songs. Do thou govern the people as long as the
solar system exists and as far as the earth extends.”
Hearing the words of Bharata, Rama the conqueror of
enemies’ cities, saying,—“So be it” sat on an excellent seat.
Thereupon at the command of Satrughna, expert, skilful
and quick-handed barbers gathered round Raghava. At
first, Bharata, the highly powerful Lakshmana, Sugriva the


1542 RAMAYANA,


lord of monkeys, and Bibhishana the Jord of Rikshasas
bathed. Thereupon shorn of his matted hairs, bathed, with
paste excellent garlands and precious clothes on, he
appeared there shining in grace. The valiant and graceful
Satrughna, the upholder of the dignity of Ikshwaku race,
himself got ready ‘the dresses for Rima and Lakshmana.
And all the high-minded wives of Dagaratha with their own
hands decked Sitd with various charming (ornaments),
Thereupon Kaugaly&, delighted and fond of her son, herself
with great care, decorated the wives of monkeys. Thereupon
atthe words of Satrughna, the charioteer by name Sumantra
got ready the perfectly beautiful car. And behelding that
celestialvéar, bright as the fire of the sun, stationed before
him, Rama, having long-arms, the conqueror of enemies’
cities, ascended it. Sugriva and Hanuman, graceful like
Mahendra, bathed, dressed in celestial clothes and wearing
excellent Kundalas, proceeded (to view the city), And
then went Sit4 and all the wives of Sugriva decorated with
all ornaments and wearing excellent Kunda/as, anxious to
behold the city. All the ministers of king Dagaratha in
Ayodhya began to held consultation respectfully with the
priest. Asoka, Vijaya and Siddhartha, with undivided mind,
consulted with each other about the welfare of Rama as well
as that of the city. (Thereupon they ordered the servants)
saying,—''Do ye collect materials necessary for the auspicious
installation of the high-souled (R&ma) worthy of being
crowned with victory”, The priest and the ministers having
ordered thus all speedily issued out of the city to behold
Rima. Like unto the thousand-eyed Indra in his car drawn
by horses the blameless Rama, seated in his car, proceeded
towarda the excellent city. Bharata took up the reins,
Satrughna held the umbrella and Lakshmana began to fan
fun vn the head with Chowries. And Bibhishana, the lord of
Rikshasas standing on one side, took up the white Chowrie
shining Tike the second moon. There was audible the sweet


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1543


encomium of Rima chanted by the crowd of ascetics in
the sky, the celestials and the Marutas. Thereupon the
highly effulgent Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, got up
upon an elephant named Satrunyaya resembling a mountain.
And riding nine thousand elephants proceeded the monkeys
assuming human shapes and adorned with various ornaments.
And with the music of conches and bugles that foremost
of men entered the city abounding in houses. (And the
citizens) belield Raghava enter the city with a graceful person
and seated in the car. And they having bowed unto that
descendant of Kakutstha were welcomed by him. And
they (followed that high-souled one encircled by his brothers,
And surrounded by his courtiers, Brilhmanas and subjects
+Rama appeared beautiful like unto the Moon encircled
by stars, And he went preceeded by men who play on
stringed instruments, by people with Xarata/ and Sustika
in their hands and by men chanting delightedly auspicious
songs. Persons with Adshaéa and gold in their hands, kine,
girls, BrSlmanas and persons with Modaka in their hands
went before Rama, Thereupon before the ministers Rama
began to describe the friendship of Sugriva, the prowess of
the Wind-god’s son and the works accomplished by the
monkeys, And hearing of the works of the monkeys and
the prowess of the: Rakshasas, the inhabitants of the city of
Ayodhy& attained to astonishment. Having related thus
(the works of the monkeys) the graceful Rama encircled by
the monkeys entered (the city of) Ayodhy& abounding in
delighted and plump persons. Thereupon the citizens
hoisted up flags upon every house and he reached the pic-
turesque abode of his ancestors inhabited by the descend-
ants of Ikshwaku. And having reached and -entered his
ancestral palace and bowed unto Kaugalya, Sumitra and
Kaikeyi, the high-souled prince, the enhancer of the joy of
the descendants of Raghu, addressed Bharata the foremost
of the pious, with sweet words instinct with meaning, saying,


1533 RAMAYANA


—“Do thou set apart for Sugriva my huge and excellent
palace ahounding in pearli and Vardurjas.” Hearing those
words, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, taking Sugriva
by the hand, conducted him to the palace. And commanded
by Satrughna, (servants) speedily entered (that palace) with
oil, lamps, bedsteads and beddings. Thereupon the highly
effulgent younger brother of Raghava spoke unto Sugriva,
saying.—-“Do thou, O lord, order some (to bring water)
for R&ma’s installation.” And Sugriva conferred upon four
leading monkeys four golden jars crested with diverse
jewels and said to them,—“Do ye so conduct, O monkeys,that
ye may return by the dawn with the jars filled with the
water of the four oceans.” Being thus addressed by the
high-souled (Sugriva) the monkeys resembling the elephants
speedily rose up in the welkin like unto quick-coursing
vultures. J&émbavana, Hanum4n, the monkey Vegadarshi and
Rishabba brought the jars filled with water from five hundred
rivers. Sushena, gifted with prowess, brought that jar
crested with gems, filled with water from the Eastern Ocean,
And Rishabha speedily brought water from the Southern
Ocean. And Gabaya brought, from the great Western Ocean
in that golden jar, water perfumed with the fragrance of
red sandal and camphor. And the virtuous-souled Wind-
god’s son, gifted with all accomplishments and the prowess
of Garuda and Wind-god, brought, speedily from the
Northern Ocean, water in that jewelled jar. And beholding
water thus brought by the leading monkeys fer the installa-
tion of Rama, Satrughna, with his ministers, communicated
that unto the leading priests and friends. Thereupon
the self-controlled Vasishtha, stciken in years, along with
other Brihmanas placed Rama with Sit& on a jewelled
seat. Vasishtha, Vijay&, Javali, Katyfyana, Goutama and
Bimadeva, sprinkled that foremost of men, with clear and
fragrant water as Vasus did the thousand eyed Vasava.
(He was then sprinkled by) the Aiftigas, Brahmanas, maidens


PUDDHARANDAM. is


ministers, soldiers and the merchants all delighted, (There-
upon) with the juice of Oskadhis* (he was sprinkled by) the
celestials stationed in the sky, the deities presiding over
four quarters and all other celestials collected. And having
placed him on a seat crested with various jewels in the arena
decorated with gold, various jewels and rich parapharnalia,
(he placed on his head) the jewelled crown made by Brahm,
brilliant and with which in the days of yore Manu and other
kings, born in his race, were installed. And being decked
by the high-souled Vasishtha with that crown, Raghava was
aftorwards dressed with the celestial garments by the Ritésgas.t
And Sateughna held the white and excellent umbrella and
Sugriva the lord of monkeys took the white Chowrie. And
Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas took up another Chowrie
resembling the moon. And the wind commanded by Visava
conferred upon R&ghava, a garland of hundred golden
Jotuses, shining in their native lustre. And the wind com.
manded by Sakra conferred upon that lord of men a jewelled
garland crested with diverse gems. The intelligent and
worthy Rama being installed the celestials and the
Gandharvas sang and the Apsaras danced. The earth was
filled with crops, the trees with fruits and the flowers were
fragrant on the occassion of Raghava’s installation. And
that foremost of men conferred upon the twice-born ones
one million of horses, hundred thousand cows and hundred
thousand bulls. And R&ghava again conferred upon the
Brahmanas thirty crores of golden coins and diverse costly
ornaments and clothes. Thereupon that lord of men conferr-
ed upon Sugriva a celestial garland brilliant like the rays
of the Sun and crested with gold and jewels. And he, gifted
with intelligence, conferred upon Angada, Vali’s son, two,
Angadast brilliant as the rays of the moon and made of


* An anaual plant or herb—one that dies-after becoming ripe,
+ A domestic chaplain—a family priest.
$A iind of ornament worn on wpper arms.


194


1546 RAMAYANA.


Baidurja. And Rima conferred upon Sitfi an excellent peat!
necklace crested with precious jems, celestial clothes and
various excellent ornaments. And taking off.the necklace
from her person Vaidehi, the daughter of king Janaka,
conferred it upon the Wind-god’s son remembering the
services (rendered by him) and cast her looks again and again
upon her lord and the monkeys. And beholding that (R&ma)
capable of reading the gestures, spoke unto the daughter of
king Janaka, saying—*O fortunate and beautiful lady, do
thou confer this necklace upon him with whom thou art
pleased.” Thereupon the lotus-eyed (Sita) conferred that
upon the Wind god’s son, And Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, in whom perpetually exist, energy, forgiveness,
fame, skillfullness, prowess, humility, tactics, manliness,
valiance and intellect, appeared with that necklace like a
mountain beautified with the rays of the moon and- white
clouds. And all other elderly and leading monkeys were
respectively honoured with clothes and ornaments. And
being honoured by Rama of unwearied actions with enough
of jewels and other wished-for objects, Bibhishana, Sugriva,
Hanumin, Jambbaban and other leading monkeys, delighted,
returned to their respective habitations. Thereupon, the Jord
of earth and the slayer of foes conferred,all wished-for things,
upon Dwivida, Mainda and Nila. And beholding (the
installation of Rf&ma) the high-souled monkeys, taking
leave of the Jord of earth, went to Kishkindha. And be-
holding the inauguration of Rama, Sugriva, the foremost
of monkeys, honored by Rama, repaired to the city of Kish-
kindh&. And having obtained his own kingdom, the
greatly famous and virtuous-souled Bibhishana, with all the
Rakshasas, repaired to the city of Lank&. Having slain
his foes, the highly generous and glorious Rima, ruled in
great delight, the kingdom extending all over the earth.
‘And Rama, fond of the pious, spoke unto Lakshmana, con-
versant with piety,saying—“O thou conversant with piety, do


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1547


thou with me and four-fold forces, govern this kingdom, ruled
by our predecessors. Like unto our ancestors do thou now
carry the burden of an associate in the throne.” When the son
of Sumitr& did not accept the heir apparentship albeit solicited
earnestly again and again, the high-souled (RAma) conferred
upon Bharata that dignity. And that son of king performed
various sacrifices such as Paundarika,*Aswamedhat, Bajimedha
and others, And governing the kingdon for ten thousand years
Raghava performed ten horse-sacrifices with excellent horses
and profuse presents, And that highly powerful Rima,having
his arms extended up to the knee-joint, having a spacious
breast and Lakshmana as his attendant,ruled the earth (in this
wise). And obtaining that excellent kingdom, the virtuous-
souled Raghava performed many sacrifices with bis sons,
brothers and friends. And Rama governing the kingdom,
the widows were not distressed and there was no fear from
voracious animals or from diseases. The people were saved
from the thieves and there was no other trouble. And the
old were not constrained to perform the funeral ceremoi
of the children. All were delighted and devoted to pious
observances, And beholding Rama they did not envy one
another, And Rama governing the kingdom, (people) lived
for thousand years and had thousand children,—they were
freed from diseases and sorrow. And the trees bore fruits
and flowers perpetually—there were showers at will and
the wind blew pleasant. And the people delighted engaged
in their respective works and the subjects grew pious and
truthful, under Rama's regeme, and were devoted to the
observance of all pious works and gifted with all auspicious
marks. And Rama ruled the kingdom for ten thousand
years. And this sacced Epic, the first of its kind, affording
piety, fame, and long life, and describing the conquest of


the kings, was composed by VBlmiki in the days of yore.


= A kind of sacrifice.
+ A kind of sacrifice in which a horse is slain,


1548 RAMAYANA.


He, who on this earth, shall hear (this story) shall be divested
of sins. People, wishing for children, shall obtain the same
and those, wishing for riches, shall get by them. , Thus
people on this earth shall attain to their wished-for objects
hearing of this Rama’s installation—the king may conquer
the earth and subdue his foes. Females may obtain sons
(in the same way) as Kaugal)4 gave birth to Rama, Sumitra
to Lakshmana and Kaikeyi to Bharata. Hearing the story
of this work describing the victory of Rima of unwearied
actions one may attain to along life. He, who with devo-
tion and having his anger subdued, shall hear the story of
this epic written by Valmiki in the days of yore shall get
over all troubles. And hearing the story of the Epic
composed by Valmiki in the days of yore, one Siving in’
foreign ceuntries, shall return home and enjoy in the
company of his friends. Hearing this people‘ shall
secure all their wished-for objects from R&ghava and
the celestials shall be greatly delighted. When this book
is kept in a house it becomes free from the disturbance
ofevil spirits. Hearing this a king may conquer the earth,
and one living in a foreign country fareth well. If a
female, during her monthly course, hears the story, she shall
give birth to an excellent son, By reading and worshipping
this ancient history people are freed from all sins and
attain to a long life. The Kshatryas, bending low their heads,
should hear this daily from the Brahmanas. Hearing or
reading the whole of Ram&yana, forsooth shall people get
sons and riches, Rima is ever pleased with him. He is the
ever-existing Vishnu—the first God, the huge-armed Hari,
Narfyane and Lord. This ancient’ work produceth such
fruits, May good betide ye. Do ye openly declare that
Vishnu’'s prowess may increase. The celestials shall be greatly
delighted for reading or hearing this story of Rama and the
progenitors shall be always pleased. Those, who shall
write this story of Rama Grst recorded by the Rishi (Valmiki)


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1549


shall reach the region of Brahm&. Hearing this people
attain to, on this earth, multiplied relations, increased
wealth.and crops, beautiful wives, excellent happiness, and
the accomplishment of all desires. They attain to long life,
health, fame, intellect, prowess, and good brothers. Therefore
it beheveth those good men, who wish for-prosperity, to hear
this story perpetually.


THE END OF YUDDHAKANDAM.
