A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION
or
THE MAHABHARATA.
TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEKT).
AlSrUSEEASAJSTA. 3PAIIVA..
VOL. XIII.
totieo A PCBUsatD st
MAKMATHA NATH DUTT, (5^a//r0 M.A , M R A S.
Hector, Kcsituu Academy}
Aulfur of the l^ngliih Translattonx of the Rama^am, Vishnu Piiranarrt,
Srimad^Dhaguxatam, Kamandaiiya Niltsara, Dhagavud-Gila,
and man/ other vorkr
40, ttayan Chand DutVs Street, Caleutta.
CALCUTTA:
rtivTiD BT n C. D«», ELTSinr P*rsi,
4^1 ChanJ Do’fs Slritf,
lOOo.
AlSrUSHASA^^TA. PAHVAJ
COWTENrS.
CnifTSR I,~Viidfil4>ilJufaV <f«part<!ffney
At U>e d! I>i 5 rcljtivei. I'^e story of
MrityUf Goutami, fo«Ur. tl>o
tcfpent. Uhistima deKfibes that Uie soul is
r'e< thocsuso of our deedv— p. t.
GnirTK* ff.— Tlie story of S»id»»»f«ana
And U^havsti. Ilowdeatn was conqttereti
t>y B Itouuliolder— p. 4, I
CMsrrcR story of Viivarnltro
os l>fin{; promoted from a Ksliairtya to a
Uralirnana— p. J,
CitsrTiR IV,— The descendants of Vlifi*
«ain)(ra_p. g.
CnafTtn V.— The mnifs of mercy and
the nterkt of devout men, ihe story ol
Vasa,jai,j tt.CKreat SuVa— p. to.
Cnirmt VI.— r.seriien and de»t>"y—
wrfcfj li more poirerAtf. CViis-er*a<*on
l>eiween IJrahmanand VashiUfia— p. it.
CiiJirrtit Vlt — Ihe fruits et Rood deeds
-p. ij.
Ctftprea Vltfr— Persens worthy fif adof*
p. 15,

Cltayrtt }X — The end of persons who
lad to mate ijifis to the nf*lin>»nss atwr
liavini; promned iliem. The story of the
i*<Vst and ape—f . td,

CuifTlR N.— Whrtfer any stnfscom.
mut'd if a person Rive fnit/ocKons lo a
fmr-casie person. TtkS ilery e( m Uiahmana
and* S’ludra— p. I7.


CjMfTRR XVII.— VoRs and ihe names
of lliogreat God— p. 47.

CtiarrsttXVn!.— The Hymn of Mahesh*
wara— p. 59.

Cttarrcts XIX— XXI —The declaration
aho<{t {0rnt dutrei on the occasion of a
persoa’s snsmage. T/ie discourse between
Aritiayakra and Uisha— p. 6 ^,

CuAfTtK XXII.— The proper object ©I '
gifts— p. 67.

Cnarrsn XXIIl— The rites for th* I
deities and departed manei On Uie occasion ,
of the Shraddlias— p. 71.

Ciupreit XXt V.— The cfreumttances tin-
der which a person beconirf gu Ur cl 0 rah-
SBinicidf wiihout actually killing htm— 'p 77.

Ctssprtft .\XV.— The merits of abluiiatt
I fn sacred wtier—p 77.

1 CistyTtn XWI — CoitnlrleS. provfnees,
rmouniains and nvers mott sancuned— p S>s.

\ Cittrre* XXVII— How cap • man cl
any other caste aetfiite the dignity of «

' Urahmarta— p. ?S.

I Cnirr,,, XX VIM-XXlX.— Tk- .twy
ief tndra and MsUnga on the auVject—

;p. 87.

Cntnen XXX —Hew Vitaharya be-
^ cameo llratimana— p. Sj.

Cturtaa XXXI. — worthy «/
hnrnig*. The dricojrje between Narada ,
and Vaiitdera— p Qi.


C0HTKMT5.


CuiFTtRS XXXVni-XXXlX.— The
6ispo$ilion of woirten— p. loi.

Chapters XL— XUtll — riie creation of
vomanand the objpcl tliereof, Ihc story
of V»pula and Oevasharn'an— p. 103

CuAPTFR-XHV — The rites of marriage
and all the particulars thereof— p ito.

CnAPTER XLV. — How a maiden after
shells left off by a man after promise, should
be treated. Ihe mherdanceof a person's I
property, wlio has daughters— p. 113

Chapter XLVI.— riic duties of men
towards women— p. 114
Chapter XLV ll — Iheruftsol TnaTnage
and the law of inheritance — p. irs
Chapter XLVI ll — Ihe duties of per*
sons born in mixed castes — p liS.

Chapter XLIX,— The position of sons—
p, I 2 t.

Chapters L— LI —The nature of corn-
passion and pity *lhe discourse between
Mfthusha and Chyavana— p. 123
Chapters LU— LVH— Ttie history ol
Janiadagni— p 136.

Chapter LVIIL— The rewards of the
planting of trees and the digging of tanks—

p. 135.

Chapter LIX— A description of the
gifts whicli follows the giver to the next
woild— p. 138

Chapter LX— Tlie preference of giH
o one who solicits and to one who does not

— p. 140.

Chapter LXl —The rewards ol gifts in
Ins world and in the nest— p 141.

Chapter LXII — A descnptioo of the
best of all gifts— p iS2 '

Chapter LXIII — The frm's of gifts lo
£rahmana and others, the icpties of
Narada — 147.

Chapter LXIV — ^Tiie ordinances of ilie
gilt of food— p I49 < *

Cs.iTTSS L^V —The gilt cJgeiiJ — p /ja


CnafTtR I.XXI —The merits of the c*

of liine Ihe diicoiiise between Ki*lii
UJd«Iski and Nachilceta — p. 159
Cfi^rrnRS LXXII— IJvXlV — The end
of persons who make gifts of kine — p. tSj.

Chapter LXXV —I he merits of Vedic
studies vows, leacfiingthe Vedas, cdt*

I kiiowledgcr of Ihe salidact on of ones
duties, ot serving the parents — p jt66.

CftAPtER LXXVl — OrdtiianceE about
the |,i(ls of ktne— p i 69

Chapter LXXVM—LXXX—Thctn}*-
tcfies of the gilt ol kine— p. 169

Chapter LXXXl— Description ol sacred
things— p. 17s

Chapter LXXXII — llie merits of cow-
dung Ttic cunversation between kine and
the goddess of prosperity— p. 177.

Chapter LKXXIIL— the glory of k»ne
— p 178

Chapter LXXXI V —An account of gold
and US gifts— p J8o.

Chapter LXXXV —The coloqules of ibP

I dietiei on iiie siibject— p 183.

Chapter LKXXVI — Tl»e history of Ihe
destructiun el larska— p 191.

Chapter LX'CXVII— The ordinance*

about b'lraddliA— p lt)t.

CiurrSn LXX'CVIll— Cletnal EiUs t»
the ilepjitrd manes— 192.

CiiAPTBTt LXXXtX —Optional Shrad*
dhas— p 193

Chapter XC— A desenpuan of Brah-
inanas to wtioin offers Should be made at
ttie time of bhraddlias— p
CHAi-TErsXCl — KCU —Tlie history and
panicuUr rites of a Shraddha— p 196
Chapter’’ XCI tl —Wlieiher a Brah-
mana «'*ting Havya at the invitation of a
Bcihmana, while fasting, commits sin—

p. 199

Chapter XCIV — The history of oaths

— p


CiiapterLXVI — riiemerjisof the gift
of a pair of sandals to a Brahmana the
gifts of sesame, land, Line, gold, tkc
p.*i 5 i.

Cbipter LXVII —The merits of the
•gilts oi drink — p 154

Chattfr LXVHl. — The gifts ol sesame
an^ lamps— p 153.

Chapter LXIX —The gifts of earth.
Vedic injunctions on the objects of gilt —
p. is6.

Chapter IXK.— The hlHofy 0! Iting
Negra— p. 157.


Chapter XCV— -The mirodnction of um-
brellas aiij sjndati as gifts of Sliraddhas—
P 209

Chapter XCVl — Jamadagn.’s attempt
to destroy llie Sun— p 3lo

Ciiapteb KCVll ^Duties ot the Dames-
Itc Mode of Life— p an.


Chapter XCVni— The history of the

giftof light— p 212.


Chapter XCIX— C— The merits of the
gifts of ligtit, incense, 8.c. The discourse
^between Nahushaand Agastya on the sub'
ject— p. aid.


COttTENTS.


iii


CnurrrR Cl.— Tlie end of a person steal*
Silt; a Ilralimina** {;oodt. '1 he conversition
I'Hneen a Ctiandafa and a low-casle
Kshitnya on the suli]»ct— p. 2(8.

CllAFTtR ClI.— lltc various ends of
righteous persons after death. The d»3-
course between Giuiama and Vasava—
p. 219.

CilArTER cm —The Idijhest p»f»ance
described, the discourse between Uliagi*
ratha and Dralima— >p. 223.

CnsrTER CIV.— Why a man becomes
lonff., or short-, hved — p. 225.

Chapter CV.— Fraternal duties— p. 232.
Chapter CVI.— I he law of fast— p. 233
Chapter CVII. — Ordinances equivalent
to sacrifices for poor men— p 23^.

Chapter CVMl.— The foremost and
purest of all llrthas described— p. 24t.

Chapter CIX — The most beneRual
fruit of all fssis— p. 242,

Chaptbr CX — Tlie means foracqinfi"K
beauty, prospeiity, good temper and happi-
ness— p. 213,

CnArrsA CXI.— The deeds by whieU
one gees to heaven or hell— p. 243. I

Chapter eXfI.— The end of virtue— i

p. aiS.

CtfAPrXR CXItI —Nsn. injury, ohs^rv- I
ance of Vedic rituals, meditation, controlling
senses, penances, and obedience to (be pre-
ceptors.— winch ct them rs preferable p. 25®
CtiAPTra CXIV. — Ihe pnnricalicinof one
who has injured oUieif—p 250.

Chaptir CSV'-— Ordinances about meat-
eating— p. 251.

CiitPrcR CXVI,— The merits of sbs-
(tntion from meat-eating— p 2St-
CusPTEasC.XVll— CXIX.— Pie end of
ersons dying in baitle-field. The discourse
etween Uwaipayana and » worm— p 256.
CttAPTER exx— CX.Xff — Knowfedge.
ptnances and gdlf, whKh of them ts tupe-
iior— p. 25t.

Chaptcr CXXI II — Ttie cendiici of good
and chaiie women— p. 264.

Chapter CXXfV.— The tricacyef eon-
ediaiion and Rdts— 263,

Chapter CXXV.— The m)iieryof duties
and gills— p. s's

Chapter C.XXVIv— D eeds pleasing to
Vl«*wu— p,

Chapter CXWII.— Tho ‘woes’ 'p ef

tacted Fre— p. Jjj.

CrtAPTc* CX.XVflf — Tfw •bserra-weel
dai.ts*blcb peod«t»b»rpn”»'-p.


Chapter CXXIX.— The condition of
men who know others' wives— p 272.

CnspTER exXX,— the mj-sterics of duty
and religion— p 273.

Chapter CXXXI.—Tlie power of the
Prainathas— p. 275.

Chaptsr CXXXII— The mysteries of
duty described by the eleplnnis— p. 275.

Chapters CXXXfff-CXXXfV— Ouiies
as described by Maheshwata and Shaiida—
p. 276.

CnarrER CXXXV.— TheJawof diej — the
position ol venous castes about tlial— 277.

ChaI'TER CXXXVI. — ^Ihe’ expiation of
a Ur,ihinana disregarding the law— p. 278.

CilAPTER CXXXVII— Hie supcfiofily
of charity and •levoiton^279

Cuapter CKXXVIlt.— I1ie merits of
gifts — p. 25 o.

Chapters CXXXIX-CXLVIll —Reli-
gion and Profit, winch brmg on happineis
in |l>e next woifd, Jbe Utstoiy of itudra
and Uma— p. 281.

Chapter CXI.IX.— An account of the
One God— p. 309.

Chapter CL— The Mantras for luceesa
in joorNe), tntry inta new buddings, and
for propitiating malevolent spirits— p. 321*
Chapter CLI.— Persons wetlby of ada-
tatwit— p. 324.

Chapter CLII —The fruit of llie adora-
tion of Urslirn*nas—p. 325.

Chapters CLIM-CLVU.— Superiority
of she itrahniBius over the Elements p. 32^
CHiPTERS CLVm-CLIX— The pros-
perity fulluwing the vrorship el the ifrah-
monas— p. 333

Chapter CLX — Shsla-RuJrya hfan-
ira— p 338.

CliAPTCR CLXL— The Samecont. p 339.
CnAPTXR ctxil — Tlie luihoTity of direct
perception, Inference, (he Kience of the
senptures—p 3(1.

Chapter cixiii.— Time for acquniiiots
of Weallh— p. 314.

Cmaptcr cucit.— T he influence of Tine
— p.344.

Cwapter clxv.— T he meins, cf hippi-
nrsi. The leufce of wcU'bemg— p. 343,
CniPTER ctxTtv— The Insirucimris ef
n* ishina-p. 317.

Cmipter CLXTii.— VodfJshtfxVa temis
to UhisArma— p. 3jS.

C«»ma ctxTiii.— Otath cf CMsss—
p-ayA. ,


THE MAnABHARATA

(IN ENGLISH.)

' ANUSIIASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER I.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).


tfauxng saUtfid IfarayaHa and Ifara {he
test of male teings as also Sarasteait, the
goddess of learmng Jel ns sty sueetss.

Yudhishtliira said

<• O grandfather, peace ot mind Wa
been described to be subtile and ol various
forms. I have heard alt your discourses,
but have not still been able to acquire tran>
quiUily of mind.

3 « Various means of quieting the mind j
Q vitv la’s*. '

hew can peace of mind be acquired from
only a knowledge of the different sorts of
tranquillity, when f myself have been the
means of bringing all this about ^

3 Seeing your body covered wth atrows
and bad sores, 1 cannot get, O hero, any
peace of mind, thinking «f the evils 1 have
done.

4 Seeing your body, O bravest of the
brave, covered with blood, like a bill covered
With water from its springs. 1 am perrshing
with grief as the lotus jn the rainy season.

5 What can be more painful than this,
that, for me, you, O granofather have been
reduced to this condition by my people
fighimg against their enemies on the
battle-field. *

6 . Other princes also, with their sons
and kinsmen, have been killed on my
account Alas, what can .be more painful
than ihii.t

7« Tell us, O prince, what will befall us
and (he sons of Dliritarashtra, who, im-
pelled by fate and anger, have done this
baleful act.

8 O king, ! think the son of DhriU-
rashtra is fortunate because he does not
see you m this condition.

9 But 1. 'vho am the cause ol your
death as well as of that of our friends, am
denied alt peace of mind by seeing you on
Vbe naked earth in ibis miserable plight.


to. The wicked Duryodhana, (he most
infamous of his family, has, with all Ins
soldiers and bis brothers, died m battle,
performing Kshatriya duties.

1}, That wicked man does not see you
lying on the ground ’ Verity, for this
leason, I would prefer death to life.

13—13. O hero who never forsook virtue,
had I with my brothers met with death
befoio fkis at the hands of our enemies on
(he battle-field, I would not have seen you
AR, .jNtV WtAlls'lWv, ^ >^mwc«L HtiAls.

arrows! Sulely, O prince, the Maker had
creat^ to commit evil deeds.

i4. O king, if you wish to do me good,
do you then instruct me in such a way that
{ iitay be purged of this am in even
another world.

Bhislinia said —

tS ’Why, O toTlunale one, da yoa re-
gard your soul, winch is dependent, to be
the cause of your deeds? Its inaction is
subtle and imperceptible to the senses.

jfi — ig Regarding it is cited the old
story of the conversatiori between Mntyu
and Gaucami with Kalu and the Fowler
and the serpent. There was, O son of
Kuiiti, an old lady named Gauumi, who
^as endued with [treat patience and peace
at mind. , One day she found her son
dead on account of having been bitten by
a serpent.

30. An angry fowler, f\amed Arjunaka,
bound the serpent with a siring and brought
It before Gauumi. He then said to her. —
Th«s wretched serpent has been the cause
o( your son's death, O blessed lady I 1 ell
me quickly how this wretch ts to be killed I
Shall 1 throw it into the fire or (shall I cut
It into pieces? Th/s infamous killer of a
cliild should not live longer I

Oaotami replied •—

31. Do ]0J, O Arjunakir of little un-
derstanding, sec free this serpent! It,


MAffADHAnATA*


should not be killed by >au. Who is to
/oolish as not (o core for (he inevKAbte
deitiny (Imt nuaits turn nn<] make liim*
seU heavy for sinking into sin 7

22. Those who have made themselves
figlit by performing virtuous deeds, manage
to cross the sea of the world ns a sliip
crosses the ocean. Hut Itiese svUo have
loaded themselves with sin sink into the
bottom, as an arro-v thrown into the
water.

13. By killing this serp*n», tins my boy
mil not revive, and by letting it live, no
harm will be taused to \oii Who would go
to the endless regions ol Death by itiiling
tins living creature?

The fowler said : —

ai I knoiv, O lady who know the d«f.
ference between right and wrong that
great persons ate pained at the miseries
of all creatures. But these words which
you have uttered carry instruction for only
a selheontamed person, therefore, t must
kill this serpent.

95. Those who v*l le peace of mind
attribute ever)thing to the course of Time
as the cause but practical men soon pacify
Iheir grief. People, throuith perpetual error,
fear loss of beatitude I herelore, O lady,
remove your gnel by having this serpent
killed (by me)

Gantami replied '

26 People like us are never pemed
Good men have their souls always brm on
virtue The death of the boy was predes*
lined therefore 1 cannot approve of the
destruction of this serpent.

27. Brahmanas do not cherish resent*
ment, because resentment leads lo pain
Do you, O goodman forgive and set free
this serpent out of mercy.

TliG fowler replied •—

iS Let US acfinire great and mexliaos
tible merit in the next world by destroying
(this creature), as a man gams gr^at merit,
and confers it on his victim as well by
sacrifice upon the altar I Mentis won by
killing an enemy t by killing this despica*
ble creature, you will acquire great and
true merit m the next world.

Gautami replied —

What good IS there in torturing and des-
troying an enemy, and what good is ac-
quired by not setting free an enemy in our
power? Therefore O you ol kind face,
wli) should we not forgive tins serpent and
try to acq lire merit by setting it (tee.


Tho fowler replied

3<>. A great number (ol creatrTe-
should be safegtnrded against this ovCf
instead of this single creature being pro-
tected Virtuous men quit the vicious -
do you, therefore, destroy the wicked crea-
ture.

Gantami replied

31. By IrjIJ/ng thn serpent, my ion, O
fowler, will not regain Ins life, nor do I see
(hat any other end will he attuned by Us
death therefore, do you, O foi/ler, set lht»
living serpent free.

The fowler said

32 Byldeslrnying Vritra, Indn pot the
best portion (of sacrificial offerings), and
by destroying a sacriHce Mahvdeva secured
his share of sacrificial ofTeriiigs do you,
therefore, kill this serpent forihwilli without
any misgivings whatsoever.

! Bbisbma said

33 Although repeatedly urged on by
t’ efowler for the destruction of the serpent,
the great Gautami did nor bend her mind
to that sinful deed.

34 Pamliilly fettered with the cord,
sighing a hiile and keeping up its eompo*
sure with great dilHculty, the serpent tiien
uttered these words slowly, m a human
voice.

The serpent said —

35 O foolish Ar)iinaka, what is my
fault 7 I have no will of my own, and anv
not independent I Death sent me on this
work.

36 By his order have I bitten this child,
and not out of any anger or opiiQii an my
part 1 herelore [if (here be any sm cn this,

O fowler, the sm is Ins

The fowler said —

37 If you have committed this evif,
urged thereto by anotfier, the sm is your
also as you are an instrument m the act.

38. As in the making of an earthen pot
tl e potter's [wheel and rod and other things
are all considered as causes, so are you,

O serpent. He who is guilty should be
killed by me. You, O serpent, are guilty ^
Indeed you conless it.

The serpent said —

39 As at] these, v<* , the porter’s wheeT,
rod,^^d other things, arc not independent
causes, sd notan independent cause I
, Therefore, this is no fault of mine, you
I should admit it.


AWU3IMSANA PAHVA


3


41. If yoii liold oUierwue, then these
ore to be considered as causes working' with
one another. For thus working tsitli one
other, a doubt springs up about their rela*
tion as cause and effect.

42. Such being the case, it is no fault of
mine, nor should I be killed on this account,
nor am 1 gudty of any sin ' Or, it you
think that (here is sin, the sm fies tn the
aggregate of causes.

The fowler said —

43. If you are neither the principal
cause nor the agent in this matter you are
still the cause of the death, rhetefare, I
think you should be killed.

44 If, O serpent, you think that when
an evil deed is done the doer is not impli>
caced therein, then there can be no cause
m this matter but having done this, you
should surely be killed. What more do
you think f * ^

The serpent said

45. Whether any prime cause exists or
rot. no effect is done without an (interme*
diate) act. Therefore causation being of
no importance in either case, my act as
the cause should be considered in full,

46 If, U fowler, you consider me truly,
to be (he cause then the sm of this act of
killing a living being rests on the shoulders
of another who led me to do this.

The fowler said

47> \You don’t deserve life, O foolish one.
why do you Itieii exchange so many words.
O wretched serpenlf You should be
killed by me. You have done a henious
crime by killing this infant,

The serpent said •—

48 O fowler, as the priests officiating
at a sacrifice do not gam the merit of the
act by offering oblations of clarified butter
to the fire, so should 1 be considered in
Itiis matter.

Bbishma continued •—

49 llie serpent directed by Death
having said this, Death himself appeared
there and addressing the serpent said.'^

Mntyn said

50. Guided by Kala, I, O serpent, sent
}ou on tins mission, and neither are you
nor am 1 the cause of this child's death.

51. As the clouds arc driven hither and
thither by the wmd, 1 am, O serpent,
moved by Kata.


52. All influences of Salltva, or Rajas,
or famas, originate from Kata as they
work It) all creatures,

S3 All creatures, mobile and immo-
bile, in heaven, or earth, are pervaded by
the tn/iueoce of Kala. The whole universe,

0 serpent, is permeated by this same
influence of Kala.

54. All acts m this world and all abs-
tentions, as also all their changes, are
owing to be influenced tsy Kala.

SS The Sun, Soma, Vishnu, Water,
Wind, the god of a hundred sacrifices.
Fire, Sky, Earth, Mitra {and Parjanaya,
Adm. and the Vasut, Rivers and Oceans,
all existent and non-existent objects, are
created and destroyed by Kala.

56 — ^57, Knowing this, why do you, O
serpent, consider me blameable 7 If lam
to be blamed for this, you arc also blame-
able.

The serpent said

55. I do not, O Mntyu, blame you, net
do I set you free from all blame, 1 only
say (hat f am directed and influenced by
you.

59. If Kala is to be blamed, or, it is net
for me (0 find the fault. We have no tight
to do so.

do As It IS my duty to absolve myself
from (his blame, so it is my duly to see'
that Mriiyu is not blamed.

Bbishisa caatinned ‘ —

bi Then the serpent, addressing
Arjunaka said, 'You have heard what
Mritju has said. Therefore, ic is not
proper for you to torment me, who am
innocent, by fettering me with this rope.

The fowler said —

62 I have heard, you, O serpent, as welf
as the words of Mntyu, but these, |0 ser-
pent, do not ‘et you free from all blame.

63. Mrltyu and you are the causes of
this child's death. I regard both of you
to be the cause and I do not call that to be
the cause which is not truly so.

64. Accursed be the wicked and venge-
ful Death that causes misery to the good '

1 sluii also kill you wrho are sinful and
engaged in sinful deeds.

Iffrityn said —

66 We both arc net free, but are depen-
dent on Kala, and are ordained to do our
appemted work. You wifl not blame us if
you do consider this matter thoroughly.


4


MAIIABIIARATA.


The fowler said •

66 If >ou boih, O serpent nnd Mntyu,
c]»pend on SCata, 1 am curious to know how
pleasure and anger ate caused.

Hntyn said:—

67—63. n>cryltiini; 1$ done under ihc
influence of Kala. I have said it before,
O fowler, that Kala is the cause of all and
therefore we both, acting under the influ>
ence of Knla, do our appointed work and,
therefore, O fowler, we two should not be
blamed byjou.

Bhisbma said •—

Op " Then KaU arrived there where
clhtcs were being discussed, and spoke thus
to the serpent and Mrilju and the fowler
Arjunaka assembled together,

Knla said

70. 'Neither Mntyii, nor this serpent,
tior I, O fowler, am guilty of the death ol
any creature We are merely the iinme*
diate causes of tlie event O Arjunaka,
the Karma of this child was the exciting
cause of our action in this matter.

7t, There was no oilier cause by which
tilts child met its death. It was killed by
the result of its own Karma

7;. It has met 'with death as the result
ei its pristine Karma. Its Karma has
been the root el its destruction We all
are subject to our respective Karma

73. Karma is a help to salvation as
sons are and Karma also expresses virtue
and vice in man Wc impell one another
even acts urge one another,

74 As men make from a lump of clay
whatever they wish to make, so do men
come by various results out of Karma.

75 As light and shadow are connected
with each other, so are men related to
Karma, through their own deeds.

pfi- XharefAT^. neither are ;voii. nor am
I, nor Mntyu, nor the serpent, nor this
old Brahmana lady, is the cause of this
child s death.

77, He himself is the cause here. Upon
Kala, O king, explaining the matter thus,
Gautami. convinced in her mind that men
suffer according to their actions, spiike thus
to Arjunaka.

Gautami said —

78 Neither Kala, nor Mntyu, nor the
serpent, is the cause here this child
has met with death as the result cf its own
Karma.


79 I loo have so acted that my son hi*
died L,et now Kala and Mntyu retire
from there, and do jou loo, O Arjunaka,
set this serpent free.

Bliislima continued

80. Tlien Kala .nnd Mntyu and the
serpent returned to tlicir respective places,
and Gauismi became consoled in mind as
also the fowler.

8r. Having heard all this O king, do
you forego all grief, and acquire peace of
mind! Men attain to heaven or hell as
the result of their own Karma.

6s. This evil hasi*neither been of your
own creation, nor of Duryodhana's! lhal
these king’s of Earth have all been killed, is
the work ol Kala.

Vaisbampayuna said —

63 Havi >g heard all this, the powerful
and pious Yuiintslhira became consoled in
mind, and again enquired as follows


CHAPTER If.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

« Continued,

Yudbistbira said — ,

t. O grandfather, O wisest of men O

f ou who are learned m all the scriptures,
have heardiihis great story, O foremo<t
of intelligent men I

3 I am desirous of again listening lo
the recital of some history full of religious
instruction, and you should satisfy me
3 O king, tell me if any householder
has ever succeeded m conquering Death
by the fpraciice of virtue ' Do you recite
this lo me in full.

Bbisbma said

4 This ancient history is narrated des*
cnbing tiie subject ol* Die conquest, 6y a
householder, of Death, by the practice of
j virtue.

S Tlie Prajapati Manu had a son, O
king, named Ikshwaku. That king, illus-
trious as the Sun, begat a hundred sons.

6. His tenth son, O Dharata was named '
Dashashwa, and this virtuous prince of
infallible prowess became the king of
Maliismati.

7 Dasliashwa's son, O king, was a pious
prince whose mind was continually devoted
to the practice of truth and charity and
devotiou.


ANUStMSANA PAi^VA.


5 ‘.


8. He was known by Uie name ol
Madirashwa and ru!ed tne Earth as her
master He was continually given to the
study o( the Vedas as also ol the science
of arms.

9 Madirashwa’s son was the king named
Dyutimat who was ended with great good
{onune and power and strength and energy
10. Dyutimat’s son was (he highly
devout and pious king who was celebrated
in all the worlds by the name of Suvira.
His soul was intent on religion and he
possessed riches like another Indra the
king of the gods.

It, Suvira too had a son who was inem*
cible in battle, and who was the best of
all warriors and known by the name of
Sudurjaya.

12 And Durjaya too, endued with a
body like that ol Indra, had a son who was
radiant with the effulgence of fire. He was
.thrjjtcftaiJni^.naqjad JXiK^wAdhAna who .was
one of the foremost of royal sages. ,

13 Indra used to pour ram profusely
in the kingdom of this king, who never fled
from the battlefield and was gifted with
valour like unto Indra liimsell.

14 The cities and the kingdom et this
king were filled with wealth and gems and
cattle and various sorts of gram. *

15 There was no miser in his kingdom
nor any person afilfcted with distress or
suffering Uom poverty Nor was there m his
kingdom any person who waa weak m body
or afUicte^ with disease.

t6. This king was very intelligent, mild
m speech, without envy, a master of his
pasiions, of a righteous soul, full of mercy.
Rifted with prowessi and not given to
boasting.

17. ffe celebrated sacrifices, and was
self'controlled and mtelligenti devoted
to Brahmanas and Truth. He never hu> '
miliated others, and was charitable, ai)d '
wel]<read in the Vedas and the Vedanta.

i 3 . Auspicious and s-scred and of cool
waters, the celestial stream Narmada, in
her own nature, O Bharata, courted liim.

19 He begot upon that river, a lotus
eyed daughter, named Sudarshana, prho
was, O king, gilted with great beauty.

ao. No woman. O Yudhislhira, hid
been born before, who was so very beauli*
ful as that exceheni lady the daughter of
Duryodharia.

SI, The god Aeni himself courted the
beautiful princess Sudarshma, and assum-
ing the shape of a flrahnuna, O king,
sooijht her hand from the king,


The king was reluctant lo give his
daui,ht%r in marriage to the Brahmana
who was pnof ^nd not of equal rank with
himself.

33 Thereupon Agni disappeared from
his great sacrifice. The king, grieved at
lieart, then addressed the Brahmanas,
saying,\_.

*4. What sm have 1 , ye excellent
Brahmanas, or you, have committed, that
Agni should disappear from this sacrifice,
as goo 4 done to wicked men vanishes from
their estimation.

3$ Indeed, we have committed a great
iniquity for which Agni has thus disap-
peared { Either you have commuted iho
sin. or I, Do you fully enquire into th«
matter,

36, Then hearing the king’s words, O
foremou prince of Bharata’s race, the
flrahm^njs, controlling speech, sought with

of fire.

The divine carrier of oblations,
efliigent as the autumnal Sun, appeared
before them, covering fiis self m glonect

refulgence.

aS. The great Agni then addressed
excellent Brahmanas, sayinf ;.— 1 seek
seff ^“S**^*^ Duryodhana for my own

39- At this, all those Brahmanas lOere
struck witl) surprise and tising on the
morro«v, they told the king what had been
I said b> fire-god.

3 ” Hearing the words of these Drahma-
vadins, wise king was detiglited

at heau, snd said, — Be It so t — Iheking
sought g tToon of the illustrious fire.god
as the marriage dower.*— Do you, O Agni,
bo P's.ased to remain always with us
here 1

3 r-“ 3 e De it so I — said the divine Agni
to iha^ king For this reason Agni has
always been present in the kingdom of
flfahisinati to tfiis day, and was seen by
Sahadeva in lus conquering ezpeduioQ to
the somh.

33“~36 Then the king gave lus
daog^er, dressed in new raiments and
decked wjib jewels, to the great god, and
Agni 100 accepted, according to Vedic
files, the princess Sudarshana as his bride,
as ho Accepts libations of clarified butter at
•*^**h^j Agni was well pleased with her

i*! beauty, grace, character, and
noutlily o( birth, and thought of begetting
wspnug upon her. And she soon gave
metn to a son by Agni, of the name of
Sudarshana.


6


MAItABIIARATA


37. Sndarsban'i, aho, was, as beautifol
as the full moon, and even in his childhood
lie acquired a knowledge of the supreme
and eternal Brahma.

3S. There was also a king named
Oghaval, who was the grandfather of
Nnga. He had a daughter named Ogha*
vati, and a son too, of the name of Ogha*
rallia born to him.

39 King Oghavat gave his daughter
Ogliavati, beautiful as a goddess, to the
learned Sudarshana, for wife.

40. Sudarshana, O king, feadtng the
domestic mode of life with Ogiiavati, used
to live in Kurukshetra with her. ^

41. This intelligent prince of fiery
energy took the vow, O lord, of conquering
Death by leading the life of a householder.

43. The son of Agni, O king, said to
Oghavati,>~Do you never act against (the
wishes ofj those wha seek our hospitality.

43 You should ungrudgingly welcome
the guests, even if you have to offer your
own body.

S, .44 O beautiful one, I always remember
this von, since for iiou$e*holders, there is
no higher virtue than hospitality to guests.

45 Do you always remember without
ever doubting it, if my words be any autho*
rity with you.

46. O sinless^ and blessed one, if you
have any faith 111 me, do you never dis«
regard a guest, whether 1 be at your side
or at a distance from you,

47. Oghavalt placing her clasped hands
on her forehead, replied, saying,— I shall
leave nothing undone of what you oider

48. Then, O king 'desiring to over-reach
Sudarshana, Mrityu began to watcli him
for finding out his short comings.

4Q. Once on a time, when (he son of
Agni went out fetch fuel from (he forest,*
a graceful Uralimans sought the hospitaliiy
of Oghavati with these words

50 O beautiful lady, if you have any
‘ aitli in the virtue of hospitality as laid
down for householders, (hen I would request
you to extend the rites of lospitality to
me to day.

51. Thus addressed by that Brahmana,

0 king, the illustrious princess welcomed
him according to the riles laid down in the
Vedas.

32 Having o^ered him a seat, and I
water to wash his feet, she enquired, say* '
'"g — What IS your business? What can

1 oiler you?


S3 The 6rahmana said to her, — My
business is with your body, O blessed one '
Do you act accordingly without any hesUa«
tion whatever.

' 54. If the duties prescribed for house-
holders be acceptable to you, do you, O
princess, satisfy me by offering up your
body to me.

55 Though tempted by* the princess
with offers of various^ other things, the
Bralimana, however, did not seek any
tiling else than the oHer of her own person.

56 Finding him determined, that lady ,
recollecting the directions given to her by

. her husband, but Riled with shame, said to
that cKcellent Brahmana,— Be it so.

57. Recollecting the words of her hus-
band who .was desirous of acquiring the
virtue of house-holders, she cheerfully
approached the twice-born Rishi.

58 Meanwhile, the son of Agni, having
coljected fuel, returned to Ins home.
Mntyu, with bis dreadful and inexorable
nature, was always by Ins side, as one
attends upon his devoted friend.

^9 When the son of PavaIca returned
(0 ins own asylum, he called out for
Oghavati by name, and repeatedly
claimed,— Where are you gone 7

60. But the chaste lady, devoted to her
husband, being then in the arms of that
Brahmana, gave no reply to her husband.

61. Indeed, considering herself sullied,
that chaste woman became speechless,
overcome with shame.

62. Sudarshana, addressing her again,
exclaimed,— Where can my chaste wife be ?
Where has she gone 7 Nothing can be
so very important to me than this.

63 Why does not that simple and truth-
ful lady, devoted to her husband, alas
repty as she used to do before with swee
smiles.

64 — 66 Then that'Bralimana, who was
within the hut thus replied to Sudarshana, —
Know, O son of Bre, that a Brkhmana guest
has arrived, and tI)ough*(empted by y our
wife with various other oBers of welcome,

I have. O best of Brahmaiias, desired only
her body and Ilhis fair lady is engaged m
welcoming me with due rites ' You can''do
whatever you think proper on this occasion.

67. Armed with the iron- club, death
pursued the Rishi at that moment, desirous
of bringing about the destruction of one
who would, he thought, deviate from his
promise.

68—69 Sudarshana was struck wiiIi
I wonder, but renouncing all, jealsusy and ,


ANUStfASAIfA PARVA.


7


anper by look, word, deed, or Iboiight, Mtd,
—Do you enjoy yourself, O Brahmanal
It IS a great pleasure to me ^ A house-
holder acquires the highest ment by
honouring a guest.

70 The learned say that to the house-
hoJder, there ts no iiiuher merit tl»an wtiat
comes from a guest leaving his house after
having been duly honoured by him

71. My l)/e, my wife and all my earflily
belongings, are all dedicated to the use of
my guests I This is the vow that I have
taken.

72. As I have trul^ made this statement,
by that truth, O Brahmana, I shaft acquire
the knowledge of Self.

73 — 74 O foremost of the virtuous, the
five elements, vi« , fire, atr, earth, water,
and sky, and the mind, the intellect and
the Soul, and lime and space {and the ten
organs of sense, are all in the bodies of
men, and always witness the good and evil
deeds of men. \

75 This truth I have spoken <0 day,
and let the gods bless me for it or destroy
me if 1 have spoken an untruth,

7(5 At (his O Bharata, there arose
from all aides, in’repeated echoes, a voice,
crjing.^lhis ts (rue, this is not false,

77—78. Then that Brahmana came out
of the hovel, and hke the wind nsiHg and
covering both Earth and sky, and making
the three worlds echo with Vedic recitations,
and calling that virtuous man by name,
and congratulating him, said —

79 O sinless one, I am Dharma 1 All
glory to you' 1 came here O truth-loving
one, to try you, and { am wetitpieascd with
you by knowing you to be virtuous
So You have controlled and conquered
Death who alway s has pursued you, seeking
your shortcomings.

Si. O best of men, no one m the three
worlds has (he power to insult, even with
looks this chaste lady devoted to her hus-
band, far teas to touch her body, ,

82. She has been saved from contami-
nation by your virtue and by her own chas-
til\. There can be nothing against what
this proud lady will tay.

83, This Drahmavadin, gifted With ass-
lerc penances, shall, (or tl e salvation ol the '
world, be changed into a powerful river,

34 And tO'i wi)J acqu re all the worlds
in this your bod), and because the science
of Yoga IS within her control this highly
blessed lady will (ol ow you with only half
her body, and with the oiher half will she
be crlebiated as the nver Oghaiail.


85 And you Will acquire With her all
the worlds that are acquired by penances.

86 You will acquire even in this mate-
rial body those eternal and everlasting
worlds from which none return.

87 You have conquered Death, and
acquired (fie highest happiness and by
your own power (ol mmd), attaining to the
speed of thought, you have transcended the
five efements

88 By thus following the duties of a
house holder, you have conquered 'your
passions, desires, and anger, and this
princess, O best of virtuous men, has, by
servifg you, conquered afHictioii, desire,
illuson, enmity and lassitude of mmd.

Bbishmasaid —

89 Ihen, ‘riding in a fine cliaiiot drawn
by a thousand white steeds, the glorious
Vasava opproached (hat Brahmana

90 Death and Soul, all the worlds, all
the eleme its, intellect, mmd, time, and
eilier fas also desire and anger, were a)i
conquered

9t Therefore, O best of men, do you
remember that a (0 householder (here is
no greater god than the guest.

22 The learned say that the blessings
of an honoured guest are more fruitful than
the merit of a hundred sacrifices.

92 Whenever a deserving guest seeks
the hospitality of a house holder and is
not respected by him, he takes away all l|ie
virtues of the latter giving 1 1 n his sms.

04 I have now recited to you my son,
Urn excellent story as to how Death was
conquered in days of yore by a house-
holder.

95 The recital ol this excellent story
gives glo^y. fame and longevity ine
man who seeks worldly prospertiy should
consider >t as powerful in removing all evil,

96 And, O Bharata, the learned man
who daily reciies Ihts story of the tile of
Sudarsliana acquires blessed regions.


CHAPTER fir.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued.

Yudhislitliira aaid: —

I. If, O prince, ,t is so very d /Tinill for
(he other three castes 10 acquire Drahmana-
hood, how then did the great \ isfiwa*
tnitra, O kn g. Ihcu^h a Ks* altija, acquire


8


mahagharata.


the status of a Grahmana T I desire to
know this, O sire ! fhereforet do you
truly describe tins matter to me.

3 O sire by virtue of his austerities
that powerful man destroyed a moment .
the hundred sons of the great Vasishlha. I
4. While under the influence of tre he
created numberless evil spirits and Rakaha*
sas of great vigour and fesctnbUag the
great destroyer Kata himself.

5 The great and learned family of
Kushika, containing hundreds of twice born
sages in it and highly spoken of by the
Brahmanas, was founded in this .world of
men by him.

6 Having been sought to be killed as
an animal in the great sicnflce of Amva>
nsha, Shunashepha of austere penances, the
son of Richika acquired his deliverance
through Vishwamilra.

7. Having pteaseef the gods at a sacri*
flee Harishchandra became a son of the
wise Vishwamitra.

8 For not having honoured their eld
est brother Devarat, the other flitv brothers
of his were imprecatedi and all of them
became ChandaUs.

9 When abandoned by his friends, and
hanging with his head downwards in the
lower regions. Tnsanku, the son of Ikshaku
was translated to heaven at the pleasure of
Vishwamiua.

10. Vishwamilra had a large tiver,
named Kaushtki, (hat was frequented by
celestial Rishis. This sacred and auspaci
ous river was frequented by the celestials and
twice-born Rishis.

It. For disturbing his devotions, the
famous celestial nymph Rambha, having
flne bracelets, was cursed and changed
into a reck.

ta.* From fear of Vishwamilra the glori-
ous Vasishtha, m days of )0re, binding
himself with creepers, threw himself down
into a river and again rose released from
his fetters.

13 On account <rf lh»s, that large and
sacfcd river became thenceforth famous by
the name of Vipasha.

14 — 15 He prayed to the glorious and
poweiful Indra who was pleased with him
and treed him from a curse Remain-
ing on the northern side of the sky. be
sheds his lustre Jfrom a position m the
midst of the seven twice born Rishis, and
Dhruva the son ol Ullanpada.

t6 These and many others are his (cats.
O descendmt of Kuru, my curiosity lias
been kindled In this respect, because they
were perfermed by a Ksnainya.


</. Therefore, O foremost orte of
Bharata's race do you refate this matter
to me truly* How without renouncing his
body and taking another body of flesh
could lie become a Brahmana?

*8 Do you, O sire, truly describe this
matter to me as you have described to me
the story of Matanga.

19 Matanga was born as a Chandala,
and could not acquire Brahmanahood, but
how Could this man acquire the status of
a Brahmana?


CHAPTER IV.

(ANUSHASANA PARVA) —
Continued,

Bhishma said

t« ''Listen truly in full, O son of Pritha,
how, in days ol yore, Vishwamitra acquired
the status of a Brahmana, as also ol a
Brahmana Rishil

3 There ivas ,'0 foremost of Bharata'a
descendants. In the family of Dharata, a
king named Ajamida, who celebrated many
sacriflcea and was the best of all virtuous
men.

3 His sen was the great king named
Jahnu Ganga was the daughter of this
great prince.

4 The far-famed and equally virtuous
Sindhudwipa was the son ol this prince.
From Sindhudwipa sprang the great royal
sage Valakashwa.

5 His son was named Vallabha who
was like a second Dharmal incarnate. Ills
son was Kushika who was itlusinous like
the thousand-eyed Indra.

d. Kushika's son was (he illustrious king
Gadhi who, being childless and wishing
to have a son bom to him, went (0 (he
forest,

7. While living there, a daughter wns
born to him. She *was called Satyavatl,
and she was peerless in beauty on Garth

8 The illustrious son of Chyavana,
known by the name of Richiks, of (he
family of Dhngu gifted with austere
penances, sought the hand of (his lady,

9 Thinking him to be poor, Gadli the
destroyer of I is enemies, d d not bestow
her In marriage upon the great Richika.

to But when the latter, thus dismissed,
was going away, the eTce'Ient king ad-
dressing him, said,— II you eats gWemem
marriage doner you will have my daughter

•syourwilet


AnU^llASANA PAnVA.


9


Eichika said j—

ri — IS. What dawer, O kln<r. shall I
e!Ier)ou{or the hand of jour davi(bler7
lei) me truly, without any hesitation
whatsoever’ — Gadhi latd, — O descendant
o{ Bhn;^i give me a thousand horses
quick'COufsing as the wind, and possessing
the color of moon beamsi and each having
one ear black.

Bhishma said —

13 — 14 llien that powerful son of
Chjavana nho was the foremost of Dhngu’s
family, besought the pod Varuna, the son '
of Aditt, who was the lord 0! all the waters.
O best of pods, I pray to you to give me
a thousand horses, all fleet fike the wind
and having compfexion as e^utgent as (he
moan’s, bur each having one ear bPack

15-16 The pod Vanina the son of Adili.
said Co (hat scion of Bhrigu’s race, — Be
jtsa! Whenever you witj seek, the horses
shall come As soon as Itichika lliought
of them, there came from the waters of
Canpa a thousand hig>i«born horseSf as
effulgent as the moon
\j Net far from Kanyakuvia, the sacred
banknf Gangs 11 st 11 faumns ain>npm^n
as Ashwatirtha on account of die appear-
ance of those horses,

tS Then Richika, that best of ascetics,
pleased in mind, pave (hose thousand ex-
cellent horses to Gadhi as (he marriage
B’ft.

ig KingGsdhi, stricken wiih wonder
and fearing to be cursed, pave his dsuphter,
adorned with jewels, to that son of Bhrtgu.

20. That foremost of twice-born Rishis
accepted her hand in marriage according
(0 due rices. The princes too was (well'
pleased at seeing herself (he wife of that
Brabmana.

2t. That foremost of twice-born Rishis,
O Bharata was well pleased with her con-
duct and expressed a detcre to grant her a
boon

33 The princess, O excellent king,
communicated tins to her mocher The
molber said to !)ie daughter that stood be-
fore her with down cast eyes, —You should,
O my daug) ter, secure a favour (or me
also from your Imsband That sage of
abstece penances is competent to grant s
boon to me —the boon, ott , of the birth of
a son to me,

24 Then, O king, returning speedily to
her husband Richika, the princess des-
cribed to him all that liad been wished for
by her mother.


Bickika said

35 by my favour, O blessed one, sli«
will Soon give birth to a son gifted with
every virtue I May your request be ful-
filled ’

36 Of you too shall be bom a powerful
and glorious son wlio, gifted with virtue,
shall perpetuate my race. Truly do 1 say
(tils (0 you

iy When you two sh\U bathe in jour
season, she shall embr,icr a pepul tree, and
I you, O excellent lady, shall embrace a fig
tree, and by so doing you shall have the
I fruiiion of yout desires.

28 O sweetlj -smiling lady, both she
and sou sHalf have to partake of these two
sacrmctal offerings (efiarui consecrated with
hymns, «nd (hen you shall get sons

29 Thereat, Satyavati, pleased at heart,
told her mother all that had been said by
Richika at also of (he two balls of eharu,

30. Then the mother, addressing her
daughter Saiysvatr, said -—O daughter, as
1 deserve greater respect from you than
your husband, do you obey my words.

3t Do yna give me the fkent, duly
eons-crated with liymns which vnuf liUS*f
band has given you, and yourieli Uka thB
one that has been intended for me.

$2 O swertly-smihng one of pure eha>
racter, if you have any reverence for my
word let us change the trees respectivefy
intended for us.

33. Every one wishes to possess an ex-
cellent and pure son. The illustrious R(-
chifca too must have acted ftrtm the same
motive M this matter as will appear in the
long run,

34 Therefore, O beautiful girf, my
heart IS bent upon your chart* and tree,
and you too should also try to secure an
exceUeni brother for yourself.

35 The mother and the daughter Sa«
lyavats fiaving acted thus, they both/ O
Yudhistiiira, became big wnh child.

36 Finding his wife quick with child,
that great Rishi, Che descendant of Bhrigu,
became pleased at heart, and addressing
her, said —

37 O excellent lady, you have not done
well in exchanging the chart* as will soon
be seen It is aho clear that you have
changed the trees

3S 1 lisd put the entire accumulated
enargy of Brahma in your eharn end
Kshairiya energy in the chatu cl year
mother.


mahabharata.


lO


39 I had so settled that you would erve
birth to a Brabmana whose virtues would
be famous throughout the three worlds, and
that she would give birth to an excellent
Kshatnya.

40—41 But now, O excellent lady, as
you have chan(,ed the order (of the eharu
so), }our mother give birth to an excellent
Brahmana and >ou too, O excellent lady,
will give birth to a Kshatriya of dreadful
deeds You have not done well, O lady,
by doing this out of afTeciion (or your
mother,

42. Hearing this O king, the excellent
lady Satyavati, filled with sorrow, dropped
upon the ground like a beautiful creeper
cut in two parts.

43—44 Regaining her senses and bow*
tng ,to her lord with head (bent), the
daughter of Gadlii said to her husband
that foremost me of Bhrigu’s race, — O
twice-born Rishi, O you who are foremost
amongst those versed in Brahma, have
mercy on me, >our wife, who is thus ap-
peasing you and so order that a Kshatriya
son may not be born to me,

45. Let my grandson be such a one as
will be famous for his dreadful feats if it be
your desire, but not my son, O Brahmana '
be you grant me this favour.

46 Be It so,— said tl at Rishi of austere
penances to his wife and then, O king, she
gave birth to a blessed son named Jama-
dagni,

47 The famous wife of Gad^loo gave
birth to the twice-born RisfiTVistiwamitfa
versed in the knowledge of Orahma, by
favour of that Ristn.

43 The highly pious Vishwamitra,
though a Kshainya, gamed llie dignity of
a Brahmana and became the^(ounder__o(^a
race of Brahmanas-

49 His sons became great present-
tors of many races of Urahmanas who
were given to austere penances, learncdTtn
the Vedas, andifounders of many cUiis.

50 53 The worshipful Madhuch-

chhands and the powerful Devrat, Akshina,
Shakuntt, Vabhrii, Kalapalha, the cele-
brated Yajnavalk)a, Slliuna of great vows,
Uluka, Mud^ala, and (he saxe Saindhs-
vayana (he illustrious Vslt.u]ai>gha and
the g'cat Rishi Galava, Ruchi, the cele-
brated Vajra. as also Salankayana,
1 iladhya and Narada, the one known as
Kurchamuklia. and Vahuli Mashala as
also Vakshogriva.

54— dl. Anghnka, Naikadrik. SI ilayu-
pa, bhiia, Suchi, Chakraka, Marutan-
tavya, Vaiaghna, Ashwalayana, and


Shyamayana, QArgya, and Javali, as also
Susfrruta, Kanshi bang<hrutya and Para
Paurava, and ranin, the great sage
Kaptla, larakayana Upagahana Asura-
yani, Margama, Hiranyahsha, Janghan,
Bhavravayani, and Suti Bibhoti, Sut*.
SurakSit, Aram, Naclnka, Champeya,
(Jjjayana, Havatantu, Vakanakha Sayana,
Yati, Ambhoruha, Amalsyashin, Shirishin,
Gardhavi Urijayoni, Hdapekshin, and the
great Rishi Naradin —these ascetics were
alt sons of Vishwamitra and were versed
in the knowledge of Brahma. O king
Yudliiahthira, the greatly austere and
pious Vishwamitra, although a iCshatnya,
became a Brahmana for Richika having
placed the energy of supreme Brahma (in
the eharu), O foremost prince of Bharata's
family t I have now described to you, in
full, the story of the birth of Vishwamitra
who svas gifted with the energy of (lie sun,
the moon, and the fire god
62. O best of kings, if you have any
doubt about any other subject, please let
me know it, so that I may remove it."


CHAPTER V,

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)— -
Centfnutd,

Yndhishthira said *—

I. "O you who know the truths of
religion, f wish to hear of the merits tA
religion, I wish to hear of the met us of
mercy,,and of the marks of devour’VneTI
Do you, O sire, describe them to me."

Bbishma said —

2 ’ Regarding it, this ancient legend,
the story of Vasava and (he great Shuka,
IS cited as an illustration.

3 in the dominion of the king of Kashi,

a fowler, having poisoned armws with him,
wrnt out of his'^llage on a hunting
vvpadv.w. w. vt«s.V. "

4 Desirous of getting meat, when in a
big forest m pursuit of jlie chase, he saw a
drove of antelopes near at hand, and shot
his arrow at one of them.

5 l^e arrow of (hat fowler of trresiible
arms, shot (or the desiruciion of the ante-
lope, missing its aim, pierced a powerful
(orest-lree

6 The tree, pierced with that arrow
covered with dreadlul poison wiiliercd
away, shedding its leaves and fru ts

7. llie tree having (Irus withered, a
panct which had bsed in afiotlowof its


ANUaHASANA PARVA.


It


runV ali Ins iiff, dtd not loave his nest frnt
of affection for (hat lordly tree.

8 Motionless starving, silent and
sorrowfiilj that gralef il and virtuous parrot
nUo withered away with the tree

9 The conqueror of Paka (Indra) was
filled witit wonder upon seeing (hat great
and generous bird thus uninfluenced by
misery or liappiness and possessing •extra«
ordinary resolution

to then Sakra thoirght -^How could
this bird come (o possess such humane and
generoos feelings which cannot be seen in
one of the lower animal creation T

II There is nothing wonderful in the
mailer, for all creatures are seen to show
kindly and generous feelings towards
Olliers.

13. Assuming then the shape of a Qrah-
mana, Shakra went on the Eartli and
addressing the bird, said

<3 OCiika, O best of birds, (he grand
daughter of Oaksha has become blessed
(by having jou as I er oSspiing)' (ask
you. wiiy do you not leave this withered
treef

>4 Thus aeeosied, the Shuka bowed to
him And thus replied ^Welcome to you
O king of the gods, 1 have recognised you
by (he fflent of my austere penances.

15 Well done, well donel—satd the
thousand eyed gad 1 lien the latter lauded
turn in hia mind, saying,— 0, haw wonder*
ful IS the knowledge which he possesses

16 Although tlie destroyer of Vata
knew that parrot to be of a greatly virtu-
ous character and meritorious in action, he
still enquired of liim about the reason of
lus love lor the tree

ly— iB Tins tree is withered and it is
without leaves and fruits and is unfit to be
the refuge of birds Wby do you then
ding to It? Ihis forest too IS vast and in
this wilderness there are numberless other

leaves and which you can choose freely
and to your heart's content.

19 O patient one, displaying proper
discrimination in your wisdom do you leave
this old tree that is dead and useless and
shorn of all its leaves and no longer capable
of any good.

BhUbma s&id •—

30 — it. Hearing these words of Shakra,
the virtuous Shuka, heaved a deep sigh,
and forrowfulty replied to him, saying,— -O
husband of Sachi, and chief of (he godt
the ordmaiKcs of (1>« geds should always


be obeyed Do you heatet the reason of
the (hfiig about which you have asked me.

32 Here, within this tree, was 1 born*
end here in this tree have all the good
traits of my character been developed,
and here in tins tree was I protected in my
infancy from the attacks of my enemies

35 O sintess one, why are you in your
kindness, interfering with the principle of
my conduct in lifet 1 am merciful and
devoutly intent on virtue, and firm in con*
duct


24 Kindliness of feeling is the highest
test of virtue amongst the good, and this
same merciful and humane feeling is the
source of eternal happiness to the virtuous

25 All the gods ask you ta remove their
doubts in religisn and for this reason,
O ford, you have been elected (heir king

26 — 57 You should not, O thousand-eyed
one, advise me now lo leave this tree for
go^ When it was capable of good, it
supported my life How can 1 leave it
now? Pleased with these well meant word$
of the parrot, the virtuous destroyer of
Paka, thus said’ to him —1 am pleased
with your humane and merciful disposition.

38 Do you ask a boon of me— At this,
thevnerciful parrot craved this boon of hint,
saying. — Let this tree revive.

39 Knowing the great attachment of
the parrot to that tree and great high cha-
racter, Indra, well pleased, caused the tree
to be quicky sprinkled over with nectar.

30 31. Then that tree became revived

and grand through the penances of the
parrot, and the fatter, too O great king, at
the end of his life acquired the companion-
ship of Shakra by vulue of that act of
mercy.

'1 33 Tliue, O king by communion and

I companionship with ihe pious, people ac-
quire all the objects of iheir desire even as
I the tree did through Us compamonihip with
I the patrol.”


CHAPTER VI

(ANUSHASANHCA PARVA).-
Confinurd,


Tndhiktbira lAid

I. ”01 Baertion and Desl^, tell me
O ieamej'sfre ‘who are verttoin all ihc
ocii^uies. '«** •» *


12


MAIIABltARATA


Bhifihma said •—

2. This ancient story of the eonversa*
tion of Vasishtha and Brahmant O Yu‘
dhistliira, explain tins matter.

_3 In days of yore the worshipful Va*
sishtha enquired of Brahman as to which
amonj' these UVQ,<Bie , the K arma __o { a
creature acquired in ihisjife or tliait ac
qiiired m pristine Uv^s'^and called Destiny),
IS the more powerful in shaping Ins life.

4, 1 hen, O king, the great god Brah-
it}an, who had originated frorn the pri>
meval lotus, answered him in these sweet
and rvell'reasoned pregnant words.

Brahmana said

5, Nothing springs into existence with-
out seed. Without seed, fruits do not grow.
From seeds originate other seeds. Hence
are fruits known (0 be sprung from seeds.

6, According to the good or bad seed
that the husbandman sows m his field,
lie reaps good or Siad fruits.

7, As unsown with seed, the soil,
though tilled, becomes (ruiiless, so, without
personal Exertion, Destiny is of no use.

8, One's own deeds are like the soil,
and Destiny is compared to ihe seed. 1 > e
harvest grows frorn the union of the soil
and seed,

9—10. It IS seen every day in the world
that the doer reaps the fruit of his good
and evil acts, that happiness results trom
good deeds, end pain is (he outcome of evil
ones, that acta, when done, alwa)s fructify,
and that, if not done, no Iriiit arises.

II. A man of (good) acts gains merits
with good fortune, while an idler loses Ins
estate, and reaps evil like the infusion of
alkaline matter injected into a wound.

ta By firm application, one acquires
beauty, fortune, and all sons oi riches
Everything can be obtained by Exer-
tion but nothing can be gamed through
Destiny only, by 3 mart who lacks personal
Exertion

13, One aUamsto heaven, and all the
objects of enjoyment, as also the fulfillment
of hif hearts desires, by well'apphed
personal Exertion.

14, All (he luminaries in the sky, all the
gods, the Nagas, and the Itaksliasas, as
also the Sun and the Moon and the Winds,
hAve acquired their high status by cvoln-
tion from man’a status, by dint of their
own acilon.

15 Riches, friends, prosperity coming
down from generation to Mcncration, as
also the sweets oi life, are d fheuit of attain-
mem by those who want Exedion.


16. The Bralimana acquires prosperity
by lioJy living, the Kshamya by prowess,
theVaishja by manly exertion, and the
Shudra by service.

17. The stingy, the Jimpotent, or the
idler do not acquire riches and other
objects of enjoyment. Nor are these ever
acquired by the man wlio is net active or
manly or devoted to the exercise oi feh*
y,io(is austerities.

tS Even he, the worshipful Vishnu,
who created the three worlds with the
Daityas and all tlie gods, even He is en»
gaged in austere penances in the heart of
the deep,

19 If one’s Karma bore no fruit, then
all actions would become fruitless, and
depending on Destiny men wuuld become
idUis.

20. He who, Without following the human
modes of action, follows Destiny only, acts
lit vain, like the woman who has an im*
potent husband.

2(. The Bpprehen«ton of good or evil
Mt (his world IS not so great i( Destiny be
unfavorable as his apprehension of (ha
same m ihe other world if Exertion be
waititog while here,

72 Man’s powers, if properly applied
only (oUuw his Destiny, but Destiny alone
cannot produce any good wheie Exertion
IS wanting.

23 When It is seen that even in the
celestial regions, the position of the gods
ihemselvesis unstable, t ow would the gods
matm«in their own posilion or that of others
mithom proper Karma.

24 Ihe gods do not alaajs approte
of the good actions of others in this world,
for. fearing their own defeat, they try to
thwart the acts of others.

i 25 there is a constant rivalry between
I the gods and the Rishis, and li they all
i have to go through iheir Ktrma, stili it
, can never be smd that there is no such
thing as Destiny, for it is tic latter tliat^
introduces all Karma.

36 How does Karma originate, if Des-
tiny IS the principal motive power of human
action? By this means, many virtues are
accumulated in the celestial regions.

27. One’s own sell is ins friend and hi3
enemy too, as also tlie witness of one's good
and avil deeds,

3S Good and evil appear through
Karma. Good and evil acts do notproduce
sufiicient results, ‘

2g Virtue Is the refuge of the gods, and 1
by virtue everything IS acquired. Destiny-


AMUaHASANA PAKva


thwarts not the man who h»s acquired
virtue and righteousness.

30. In days ol yore, Yayali. faUmg Irani
lus high position im liFaien, descended on
t) • Earth but was again restored to the
celestial regions by the ^goud deeds of his
pious grandsons.

31 The royal sage Pururavas, wetl
known as the descendant of Ila, attained
(a heaven through the intereeiston of the
Drahmanas.

3). Saudasa, the king of Kashala,
though digniFied by the performance of
Ashwsmedha and otnar sacrifices, came by
(lie status of a man-eating ftakshasa,
through the course ol a great Kishi.

33 Ashwatlhaman and Uama, though
bocfi warriors and sons of Ascetics, faded to
acquire heaven by virtue ol their own
actions in this world.

jf. Vast]. Ihoqgh he celebrated a hun-
dred sacnfices, like a second Vasava, was
sent to the nethermost regtons, for making
a single lalie statement.

35. Vail, the son ol Viroehans. virtuous
bound by hla promise, was sent to (he
regions under the Earth, by the prowess of
Vishnu.

3S> Was not Janameiaya. who feltowed
the foot-prints of Slukra, (or staying a
Ufshmana woman, checked and put down
by the godsf

37. Was not the twice-born Rishi Vai»
shatnpsyana too, who killed a Drahmana
III Ignorance, and was polluted by (he
slaughter of a child, put down by the
fcdst

33, III days of yore the royal sage Nriga
became changed into a Ijasrd. lie had
made of kine into the Urahniants at I
his great taertfice, but this did not help >
him.

S'). Tlie royal sage Dliundhumara was
pasiesied by decrepitude evtn while
engaged in celebrating Ins Sacrifices, and
1'iff.oirg all lt»e merits Ihpreuf hr fell
asietp at Girivraja,

<«. The Pandavas too regsmed iheir
toil k ny dom. of w) ich they had been de«
pint I i>jr ihe poarrful sons ol DhriU-
rati tra, rvoi (lirough tic in/lucncc eflhe
Fates, but by recourse of their own heroism.

4t. Ho (he ascetics of rigid vows, and
given la the practice of auitere penances,
denounce tt>eir Cunts by (h« help of any
supernatural power or only m (he esercise
ol thnr Own power aualned by Individual
^ts 7

\ 4S, If possessed by the wWrd. tfl (he
which IS isfred with difTico’iy in (his


u

worfdi IS soon lost to them. Destiny does
not help (I0 man (hat is fuJl of Spiritual
Ignorance and avarice,

43 feven as small fire, when fanned by |
the wirif}^ becomes highly powerful, so does
^***k'* '*'*’*'' helped by individual Exer-
tion, bex:ornci greatly patent.

44 As by the diminution of oil m the
lamp «t( hgi, I IS pul nut, so does the influ-
ence of Deatiny. by tire abatement 0/ one's
acts.

45 - Having obtained riches, and woman
' the enioyment* of this worfd, the

man aho is not hard working is unable to
them Jong, but the great man,

; cldigani in Exertion, can find riches buried
deep in [fje Eaith and watched over by the
i Fates.

I 4 d The good man who is prodigal is
sought by the gods for his good condoct,

I ihecelestial world being better than (hs
worfdof nien, but the house of the miser
though juij of iiches is looked upon by the
gods as ij,e house of the dead

4 ^ The man who does not exert himself I
contented in this world, nor can'
Uesiiny change the course of a man who
has gor,( HTong, There is no power inhe-
rent m Destiny. As the pupil follows lha
preceptor, so does one’s action, guided by
feilowa his own personal exertion
where one's own Exertion (a dispfayedi
; there o^ly Destiny shows us hand.

4 ® O best of ascreics, I have thus dei. ,
cnbed the merits of personal Exertion,
liaviiig BJwaj-5 known in llieir true sigmli-
cance.

49 Dy the Influence'ef^Deitmy, and by
’howiofr personal Exertion, do men attain

5 ^i’'rfr The combined hefp of Destiny
*■“ Ex jiiioT, becomes fruitful.”


CffAPTBR VJ7.

(AVUSIUSANIKA PARVA).—

Cenfinuid.

Ycdhigtliira Bsid

I. '*0 best el Bharata ’a family and th#
feremojt great men, t wish to know what
the fniits kre o( good deeds I Do you en-
f'ghten me.”

GIifi!]a!i laid

1 * '*1 shall leJl yej wVji yeu haveaskrtl.

I 0» yov O Yudl lithira, I itm to this which
I (orrst the »ecrsl kneafedge of the Rishia.


maiiabiiarata.


3. Listen to me *s I explain wliat the
lone coveted ends nre which befall men
after death The fruits of whatever actions
are performed by creatures in whatever
bodies or forms of existence, are reaped by
the doers while endued with similar bodies
In whitever stales creatures perforin Kood
or evil acts, they reap the fruits thereof in
similar states of succeeding lives No act
done with the help of the five organs of
sensual perception is ever lost.

^—7. The five sensual organs and the
immortal soul winch is the sixth, are its
witnesses One should devote Ins eye (to
the service ol others) one should devote
Ins heart (to the same), one should utter
sweet words, one should also follow and
worship (one's guest) This is the sacrifice
with five gifts He who offers good food to
the unknown, and tired traveller, fatigued
by a long journey, acquires great merit.

8. *1 hose who use the sacrificial platform

as their only bed, obtain palatial mansions
and beds (in subsequent births) He who
wears only rags and barks of trees for dress,
gets good apparel and ornaments ^

Q One possessed of penances and
having Ins soul on Yoga, gets veincles and
riding animals I he (f'lig who lies down
by the side of the sacrificial fire, acq tires
Vigor and valour.

le The man who casts off the enjoy,
ment of all delicacies, acquires prosperity
and he who abstains from animal food,
obtains children and cattle.

II. He who lies down with his head
I downwards, or who lives in water, or who
lives secluded and alone in the practice of
Brahmacliarja, acquires all the desired

I ends

12 He who gives shelter to a guest and
welcomes him with water to wash Ins feet as
also with food light and bed, acquires the
merits of the sacrifice with the five gifts

13 He who on the baltle.fietd, lays
himself down as a warrior on a warrior's
bed goes to those eternal regions where all
the objects of desire are fulfilled,

14 A man O Umg, acquires riches who
makes charitable gifts One gets obedi
once to one’s command by the vow of
silence all the enjoyments of life by practice
of austeniies, long life by Drnlimacharja,
and beauty, prosperity and immunity from
disease by abstaining from injury (o others

15 Ihose who live on fruits and roots
only, acquire Sovereignty, those who live on
only leaves ol trees acquire Residence m
heaven

16 A man, O king, is said to acquire
happiness, by abstention from food. By


eating herbs alone, one gets cows By
living on grass, one acquires the celestialt
regions

17. By Avoidng all intercourse with his
wife and making ablutions three times a
day and by inhaling the air only for pur«
poses of maintenance one acquires the merit
of a sacrifice Heaven is gained by the
practice of (ruth, and nobility of birth by
sacrifices.

18 The Brshmana of pure practices
who lives on water only, and performs the
Agnihotra conlinu-«lly, and recites the
Gsyatfi, acq iires a kingdom By abstain-
ing from food or by restricting it, one
acq nres residence in heaven

19 O king, by avoiding all but the
prescribed diet while celebrating sacrifices,
and by making pilgrimage for twelve
years, one acquires a place better than the
abodes reserved for heroes

20 By reading all the Vedas one is
imrnedialely freed from misery, and by
pr.(Ctising viriue in thought, one acquires
(he heavenly regions

I It. That man wlio shakes off the long,
j ing for happiness and material camforis—

I a (hirst that is difficult of conquest by the
foolish and winch does noLabate with (li e
' decline of physical vigour and whiCii cimgs^
(9 him like a dreadful disease,— IS abfe'to*
secure happiness

32 As the young calf is able to recog-
nise Its dam from among a, thousand cows,
so do the pristine deeds of a man follow
him.

33 As the flowers and fruits of a tree, .
unmoved by apparent influences never miss j
(heir proper season so does Karma done in \
a pnstme existence bring about Us fruits <
in proper time

34 With age, man's hair grows gray ,t

Ins teeth become loose, his eyes and ears |
100 become dim in action , but the only {
(lung (hat does not decline is his desire for t
enjoyments ,/

35—2$ Prajapaii is pleased with those,
deeds which please one's father, and the \
Earth IS pleased with those acts winch I
pleaseone's mother, and Brahma is pleased ]
with those acts which please one's mother, H
and Brahma is adored with those acts that {
please one’s preceptor. Virtue is honored |!
by him who honois (liese three. The acts f
of (hose who despise these three do not!
help them.

Vaishampayana said ■—

27 The princes of the line of Kuru
became filled with surprise upon listening
to this speech of Uhishma, All of them


ANU^itJlSANA PAr*VA.


<5


pleased in. mind and overpowered
wuli joy.

38 . As Manlras applied for (;»imng
vicco'y, or tlie performance of tlie Sboina
sacrifice made wulioui proper sifts, or obta-
tions poured oi> (lie fire witfiout proper
hymns, become fruitless and produce evil
results, so sin and evil results originate
from fdlseliood.

29 O prince, 1 have thus described to
you this doctrine of ll<e fruition of st>nd
and evil deeds, as recounted by the Rishts
of old. VVhal else do you wish to hear.*'


CHAPTER Vfll.’
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

CoMiiMued,

‘yndhishthira aaid —

I. "Who are deserving of adoration ?
Who are they to whom one may bowt Wlu>
are they. O Bharata, to whom you would
loiver your head? Who, again, aiethev
whom you hire t fetl me all this, O
prince.

a. What IS that upon which your mind
turn when afiliCUon overwtiefms yon
Do you describe (0 me what is beneficial
here, that is, in this region of Human
beings, as also hereafter.

Bhislima said

3 I like those twice born persons whose
highest wealth is Brahma, wliose heaven
IS ttieir knowledge of (he soul, and whose
penances are formed by their diligent study
of the Vedas.

4 My heart longs for those ii> whose
family persons young and old ddigenlly
bear the ancestral burthens without lan>
guishmg under them.

5 — 7 ' Brahmanas weihlrained inseveral
branches of knowledge, self controlled,
mild.speeched, conversanr wiih the scrip*
lures, well-behaved, possessed of the
knowledge ol Brahma, and righteous in
conduct, discourse in respecubfe assem*
bhes like flights of swans they in a voice
deep as the muttering of clouds give vent
to auspicious, sweet, escelleni, and well-
pronounced words, O Yudbishthira. Jn
the courts of monarchs, they spoke these
words fraught with fiappmess botli temporal
and spiritual, themselves being received with
honor and attention and served with tei*
poet by those kings.

8. Indeed, my heart longs after them
who endued w,th knowledge and all desir-
able attributes, and honoured by others.


listen fo such words when uttered m
assembf'cs or the courts of kings.

Q j^ly heart, O king, always yearns
after tpem who, for the satis^ctiou of
BrafimiX'^^r ^ Vudliisfithira, give to ttiem,
iritli fhat is wetl*cooked and

clean wholesome.

U IS easy to fight m battle, 'but not
so to m<*He a gift wuliout pride or vanity.

11. in this world, O Yudlnstliira, there
are ityndreds of brave men and heroes.
Willie counting them, he who is a hero m
gifts should be considered as superior.

12. O amiable one, if I had been even a

vulgar Brahinana ( would have considered
myself ^reat, not to speak of one

born in a good family, gifted with righte-
ousness conduct, and given to penances
and !ea>n»'^-

Iheretsno one, O son of Pandu,
la «.tiu *vo'f<fi 'vHo IS dearer to me than
you, (7 chief of Bharaia's frace, but Bra*
hmana* dearer to me than you.

1^, And since. O best of the Kurus, the
Brahtn*''**’ niuch dearer (0 me

than yi’h. It IS by (hat truth that I expect
10 those regions ol happinesa

which Have been gained by my tather
Shantahu.

' ta Neither my father, nor my grand*
fattier any one else connected with me
by bt^d, IS dearer.to me than the Brah*
manas.

10 I do not expect any fruit, small or
great, from my adoration of the Brah*
manas/

jy. On account of what I have done to
(he Bi'^Hmanas in thougtit, word, and
deed, } do not feet any pant now.

i8. People used to call me as one
devoted to tie Brahmanas Ihis address
always highly. To do good to

the Brahmanas 1$ the most sacred of all
sacred duties.

IQ I see many regions of beatitude
waitini? **'0 have respectfully fol*

towed the Brahmanas, Very soon shall 1
go to iH»»e regions for good, O son

2q In this world, O Yudhisl (hira, the
duties af women depend upon their hus-
bands, a woman, verily, the husband
IS the sod and he is the > ighest end (or
wbieh should try. As the I usband to
(he V>f^> *0 the Brahtneiias to

KshaU'yas*

21, It there be a Kshatnja hundred
sears ^Id and a good Orahenana child of
enly years, the latter should be con-
sidered as a father and the former as a


I6


MAIIABIURATA


son, for among the two, the Brahmana le :
superior.

ai A woman, m llie absence of brr
husband, takes his younger brother for her
lord , so the Earth, not having obtained
Brahmana, made the Kshatriya her ki tg
33 The Brahmanas stioiitd be pro>
tected hice sons and adored tike fathers
or preceptors Indeed O best of lie
Kurus, they served reverentially as people
wait with respect upon their sacrificial or
Homa hres.

24 The Brahmanas are gifted with
iimpl city and righteousness They are
Riven to truth They are always engaged
in the behalf ol all creatures. Vet when
angry they are like snakes of dreadful
venom They should, for these reasons, be
always waited upon and served with respect
and humility.

35 One should, O Vudhishtliira,
always fear these two, vte Energy and
Penances. Both these should be shirked
or kept at a distance.

36 The effects of both are quick There
IS this superiority, however of Penances
vt3 I that Brahmanas gifted with Penances
O king, can, if angry, kill the object of
their anger.

a; Even greatest Energy and Penances,
become neutralised if applied against a
Brahmana who has conquered anger If
the two,«>-that is, Energy and Penances —
be set against each other, then both ol
them Would be destroved Again when
Energy, is set against Penances, it is sure
to be destroyed without leaving a remnant
Penances applied against Energy cannot
be destroyed completely

a8 As the herdsman stick in hand
protects the herd so should the Kshatriya
always protect the Vedas and the Bra-
hmanas

39 The Kshatriya should protect all
pious Brahmanas as a father protects his
sons He should always look after the
houses of the Brahmanas for finding out
that the means of subsistence may not be
wanting ’

CHAPTER IX

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CeniiitutJ,

Tudhisthira said —

I *' O grandfather, O you of great
splendour, wl at do those men become who
Ihrougl) stupefaction of tntellect, do not


make gifts to Brahmanas after having gro*
mised to make those gifts 1

9 O foremost of all righteous persons,
do tel! me what the duties are in this
matter Indeed, what becomes the end of
those wicked men who do nOt give alter
having promised to give "

Bhishma'said *—

3 * file person who after having pro*

mised does not give be it I ttle or much,
has the motrofication to witness his hopes
Irustraeted like the hopes of a enunch about
children.

4 — S Whatever good acts such a person
does between the day of his birth and that
of his death, O Bharata whatever libations
he pours on the sacrificial fire, whatever
gifts he makes, O chief of Bharata's race,
and whatever penances he performs, all
becomes useless,

6 They who are conversant with the
scriptures hold this as their opinion, ar«
riving at It, O chief of the Bharatas, with
the help of a well ordered understanding.

7, Persons conversant with the scrip*
lures also opine that such a man may be
purified by giving away a thousand hones
with dark ears

8 Regard ng It is cited the old dis*
course between a jackal and an ape

9 Wl lie both were human bem^i, O
scorcher of enemies they were intimate
itieiids ..After death one of them became
a jackal and the other an ape,

10 Seeing the jackal one day eating an
animal carcase in the midst of a cremato*
num the ape, remembering his own and
Ins fnend s pristine birth as human beings,
addressed him, saying — •

11 Verily what dreadful sm did you
commit m your pristine birth on account of
which you are obliged in this birth to feed
in a crematorium upon such repulsive food
as tl e putrid carcase of an animal 7

13 Ihus addressed the jackal replied
to the ape, saying —Having promised to
^ive to a Brahmana I did not make him
the gift

13 It IS for that sin O ape that I have
fallen into this wretc) ed state of existence
It is for ti at reason that wlien hungry, I
am obliged to eat sucli food

Bhiehma said —

14 The jsckal then, O best of men,
addressed the monkey and said —What
sin did jou commit for which you have
become an ape


ANUbhASANA PARVA.


n


The apo said

15 In my former life I used to eat the
fruits beIont:!ng to Brahmanas. Hence
tiave I become an ape. Hence it is char
tliat one endued with intelligence and
learning should never take wb*l belongs
to Brahmanas. As one should abstain I
from this, one should avoir! also all quar* 1
re!$ ivilh Brahmanas. Having promised,
one should certainly make the promised
gift to them.

Bhishma said

t6 I heard this, O king, from my pre-
ceptor while he was discoursing upon lUe
subject of Brahmanas I heard this from
that pious person when he recounted the old
and sacred declarations on this topic,

17. 1 heard this from Krishna also, O
king, while he was discoursing, O son of
Pandu, upon Brahmanas.

iS. The property of a Brahmsna should
never be taken. Ihey should always be
let alone Poor, or miserly, or young m
years, they should never be dishonoured,
ig The Brahmanas have always taught
me (his Having promised to make them
B gift, the gift should be m^de A supe-
rior Brahmana should never be disappoint*
ed in Ills expectations,

80. A Brahmana. O king, in whom an
expectation has been raised, has, O king,
been said to be like a burning lire.

8<> That nan upon whom a Brahmana
sviih raised expectations looks, is Sure,
O king, to be reduced to ashes as b heap of
straw IS capable of being consumed by a
burning fire.

32 When the Brahmana, gratified by
the king, addresses the king in delightful
and afiectionale words, he becomes, O
Dharata, a source o[ great good to the king,
(or lie continues to live in the kingdom
like a physician fighting against various
Ills ol the body.

vy .Rifh d'iBss'hmnw iS-rfuiv-ilfiTrai*!^ 1
tain peacefully the sons and grandsons .
and animals and relatives and ministers '
and other oflicers and the city and the pro* '
Vinces of the king.

34. Such IS the energy of the 3rali-
Cnana, (ike to (hat of (he thousand-rayed
bun himself, on the Earth.

35 Therefore, O Vudhfshthira, if one
Withes to come by a respectable or lutpoy
order of being in his next birth, he should,
having made the promise to a Brahmana,
ceiisinly satisfy it by actually making the

gift (0 bim.


36 By making gifts to a Brahmana
one IS sure to acquire the highest heaven.
Verily, the making of gifts is the highest
of deeds that one can perform.

37 The gods and the departed manes
are supported by the gifts one makes to a
Brahmana. Hence one endued with know-
fedge should ever make gifts to the Ora*
hinanas,

28 O chief of the Bhararas, the Brab*
maita is considered as the highest object
to whom gifts should be made. At no
time should a Brahmana be received with*
out due adoration."

CHAPTER X.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)
Conhnutd.

YudMahthira said:—

1 "I wish to know, O royal sage,
whether any sin is committed by one who
from interested or disinterested friendship
delivers insnueiions to a person of a low
order of butli.

3. O grandfather, 1 wish to hear this
explained to me in full Ihe course of
duty IS highly subede. Men are ofcett seen
to be stupefied about that course.

BiliBhma said;—

3 About It, O king, t shall recite to you,
in due order, what 1 heard certain Rishfs
say in days of yore.

4 Instruction should not be given to
one who belongs to a low or degraded
caste. It IS said that the preceptor who
delivers instruction to such a person com*
mils great sin.

5 Listen to me, O chief of Dharatas,
as 1 recite to you, O Yudhishthira, this
incident which took place m days of
yore, O king, of the evil consequences of
.lopwcti'W' .irutatniwn ^ ji .hn*-Jviep
person fallen into distress.

6 The incident which I shall describe,
took place in the hermitage of certain twice*
born sages which stood on the auspicioue
breast of Himavat There, on the breast
of that king of mountains, was a sacred
asylum adorned with trees of various
kinds.

7. Overgrown also with various epeaes
of creepers and plants, it was the resort of
many animals and birds. Inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas also, it was highly
defightful on account of the woods that
floacred (here at trery season.


MAHABHARATA


iS


8 Many Brahmacliarms lived there, '
and many hermits Many Brahinanaa
lived there, who were highly blessed and I
who reseml led the sun or the fire m energy
and ef!ulgei ce

9 Ascetics of various kinds, observant

of various restraints and vows, as atso
others, O king of the Bharatas who had
goae through initiatory rnes and were frugal
in fare and possessed of purified souls.
Jived there ^

10 Large numbers of Vahkhilyas and
many who observed (he vow of Sanyasa
also, used to live thera. On account of
alt this, the hermitage'resounded with the
recitation of the Vedas and the sacred
hlantrbs uttered by its dwellers.

It. Once upon a time a Shudra endued
with mercy for all creatures, ventured to
come into that hermitage. Arrived at that
retreat, ke was duty honored, by aff (he
ascetics

ts Seemg those ascetics of diverse
classes wlio were endued with great energy,
that resembled the gods, and who were
observing diverse kinds of imtiation, O |
Dharata, (he Shudra became highly pleas*
de at heart.

13—14 Seeing everjtlung. O chief of
Ohardla's race, (he bhudra felt inclined
to devote himself to the practice of
penances. Touching the feet of tite head
of theordei,*0 Uharata, he said to him —
Through your favour, O foremost of twice*
bom persons, 1 wish (a learn (he duties of
religion. You should, O illustrious one,
desciibc to me those duties and intro-
duce me into a life of Renuucistion.

15 t am certainly inferior in colour. O
illustriaus one, for 1 am by caste a Shudra.
O best of men I 1 wish to wait upon and
serve you here De pleased wilbraewlio
humbly seek >our altclter.

TIio Kulapati said

fd It n i/npatsibh (hxtaSfiadrx shoald
lue here foilowinc the life of Uenuncia*
lion. If It pleases )ou, )0U may stay here
and, serve us

17 horsooih, by such service you shall
acquire rean) regions c( great iiappiness.

Bhialima said.—

(8 rfruj addressed by the asecdc, the
Shu Ira began to think in his cninda O
kiig.— How should I now act? | have
Riest reverence for those religious duties
w' ich lead to nent.

19 Let this, however, be Sriited, lhs(

I stisll do whst would be tor my behoof,
i'ra^rrd nt* to a laol |t-it was d itarl from


that hermitage, he made e het 0! the twigs
and leaves*©/ trees

so Erectirg aLo a sacrificial platform,
and making a fitlle room for his sleep, and
some plitforms for the use of the gods, he
began, O chief of the Bharatas, to lead a
fife governed by rigid observances and
vows and to practise penances, abstaining
entirely from speech.

St He began to perform sblutions
thrice a daj, observe other vows, make
sacrifices to the gods, pour libations on the
sacrificial fire, and adore and worship the
gods iirthis way.

*2— Governing all carnal desires,
living sparingly upon fruits and roots, go*
verning all his senses, he daily welcomed and
entettained all that came to Ins hermitage
as guests, offering them herbs and fruits
which giew in abundance around In this
way lie passed a very Fong lime in that
hermitage of his.

34 One day an ascetic came to that
Shudra 's As)him for making I is aqiiaint*
anee Tlie Sudra wefcomed and adored
(he Rishi with due rites, and pleased him
highly.

35 Possessed of great energy, and a
, et|,hieous soul that Rishi of rigid vows

conversed with Ins host on many agreeable
subjects and informed him of the place
wliencc he had come

36 In this wa>, O chief of the Bharatas,

that Rishi, O best of men, came into the
hermitage ©f the Shudra in numerable
I limes for seeing him,

I 37 On one of these occasions the Shudrs,

I O king, addressing the llishi, said,— I wish
to perform the rites .that are ordained for
' (he PiUis. Do you show me kindness m
this matter.

35 Very well — the Drahmana said m
reply to him, O king,

39. Then, purifjmg himself by a bath,
the t»l lidra brought water for the Rishi to
j wash h<s feet, and he also brought some
' Ktfsha grass, and vnIJ herbs and /runs,
aid * sacred lest, and (he seat ca ted
Vrtshi.

30 — 31 The Vfish* howestr, was placed
by the bhudra luwsriJs the south, wnh its
head turned to ihe west Seeing 0 ns and
knowiRC that it was against the erdmanre,
lh« Ki>hi addressed the Shixira, saying —
Place tlie Viisini with HS head lumn!
lowardi the r*sl. and having purified
yourtc (. do you s I stiih your face turned
towards the north —The Shudra did every*
ihine as the Rishi directed.


ANU51IASAMA PARVA


3?--35 Ef»i}ue<J with great mteftigencea
find practising rigI>teoU5ne55, the S>Hidra
received every direction> about (lie Sraddha,
9s Uid doKn tn the ordinance, from that
Rishi gilled with penance*, marking tlw
manner o( spreading the Kusha grass, and
placing the Arghyas, and as regards the
rite* to be observed in the matter of the
hbations to be pouted and the food to be
offered After the rites in honor of the
Pitns had been finished, the tlishr, was
sent aivay by the Shudra, nhereapon he
returned to his own abode After a long
time, the whole of which he passed prac*
lismg such penances and vows, the Shudra
ascetic died in those woods. On account
of the merit he acquired by those prac^'
tices the Shudra in his hext fife, was born
in the family of a great king, and tn tune
became possessed of great aplendaur.
ihe lw(c«-born Rishi also, when the time
came, paid his debt to Nature.

3d In his next life, O chief of Bharata’a
race, he was born jn the family of a priest
Thus those two, vt* , that Shudra who had
passed a life of penance* and that twice*
born Rishi who had out of kind icss givers
the former some instructions tn the matter
of the rites performed in honour of ibe
Pitns, became re*born, the one a* the son 1
of a royal race and the other as tire member ,
«f 8 priestly family. ,

37. Both of them began (0 grow »nd
both gained great knowledge in the usual
branches o( study. The Srahmana became
well versed 'in the Vedas as also in the
Atharvans.

38. The re-born Riihi gamed great
perfection in all sacrifices ordamed m Hie
Sutras, of the Vedanga which deals with
religious rites and observances, astrology
and astronomy. He (00k great pleasure in
rhe’Sankhya philosophy loo

Meanwhile, there born Shudra who
had becorne a prince, when his father the
king *died, performed his last nte*, and
alter he had punhed himself by performing
all the obsequial rites, he was installed by
the subjects ot his father as their king on
his paternal throne.

40 But soon after his own Installation
asking he installed the re born Kistu as
his priest Having made the Brahmana
bis priest, the king began to pass bis days
happily.

4(^42. He ruled Ins kingdom pioasty
and protected and maintained all his sob-
fects, Fvery day, however, the king, ace-
ing his priest on the occasion of receiving
benedictions from him as also of the perfor-
mance of religious and other sacred rites,
smiled or laughed loudly In this way, O


^9

kmff. llic re-born Shudra who had become »
king, Uughed at seeing his priest on num-
berless occasions.

43 The priest, marking that the king
atways smiled or faughad whenever he
happened to look at him, became angry,

44 On one occasion he met the king
m a place whcre'rhere was riobody present,
fie pleased the king by agreeable conver-
sation,

45 Taking advantage of' that moment,
O chief of Bharata’s race tlw priest ad-
dressed the king, saying, — O you of great
<otendour, I pray you.to grant me a single
boon.

I The king said *—

I 46 Of boons, O best of twice-bom
, persons, I am ready to grant sou a liun-
I clrcd, whtt do you say ithen of one only ?

[ rrofii the affection f have for ) ou and (he
{ reverence in whicli I hold you, there is no-
thing that I cannot give you

i The jjyiest aaid —

47 I wish to have only one boon, if, O
king. >011 have been pleased with me.
Rromi<e that you wodld tell me the truth,
instead of any untruth.

Bhisbmasaidt*-'

48 Thus addressed by the priest, O
Yudhisthira, (he king said (0 him— So be
(tl )f 2 know what you would ask me, I
sfiall certainly tell you truly If on the
other band, 1 do not know it, I shall not say
■nyihmg.

The 'priest said *—

49 Every d^y, on occasions of receiving
benedictions from me, when, again, f am
engaged tn the performance of religioua
rites, On your behalf, on occasions also of
the Homa and other rites of propitiation,
why do you laugh upon seeing m*?

59 Seeing you laugh at mean ail occa-
sions, rny mmd shrinks with shame, 1
have made you promise, O lung, lb4t you
would answer me truly. You should not
tell an untruth.

St There must be some grave reason
for your conduct. Your laughter cannot
be Causeless, I have great curiosity to
know the reason. Ua, you speak truly to

me.

The fcing^ Bald •—

52 While you have thus accosted me,
O twice born one f am bound to enlighten
you wen if th« matter b« one that should
net be given out to you 1 f must tell joii the


20


MAHA8IIARATA.


(ruth. Do you listen to me with rapt
attention, O twice>born one.

53. Listen, O foremost of twice*born
persons, to me as I give out to you what
took place (to us) in our pristine births. I
remember that birth. Do you listen to me
with concentrated mind.

54. In my former life I was a Shudra
engaged In the practice of severe penances.
You, O best of twice-born persons, were a
Hishi of austere penances.

55 O sinless one, pleased with me, and
moved by the desire of doing me good, you,

0 Brahmana, were pleased to give me
certain instructions about the rites I per*
formed in honor of my departed manes.

56. You Instructed me about the manner
0! spreading the Vrislii and the Kusha
blades and of oHering libations and meat
and other food, O foremost of ascetics. On
account of this transgression of yours you
are born as a priest.

Sy. I have taken birth as a king. O
foremost of Drahmanas. See the changes
that Time encompasses. You l>ave reaped
this fruit on account of jour having ins-
tructed me. •

38 It IS for this reason/ O Brahmana.
that 1 smile at seeing you O foremost of
twiee«born persons. I do not certainly
laugh at jou from desire of disregarding
you. You are my preceptor.

1 59 I am really very sorry at this
change of condition. My heart burns at
the thought I remember our former births,
hence do I laugh at seeing you,

60 Your austere penances were all
destroyed by the instrucnons jou gave me
Removing jour present office of priest, do
you try to regain a superior birth.

61. ' Do you exert so that you may not I

obtain m jour next life a birth meaner than 1
jour present one Take as much riches j
as you wish, O learned Orahmana, and I
purify your soul, O best of men, I

Bhishma contmn«d —

62. Dismissed by the king, the Brah-
mana made many gifts, CO persons of his
own own order, of riches and land and
villages.

63. He observed many rigid and severe
vows as laid down by the foremost of Brah-
msnas. He sojourned to many sacred
waters and made many gifts to Bcahinanas
in those places.

64 Making gifts of kine to persons of
the tnic* born order, his soul became
purifi'd and he succeeded m gaining a
knowledge of it. Going to that very


asylum where he had lived m his former
birth, he practised very severe penances.

65- As the result of all this, O foremost
of kings, that Brahmana gained the highest
success. He became an object of respect
with all the ascettes who lived in that
asylum.

< 56 . In this way, O best of kings, that
twice-born Rishi fell into great distress.
The Brahmana should, therefore, never give
instructions to Shudras.

67. Hence, O king, the Brahmana
should avoid delivering instructions to such
as are low-born) for it was by giving ins-
tructions to a low-born person a Brahmana
came to grief.

63 O best of kings, the Brahmana
should never desire to acqntre instruction
from or impart instruction to, a person who
belongs to the lowest order.

69 Brahmanas and ICshalrlyas and
Vaishyas, these three orders, are considered
as iwice-born. By delivering instruction
to these, a Brahmana does not commit any
sin.

70 Tliey, therefore, who are good,
should never discourse on any subject, for
giving any instruction, before p^sons of the
inferior caste. The course oi,^orality is
highly subtile and incapable of being un-
derstood by persons of uncleansed soul.

7t. It IS for this reason that ascetics
adopt the vow of silence, and, honored by
all, pass through initiation without speaking
a single word. For fear of saying what is
incorrect or what may oSend, ascetics never
utter a single word.

72. Even men who are righteous and
endued with every accomplishment, and
truth and simplicity of conduct, have been
known to commit grrat sin on account of
words spokati improperly,

73, Instruction should never be given

on anything to any person. If on account
of the instructions given, the instructed
jwmmu .ifjAi .sin .the

Brahmana wlio gave the tnstructien.

74 The wise man, therefore, who wishes
to acquire -nerit, slio ild always act with
wisdom That instruction winch is given
in exchange for money always sullies the
instructor.

75 Requested by ethers, one should
say only what IS correct after determining
It with the help of reflection. One should
give instruction m such a way that one may,
by C'ving It, acquire merit.

77. I have thus told joii everything
about instructions. Very oflcn persons


ANUSHASArfA PANVA


become plunged into great afflictions on ac*
count 01 giving instruction Hence it is
proper that one sfiould abstain iron giwng
instruciion lo oihers.”


CHAPTER XI.

• (ANUSHASANIKA PAftVA) —

Tadhisthira said •—

>. “ Tell me O grsndUfher, in what kind
oi man or woman, O chief of the Bharaias,
dors the goddess ot Prosperity always
live *’

EMshina said •—

3 . "About It, 1 shall describe to you
athat tonic place and what I have heard
Once on n time the princess Rukmini put
this question in the presence of Devaki'a
son.

3 Seeing the goddess of Protpenty,
shining with beauty and gifted with the hue
of the loiiii, the mother of PridyiimnM
I sving tl e emblem of Makara on his
banner, filled with euiiosiiy, said these
ssoids

A Who sre Ihon* beings whom you help
and whom jou serve f Who. again, are
tf ose whom )aii do not s«rse ? O you who
are desr to f im who is the ford of afl erea*
f tires, leflune this irufv, Q you whoaro
squal to a great Ristii m penances and
power.

•; Tl us Addressed by the princess, th*
go hires of Prospeiuy, wnU a lace beautiful
i ke thr moon, and, aciuatcd by grace in
O-e prrvnce of the drily haring <he
emblem of Giruds on ),f banner, said
U rsr wards in leply which sv«re sweet and
c) aimiog.

Shrcc ia!d —

6 O t Irssed lady, | alsiays hire with
fim who is ehqirni, ae|i»e, atientirero
I usiiirss, flee liam anger, Kiren to !!•«
ndaiation of tl e gods en tued with grass*
tude, has t is passions under complete
rrsuant, and is I gh mmded m evesy
thing.


honor, who arc distressed at every trifle,
and who alsvaj-s indulge m anger Nor do
I ever live with those who think m one svay
and act in a diflerent wa).

9 I never live also with him who neter
Wishes for any acquisition for himself, or
him who IS so blinded as to rest satisfied
with the lot in which he finds himself with*
out any exertion, or with those who are
contented with small gains.

10 I live with those who perform the
duties of their own order, or those who are
conversant with (he duties of virtue, or those
who are given to the Service of the aged, or
those who have their passions under res*
traint, or those that are gifted wuh purified
souls, or those who observe the virtue of
forgiveness, or those who are able and
prompt in action, or with such women as
are forgiving and self*con(rolled.

II. I live With those women also who
are sgiven lo truth and sincerity and who
adore the gods 1 do not live with (hose
women also who do not look after house*
liold furniture and provisions scattered all
around the house, and who always ulfkr
words against the wishes of their husbands.

tf } A!wa)S avoid those women whoare
fond of the hnuses of other people and who
have no modesty. On the other hand, t
live wnh those women who are devoted to
their husbands, who are blessed fn conduct,
and who are a>va>s adorned witherna*
menu and ivelf clad.

t3 1 alsrays'live with those women who
are irutf ful in words, who are handsome
and fovely tn appearance, who are blessed
arid who are gilted with all accomplish*
mrnts I always avoid such women who are
sinful and unclean or impure. w< o always
lick the cerneri of eheir mouths, wtio^iave
no pstience or firtuude, and wfo are fond
of ditpule and quarreling , who are mcfnlrnt
and sleepy and always inclined tol,e down.

I always live in conveyances am! the am*
msls that draj* llMrm. in maidens, fn orna*
ments and good dresses ir, sarti^rs in
cfowit charged wnh ram in ful) blown
lotuses and in tl oso ttais that covers tie
autumnal sky 1 lire in elephants, m tfe
cowpen in good seals and in lakes adorn*
vd will fuh blown fotuses.


UAIIABIMRATA


ptjnfjlnfr into Uifm for biOilnp er latiffy*
in{; i>>«ir Ihir5t. I live oho in
rirplianis. In IxiHi, in kinKlr on the (lirone,
amt in ^ooil men

lS I nlu^i) live in that hoiite in which
the mmaie pours (ibaliens on the onciilictal
fire and adore kine. nrahmsnas, and the
ftodt. 1 live in that house where at the
proper lime rflffinuj are made, to the
f;odi, ol flowers in course of worship.

TQ. I alwa)s live m such Orahmanae at
are t.iven to the study ol the Vedas, in
Ksha(ri)BS devoted to iht observance of
virtue, in Vaisli)as devoted to cultivation,
apd in Shiidns devoted to the tetvieeof
(he three upper caitei.

an I live, with a heart firm and iin* I
stiaken, in Narayana, m my embodied self I
In Him eaisls virtue, full and perfect, I
devotion to the Orahmanas, and the quality j
of Roodneas I

ai. Can 1 not say, O lady, (hat I do
not live in my embodied form T Fliat person
in whom 1 live in spirit increases m virtue
and lame and wealth and objccta of
desira."


CHAPTER XII.

(ANUSHASANIRA PARVA).—

CoitfiRircd.

Tudhislitliira said’—

I " Vou ‘hould, O kiojf, (ell me truly
which of the two, rit , man or woman,
gels the cresler pleasure from an act of
muon with each other. Kindly rensov#
my doubt about it.’'

Blfishma said —

a. lo illustrate this queftton, (he eld
discourse between Dhangaswana and
bhakra is cited m (his connexion.

3 In days of old there lived a king
name Uhan^aswana He was very pious
and was known as a royal sage He was,
however, childless O king, and, there
(ore, made a sacrifice from desire of getting
a son

4, The sacrifice which that powerful
king celebrated was the Agmsktuia, which
on account of the god *oi fire being alone
worshipped in it is always disldred by
Indra Yet ii is thesaenfice that it desired
by men wheri for the object of getting
children they seels (o purBy them^lves ol
their sins

S Learning that the king was desirous
of performing the Agnishtuta, the highly


blessed Wing of the go8« n* , Indri, begin
from that moment to look for the short*
comings ol that ro)«al sigeof well controtl*
cd aoul. *

6 Despite all his careful watch Indra,
howaver, O king, could not find any short*
comings on the psrt of the great king,
Someiinee after, one day, the king went on
a huniing*espcdition.

7. Saying to hinnelf,--Thit, Indecd,*if
an opportunity,— Indra stupefied the king.
The king went alone on hit horse con*
founded, because of (he king of the gods
having stupefied hit senses.

8 Slneken with hunger and thirst, ilie
king t confusion was so great that he could
fvot SCO the cardinal points Indeed,
stricken with thirst, he began to rove
about.

g He than sawn lake that was highly
beau'.dvd and was full e( transparent watsr.
Descending from his horse, and plunging
into (he lake, he made I is animal to drink.

to Tying his horse then, whose (hirst
had been saiitfied, to a tree, the king
plunged into the babe ogam for doing his
ahVjlions To his surprise he found that
he was meumorphosed by virtue of the
waters, mtoa woman

I It. Seeing himself thus changed m
respect ol sexnsell the king became filled
svtib shame. Wiih his senses and mind
cemplelely agKated he began to think thus
with his whole heart.

(7— (3 Alas, how shall I ride my
horseT How return to my cipitalT On
account of the Agnishtuta sacrifice 1 have
got a hundred sons all gifted with great
strength and all children of my own loins f
Alas, ihiM changed what si all I say to
them I What shall I say to my wives my
relatives and welbwishers, and my subjects
of (be city and the provinces T

t4 Rishts versed in the truths of duty
and religion and other matters say (hat
mildness and softness and susceptibility to
extreme agiiaium are the characierislics of
women, and that activity, hardness and
energy are the characterislics of men
Alas, my manliness is gone ! For why has
femininity possessed me? On account of
(his change of sex, how shall 1 succeed m
riding my horse again 7

16 Having thought thus the king, with
graat exertion, mounted his horse and
letuimed to his capital changed though he
had been into a woman.

17 Seeing that extraordinary change
biS sons and wives and seryanti, and Ins
subjects of the city and the provinces
were extreme^ amased.


PARVA


tS. Then addretslnff them aJI, ibat
royil sage, that foremosi of orators, iai3,—

1 liad gone out on a hunting e«pedttiont
accompanied by a large army. Losing all
knowledge of the cardinal points 1 entered
a thick and dreadful /oresL moved by the
fates. ^

19 In Khat terrible forest, 1 bccarne
very much thirsty and lest my tenses. I
then saw a beautiful lake abounding wttli
fowl of all sorts.

30—31. Pfungmg into (hat latte for
performing my ablutions, 1 was cbariged
into a woman '—Summoning then his wives
and counsellors, and all his sons by their
names, that best o( kings changed into a
svoman said to them these ivords 1 — Do
ye enjoy this kingdom happdy. About
myself, 1 shall go to the forest, ye sons.

23 . Having taid thus to his children,
the icing went to the forest. Arrived there,
she strived at a he^iitage intiabned by an
ascetic. ”

33— a4> By tliat ascetic die changed
monarch gave birth to a hundred sons.

1 'laking all those cl’lldren of hers, she

I went to where her former children were,
and addressing the latter, said, Ve arc the
children of my loins while I was a man
These are my children given bull) t« by me
tn this stale of change^ Sons, do you all
enjoy my kingdom together, like brothers
bom of the same patents.

g^— Thus commanded by their
parent, all the brothers, In a body, began
to enjoy the kingdom as their joint pwperiy
Seeing those children ol the king aU
jointly enjoying the kingdom es brothers
born of ttie same parents, the king of the
gods, filled wall anger, begaa to reflect, —
By transforming this royal sage into «
woman, I have, it'Bppears,.doiie him good I
instead of an injury. j

37 Saying this, the king of the gods, 1
Vi* , tndra of a hundred S3cnfice», aiuoimg 1
the form of a Drahmena, went to the capital
of the king and meeting all ilie children
succeeded in creating dissensions ansongsl
them.

s8. lie said to them,— Brothers never
remain at peace even wi en iliey are the
children of the same fatter 1 he sens of
the sage Kashyapa, ris . the gods and the
Asoras, lelloel with each other on account
of the sovereignty of (fe three woifds.

\ 39 As regards you princes, you arc the

children of the rojral sage fJhangaswana
rihcse others are the children «l an ascetic
fi he gods and the Asurss are children of
feven one common falher.


30. This ki'tgdom, your paternal pro-
perty IS being enyoyed by these children of
an ascetic,— with these words, Indra suc-
ceeded in creating disunion amongst them,
so that they very soon engaged in battle
and killed each other.

Jl, Hearing this, king Bhangaswana,
who was living as an ascetic woman, burn-
ing with grief and began to bewail. Ihe
king of the gods, vis , Indra, assuming the
form of a Brahmana, came where the ascetic
lady was living, and meeting her, said, — O
you having a beautiful face, with what grief
do you burn so that you are thus bewailing 7
Seeing the Brahmana, the lady lofd him m
a piteous tone.

33 Two hundred sens of mine, O twice-
born one, have been killed by lime, 1
was forrnerly a king, O learned Brahmana
and III that state had a hundred sons.

34 These were begotten by me after my
own form, O best of lwice>borii persons f
On one occasion I went on a hunting ex-
pedition. Stupefied, 1 travelled amidst a
thick forest.

35 Seeing at last a lake. 1 plunged iiiii*
It. Rising, O foremost of Brahmsnas, 1
found that 1 had become a woman. Rt**
turning 10 my capital 1 insiatJed my
sona in the kingdom and then left for the
forest.

36 Changed into a woman, t bore a
hundred sons to my husband who Is a
Kreat ascetic. All of them were born in

I Ihe ascetic’s retreat, 1 took them to the
I capital. ,

'37. My children, through the influence
of lime, fell out with each other, O iwice-
born one I Thus afflicted by Destiny, I
am bewailing,

38. ladra addressed him in these harsh
words. — In former days. O lady, you gave
me great psin, for you did perform a sacri-
fice that ts disliked by,Indra,

39 Indeed, though 1 was present, you
did not invoke me with honors. 1 am (hat
ladra, O you of wicked understanding 1 It
IS I with whom you sought hostilities.

40. Seeing Indra, the rc^ial sage fell at
his feel, touching them with I is head, and
said,— Be pleased vnlli me. O foremost of
gods. The sacrifice of which you speatc
was psrlormed tram a desire of offspring.

4 t. Vou should, therefore, pardon me.
Seemg the transforraed king prostrate > im-
sell thus to him, Indra became pleased with
him and and wished to give him a boon

41. \Vt ich of y our sons, O king, do you
wtsh, aloufd leviie, these whom you gave


'■4


MAftADIIARATA.


birth to as *i woman, or those who were be-
gotten by )ou as a man.

43 Joining tier hands, the ascetic lady«
answered |tndra, saying , •>•0 Vasava, let
tliose sons oi mine revive svlio were borne
by me as a woman.

44. Tilled with wonder at this reply,
Indra once more asiced the ladyg-^Why d«
you cherish less aflectian for tliose children
of thine who were be^^otten by you as a
man 7

45 Why is It that you love tnore those
children itiat were borne by yon m your
changed state 7 I wish to hear the reason
of this diflercnce m your love. Vou should
tell me everything.

The lady said s —

49 Ihe afTectioa that la cherished by a
woman is much greater than that which ts
cherished by a man fhercfore, O bliakra,

I wish those children to revive tlial were
borne by me as a worsan.

Bhishma said

4y. thus addressed, Indra became
highly pleased and said to her,— O trutliful
lady, let all your children come back into
lile.

48 Do you take anotlier boon, O fore-
most of kings, — whatever you liUe, O you ;
ol excellent vows Do you take from roe
whatever dignity you choose, that of wo-
man or of man.

The lady said —

I wish to remain a woman, O
Sakra In fact, I do not wish to become a
man, O Vasava — Hearing this answer,
Indra once more asked her, saying, —
Why IS It, O powerful One, that leaving
aside the dignity of manhood you seek for
tliat of womanhood 7 Ihus accosted that
foremost of kings transformed into a wo
man, answered, — In «*ual iritercOTMcTWie
pleasure that women enjoy is always much
greatjr *~lha n whatsis “enjoyed, by me_n
X b'erefore, O Sakfk^ 1 v^sIi~to continue a
woman.

52 O foremost of the gods, truly do I
say to you tliat 1 derive greater pleasure
in my present state of womanhood “ I am
quite content with tins st 3 ie~of womanhood
that I now have Do you leave me now, O
king ol lieaven.

53 Hearing these words ol hers, the
lord of the gods answered — So be it —
and bidding herfarewetl, went to heaven.
Thus O king it is known that woman
derives much greater pleasure than men
under the circumstances you iiave asked."


CHAPTER XIII.

(ANUSHASANA PARVA) —

Conttnued

Yndhishthira said

t. "What should a man do in order to 1
pass happily through this and the otlier '
world How, indeed, should one act 7
What practices should one follow with this {
view 7 ”

BWili7a& laid

3 "One should avoid the three deed^ )
which arejdone with the body, the four which f
are done with words, jibe three which are |
done with the mind, and the ten roads of t
action.

3 The ihree deeds which are done with I
the body and should be wholly avoided are f
the denruction of the lives of other crea- I
lures, theft or^nisappropnation of others' f
properties and the enjoyment of of other '
people’s wives.

4 *1 tie four acts which are done with!
words, O king and which should never be |
done or even thought of, are evil ]conversa- I
tion, harsh words, giving other people's 1
faults and falsehood.

5 Coveting the possessions of others ,
doing harm to others, and disbelief m the I
Vedas, are the three deeds done with the j
mind whicli should always be avoided ^

6 Hence, one should never do any evil I
deed in speech, body, or mind By doing [
good and evil deeds, one is sure to enjoy j
or Ireap the just consequences thereof. J
Nothing can be more certain than this."


CHAPTER XIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAJ.t-
Co/iXiHtr«i.

Tudhisthira said:—

I "O son of the River Ganga, you have
heard all the names of the oLrd of the uni-
verse Tell us, O grandfather, all the
names that are applied, O powerful one, to
Him who IS called islia and Shambhu
J Tell us all those names which are
applied to Him who is called Vabhru or
vast, Him who has the universe for Ins
form. Him who is the illustrious Lord of all
the gods and the Asuras, who is called
Shankara and who has an •rigm that is
unmanifest. Tell us also of the power of
Mahadeva,"


A«Ua*WS\MA PARVA 2^


BWshm said'—

3 I am quiie incompetent In recite the
\ irtues o( the tnt-lity intelligent Mahadevs.
III. prevades a 1 tlnnt;* 1 1 tl>e universe and
yet IS not seen anywhere

4 tie Is the creator of Brahman,
Vuhno, and Indra, and he « their ford.
Al) the cods, from Ouhmai) to the Pislta*
clias, adore him.

5. He H above both PraVnil and Pm»
rnsha U is of Him that Rishis, cnnvetsanl
with Yoga and possessmc a knowledj^e o(
all subjects ttimk and rennet

6 Ha IS indestriictihle and Snpreme

Brahma He is hotli existent and iinn>
existent. both Nature and bonl

by His energy, He created therefrom the
universal lord of creatures, via , Brahman.

7 Who IS there, who is competent to
recount the virlnrs of that god of ends, wlio
IS cdicd with supreme Inieliigence f Man
It sill j'ct (0 conceptiofi, birth, decrepitude,
and litaili

S B'lnc t’ich, what man hire me can
iiiiiierstsiid U'laval Only Naray •><»'*, O
son, ilial holder of the cnncli th« discus,
and the mace can comprehend Mahadeva
9 He gified with Itnawlrdge He is
the foreinost < f atl fienifis in q’latiiies ffe
It Vch III hecaiite he prevades (he ii'u
verse He is irresisiihte G'fied niili
sDintiul vision He is possessed of eiipieme
I lerviy He sees all ilnn^s wiiU the eye of
Y.ii,fl

to On account of his devotion to the
illustrious Kudra who 11 fe pleased, O
Bi ar-aia, Ki ihe herimiage of Vadari by
penances, dial the great Knshna has
succeeded iii overwheliniU)' (he entire
universe |

tl O lung of Knit'S, it IS ihroiich Ma- I
liestuvara of celesliat vision (li-it Vasiideva 1
Ims got die q Mhliy of liuversal scree- |
ableness —an H^reeableiiesa which is much
greater than riclies !

•X lior a full thousand s'ears this
M-idhava praciised die austerest penances
and at last surceeded in pleading ll e
dlimrioiis and Ikiqi* tiv ng Shiva (hat
lord of all the mobile and the (mmobije
universe

13 In every new cycle has Krishna
pleased Mahadeva In every cycle has
Mahadeva been pleased with the great
devotion of the great Krialma

t4 Han who llmselt is above all
decay, saw the power of tl e great Malia-

deva that unginal cause of (he univese,

the occasion of lus penances m the

4


' retreat of Vadan undergone for getting a
son

15 I do not, O Bharata see anv one
»Im«« tnperior to Afahadexa Only Kiishnt
Is pomppieiit lo explain the names of that
Kod of gods fully and without crealing itie
desire of hearing more

16 Tim mighty-armed one of Yadu't
race IS atone competent to tell the qualities
of tfie iflutlriout SI iva Verily, O I ing,
Onty fie IS able to desciibe fully the power
of tfie Supreme god,

VftUbampayana eaid •—

tj. llaM ig said these words, the 'dliis«
tfKMis Uhishnia, the grandfather of tho
Kurus, a tdressing Vasudeva, said if c
fofloivr'tg words Jescrtbing (he f^teatness ol
Bhava, O kmg.

Bhisbma said

iS You are (he Lord of all (he g ids and
l»e Asnras You are ilfiistrinus You are
Vishiiu becaiisi' you pervade (he endr^

I Diverse You si eutd tle'cribe those siib*
)»cis connecied wiili Shiva of universal form
^ about xvincli Vudhisiliira has asl ed me
I 19 In d^ys of yore the Rislii landiii,
j onvinated from Brahinan recited in Brali'
m-n s res. ion **”*1 I'efore B'aliman lilmseff
(he (hoitsand names of Afahadevs

ig Do you reeire those names before
this ass'inhla^e ol Itisins having aseelieisn)
lor (heir wealth obsirvant ol high vows,
pos'essed nl self control, and numbering
ilie (sUnd boin Krishna among them, may
hear you

31 Do you discourse the high blessed^
ness of Him who is immutable, who is
always cheerful and happy, who is Hotn,
who IS the universal Protector, xvlio is
Creator of the universe, and who is called
Mundin and Kaparddin,

VasuflcYa said:—

23 The very gods with Indra, and the
Grandfatler Brahman numbering among
them, and the great Rishis also, cannot
understand the course of Mahadeva's deeds
truly arid full.

23 Even He IS the end w1 ich allrlglile*
00s people gam. The very Adicyas who
are y. died wuh subtile sight, are unable 10
see his abode How then can one wl o is
merely a man succeed in comprehending
Himr

24 I shall, therefore, truly recount ip
you some only of (he qualities of that illus*
(rto'is killer of Asuras, who Is comideted at
the Lord of all sacrifices and Vows,


26


MASlABltAHATA.


VaiBhsmpayana said

35 naM><j> said lliese words, ll>c illus*
tttous Vasudcva be);ati Ins discourse ttie
quahlies of (he Maliadevn iiiUed null
llie lu}>liesl iiuelli{’eiice, aller liasinC pun-

tied liimseli b> luuclnnt' water.

Vasudeva said •—

36 Heat, {oreTWcsi of Brafimanas,
and >ou Yudliisilnra also, O sire, a»d bear
)ou too, O Uivcf's son ilie names winch
Bie applied tu ICapAiddin.

27, Hear, }e, how in days of jore. I
gdined a so difficult to |;et, for the

sake of S 1 iani\a Verily, in those days
was the illnstnous ^od seen by ine oit
account of Vot'a*abstraction.

3 $. After twelve years I ad passed from
the time when Pradyumna, (he son of
Itukmini, who is Rifled with great intelh*
gence, killed liie Asura Shainvara in days
ofynre, iny wife J,<mvavaii addii sed me
2^—30 Indeetj, seeiug Piadyumna and
Chatudeslina and oilier sons bom of ttuk>
mini, JaiiivaVAti, desirous of a son, said
these words to me, O Yudlnsilura,—

30 Grant me, O you of utidecaySng
glory, a liiton. son, the foremost of power*
iul tnen, possessed of the most lovely fea*
lures sinless Ai>d like your seif. And O.
let there be no delay on your part m grant*
liig tins prayer of niiiie ' |

31. ihere is nothing in the three worlds
winch you cannot acquire ' U perpelnator
of Yadu's race, you can create other worlds
if only you wish’ Observing a vow for
twelve years and piirifyii g yourself, yon
hadat worshipped llie Lord uf all creatures
(vis , Malmdeva), and then begotten
upon Ituhiniiii (lie sons th,<t she has got
horn you vis, Charudeslina and Suchaiu
and Chaiuvesha and Yashodhana and
Clidinshraias and Ciiaruyashas and Pra*
dyuinna and Slianibhu.

34 O killer of Madhii do you grant me
a son like those of great prowess whom you
have begotten upon Itukiiiini.

35 'Ihtis addressed by (he princess, I
replied to her having slender waist — Let
ni« have your pei mission, O queen! 1
shall certainly obey your coinmand.

37 — 40 She answeied me, saying, — Go,
and acquire success and •prosperityj' Let
Urahinana and Shiva and Kashyapa, the
Kivers, those gods who preside over the
mind, the soil, all deciduous herbs, tliose
Clicahai'dds who are considered Jas bearers
ol ill* libations poured in sacrifices, the
Kishis, Earth, the Oceans, lire sacrificial
presents, those syllables which are uttered
for coinpleting tlie.cadsnces of Sanans,


the Kikshas, the Pilris, (lie Planeis. iKe
wives of the gods, the ceiesiul tiidiJeiis, the
celestial iiiolhers, the gie.it cycles, kine,
Ciundrainas, bavitri Agnf, bavitil, the
ktiowfedgr of the. Vedas, the seasons, lie
year, die Kshanas, the Lavas, the Miihur*
(as, the Niiiieshas, and the Yugas in suc-
cession, protect you, O Yadava, and keep
you 111 I appiness, wlierever you may hre
Lei no danger uverl,ike you on your way,
and let no caielessiiess be dime, O sinless
one. >

41—43. 'J lius blessed by her, f took her
leave, bidding farewell to the daughter of
the prince of aioiikeys. Kepairiiig diem to
(he presence ol that loreim'St of men, via >
iny father, of my moilirr, of the kin,;, and
of Ahuka, i informed (hem of what the
daughter uf the kiiq* uf die Vidyadlisras,
m great misery, had said to me Uidding
them farewell with a sorrowful fieart, I then
went to Gada and to Kama uf great power.

43 1 hesp two gladly addiessej me,

saying,— Let your penances multiply with-
out any liinderancs,

44. Having got (he permission of all of
then), 1 thought uf C^ruda. He forthwith
came to me ami lonW me to Himavat. Ar-
rived at Himavai, 1 sent linn away.

45 1 here, on that foremost of moun-
tains, 1 saw many wondeiful spectacles I
saw an excellent, wunderful, and .igrceable
hciimiage fur die practice of penances.

46 Ihat channing retreat was die
property of the great Upamanyu who was
a descendant of Vyaglirapada. that re*
treat is spoken highly of and respected by
the gods and the Gandharvas and seemed
to be Cuvered with Vedic beauty.

47—49, It was adorned with Dhavas
ana Katubhas and ICtdamkas and cocoas
with Kuruvakas and KTUk.<s and J^mvos
and PamUs, with banians and Vaiui>ak.<s
and Vntsanabhas and Vilwas, with baralas
and Kapitdias and Piy alas and bhalas and
Palmyras, witli Vadaris and Ingudis and
Punnagas and Ashokas and Amras and
Kovidaras and ChampaltHS and PanaslMS,
and WKti various other trees having fiuiis
and fiuweis And that retreat was alio
decked Willi the Straight stems of the
Sapienta.

50, Iruly, that asylum was adorned
with vanows other sorts ol trees and wth
various kinds of fnnls lorining the food of
vaiious kinds of birds. Heaps of
were thrown in proper places all around,
which enhanced the beauty of the scene.

51. ft was full of Rurus and apes and
tigers and lions and leopards, deer ol
various species and peacocks and cats
and snakes.


MAtlABliARATA.


2S


from Mahadeva the power betoni'ing to all
ttie gods and enjoyed it for ten millions of
years-

73 He who was the foremost of all lits
sons, and who was known by the of

Mandara, succeeded, through the boon he
had got from Maliadeva, in figliting Siiakra
for a million of years

74. The terrible disc»s>]nf Vishnu and
the thunderbolt of Indra were both unable
10 make the least impression, O Keshava,
in days of yore, upon the body of that great
source of universal misery.

75 1 he discus whicli you carry, O sin-
less one, was giveri 10 you by Mahadeva
after lie had killed a Daitya who, proud of
his strength, used to live withm the waters

76 1 hat discus, elTulgent as hre, was
created by the great god havnig the butt
for lus emblem Wonderful and irresisti-
ble in energy, it was given to you by that
illustrious god.

77. On account of ils blazing energy
It was incapable of being looked at by any
person except the holder of Pmaka It
was, tlierefore, that Bhava named it Sudar-
shanam,

78 From that time it passed by the
name of Sudarshanam in all the worlds
Uven that weapon, O K«s>iava, failed to
make the least impresnon on the body of
Hiranyakashipu's son Mandara, who ap-
peared like all evil pUnet in the three
worlds.

79 Hundreds of Chakras like yon and
thiinderboUs like that of blukra, could not
inl1icC_5 scraich on ihe body of that evil
pTaiiel v'hed wuli great might * who had
acquired a boon from iMahadeva

So Afllieied by the mighty Mandara,
the gods fought hard against him and hts
coinpaiiioMS, all of whom had got boons
from Mahadeva.

St. Pleased with another Danava
named Vidy iilprabha, Maliadcva granted
to him the sovereignty of Ihe (liree worlds
'Ihai Danavi remained the king of
the three worlds for a hundred thousand
years

Si And Mahadeva said to turn —You
will become one of my ailendsnCs —Indeed
the powerful l-ord furtfier conferred upon
him the bonii of a hundred millions of
childieii Ihe Unborn Lord of alt crea-
tures further gave llie Danava the region
knoan as Kushadwipa for his kinidom
bj Another great Asura, named ‘'hsia*
tnaUha, was created by Uraliman I --r •
Inin IreJ years he poured on the sactlficid
fire th' d«sh of his own body.


84. Pleased with such penances Shan*
kara said 10 him,— What can I do for you,
— SI atamiikha replied, saying, — O you the
most wonderful, let me have the power of
creating 'new creatures and animals

85 Give also to me, O foremost of all
gods cverUsling power — thus addressed
by linn, the powerful lord said to liim, — bo
be It.

86 Concentrating his mind in Yoga,
the Self create Braliman, in days of yore,
made a sacrifice for three hundred years,
with the object of getling children.

87. Mahadeva granted linn a thousand
sons having qiialificaiions prnportionaie to
the merits of the sac ifice rnrsoolh. )Oil
know O Kri»hna, ihc Lord of Yoga, Imn
who 1$, who IS sung by tlie gods.

83 (he (Itsfii known by the name of
Yaynavalkya is exceedinglv virtuous By
worshipping Mahadeva he has gained gteat
fame

80 The great ascetic who is Parashara's
son, vif , Vy "sa bent on Yog* hat become
famous by worsl ippmg Shanksra

po Ihe VahkliiJyas were on a former
occasion dishonuied by Maghavai f* lied
with anger at lhi>, tl ey pleased the illustii-
ous Uudra

91. lhai lord of the universe, that fore-
most one of all the gods, thus pleased by
the Vahkhityas, said to them —Ye sliali
succeed by your penances in creating *
bird which will rob Indra of the Atnhrosia.

91 All (he waters disappeared through
It ranger of Mai^deva on a former peca-
Sion Ihe t,od» pleated 1 im hy celebranng
M Sacilfice called ')apiak-p*la, and cained,
(lironch his fav ur ctl er waters lo fliw I'HO
the worlds Verily, wlicn the tl rre eyed
t.od, became pleased, water once more ap*
peared in the world

93 Ihe wile of Atri, who was well read
lit the Vedas forsOOK her hiishand >■>
anger and said — \ sNiwM no lonj,er hi*
under tfiai ascetic

9t Having said these words, shesot’gl t
the protection ol Matiadeva Ihrough
fev of her hiislnnit Atri, she pas»rd
thiee bundled yeais, abstaining from all
food

95, And all this lime she slept ro
wooden clubs for pleasing Bhava. Ihe
great gnd lliefi appeared belore her and
then emitingly addressed her, say iiig,— You
will htve a son.

96 And you will have that son will " it

the hefpsii a liusban t, SI nply' |liroiit.h the
favour vl Kudra Ior»v>tl* that son, hoin
in the family of lii» lather, sImII becom*


30


maiiabiiarata.


rivers or in caves or on tnoiinlavn*breasts,
or III atirines and oilier places of (be kind,
we pass our time m the praciice of penan-
ces and the recitation of sacred Mantras,
Sfiiva being; our hitjbest refuge Without
pleasing the boon giving SlhaiiO of unde
Caying glory, — him wlio Is, who has three
ejBS —whence, O child, *can one gel food
prepared with milk and good dresses and
Ollier objects of enjojmenl in ihe world t
Du you devote yourself whule-iiundedfy, O
d*ar son, to Shankara,

125—126 Through his favour, O child,
you are sure to obtain all such objects of
wishes — Hearing those words of my
mother, O destroyer of enemies, that day,

1 joined my hands in respect and bowing
to her, said — O mother, wlio is this Mafia-
deva? How can one please hint 7 '

127 Where does that god live? How
may lie be seen? With what does he be-
come pleased? What also is the form of
Sliarva 7 How may one succeed in know-
ing him? If pleased, will he, O mother,
appear before me 7

n8. After I had said these words, O
Krishna, to my mother, she, filled with pa-,
rental aflcclion, smelt my head, O Govioda,
her eyes bethed in tears.

tap Genily^palting^y.body, O des-
troyer of iMadliu, tny mother, adopting a
tone of_ gr eat humihiy, addressed"Tne~in
tlietotr^ing'^rds, O best of the gods.

My mother said

130, It IS diflicutc for persons of impure
souls to know Mahadeva these men are
incapable of bearing him in their hearts or
uudeotanding film at all they cannot
retain him in their minds, lliey cannot
seise him nor can they see him

131 Wise men say that tus forms are
manifold Many arc the places >11 whicli
lie lives. Many are the forms of his
Grace.

132 Who IS there who can undeistand
tn full all the exceUent deeds of tsha. or of
all the furins that tie iias assumed in days
of yore 7

133 Who cm describe how Sharva
sports and how he becomes pleased T
Mslieshwara of universal form fives in the
iiearls of all creatures.

134 While ascetics discoursed on the
.nuspicioiis and excellent deeds of l»liana, I
liave heard from them I ow, moved by
mercy towards his worshippers, fie grants
them a sight of Ins body

13s Pur showing a favour to the nrah-
maims, tlie dwellers of heaven tiave reeiied
for their information the various forms


which were assumed by Mahadeva in days
of yore. You have asked me about these.
1 shalPrecite them to you, O son.

My mother said:—

136 Bhava assumes (he forms of Brah«
mail and Visliiui and the king of the gods
oftheRudras lh»* Adilyas, and the Ash*
wins , and of tliose gods called Vishwe-
devas.

* 37 * He assumes the forms also of men
and women, of Pretas and Pisliachas of
Kira*as and Shavaras, and of all aqmtic
animifs I hat illustrious god assumes the
forms of also those Shavaras who live in the
woods and fprests

138 He assumes the forms of tortoises
and fishes and couchs He assumes the
forms of those corals which are used as
ornaments by men.

139 He assumes the forms of also
Yakshas and R^kshasas and Snakes, of
Daityas and Danavas 1 he illustrious god
assumes the forms of all creatures too which
live in holes

140. He assumes tlie forms of tigers
and lions and deer, of wolves and be>irs
and birds of owls and of jackals as well,

(41 He assumes the forms of swans
I and crows and peacocks of cliaineleuns
I and lisirds and storks Ho assumes the
I forms of cranes and vultures and Chakra*

: vakas.

142 He assumes the forms of Chasas

and of mountains also O son, M-«l sdeva
assumes the forms of kine and elephants
and horses and camels and asses ■

143 He assumes the forms of also
goats and pards and various other ani-
mals Dhava assumes the forms of various
kinds of birds of beiutiful plumage,

144 It IS Mahadeva who assumes the
form of the banyasin bearing the Danda
(emblem of ineudicaucy), and also of the
king wuh the Chlialra and the Hralunau
wiilt the c-<lah.<sli He sometimes be-
comes SIX faced and somelinies beemnes
multifaced He someinnes assumes forms
having three eyes and forms having many
heads.

(45 And he someiimes assmres forms
havii g many millions of legs and forms
having numberless stomachs and faces,
and forms gifted with numberless arms and
numberless sides. He sometimes appeals
surrounded by numberless spirits and
gliosis.

146 He assumes the forms of Risins
and Gsndliarvas, and of bidJliat and
Charanas He assumes a form winch U


ANUiHASWA PARVA.


will.

t) It ^ii.l adorned willi a ball-moon on «'«
ureliead

147. Ad»reJ will. v»..o..l.ymn! ..llcrrd
..ll? ,.r.ou5 k.,.d. «f .oicc ...d »do.=d
.111. vsnoin it..ura' fraiiiil'l will, o.c.i-
moms, be wbo n sometiines cdlied aiiarwa,
i tbe D-stroyer of all creatures m the
iiuwcrse, and it is upon him, again, that
lU creatures rest as on ibeir common
basis.

143. Mah»devs5slhe soul of all ctea-
lures. He pervades all lbin>fs He is the !
speaker ol all siibiects He lives every,
where and should be known as living m
the beans of all creatures in the universe.

140 He knows tlic desire ol every
worshipper of Ins. He becomes aeqnainl-
ed wilh llie object with winch one pays
Inin adorations Oo yon. Iben. seek the
protection of that king ol llie gods.

IS>. He sometimes rejoices, and some-
times b'C imes ir no. and lomeiiiues inters
IhesylUble Hun with a very loud noise
lie soiiifimies aunt bitnseU with ibe disc is.
sometiinei wuh «'>« trident, someumes with
the inaee.snnetnnes with the heavy imiUets.
soin'‘liin*s with the scimitar, and sometimes
with the battle

151. He ass lines llie form of Shesha
wliu keeps lip thewirld on Ins head He
has snakes for Ins belt, and his ears are
decked wiili ear-rings made of snakes
biukes form aU» the sacred thread he
wears. An elephant asm is hts upper
garment.

ISJ He someiimes IsiibUs and some-
times sings and som»liines dances •"•.►'t
brauiifully. Siurroimded by .mmherless
spnitsand ghoiis, lie sometimes plays on
musical insitumeiiis Vaiuus ate the
' tnsiniments up in which lie pUyi. and
sweet the sounds they yield.

153 He sonieiimei wanders, sometimes


c.lt. : .o.n.l..n.> di.po!!, t.i™i.ll ■" Voea

Yoga ol others.

156 He may be seen
pUtlormorin the sacrificial '

midst of the cowpen or in ‘''e '* * ‘

may not again be seen Here. He may be
seen as a boy or as an old man.

IC7 He sports with the daiighters and

has the horixon lor h» dress. He has
terrible eyes.

i<8 He Is fair, he is darkish, he is
I »S» *»*= , of the color of


1 pale, hi


causes oUieti
Bssum'S the (
sometimes of
tunes utters s»
t^t rndii
he


He


isd


.Tke'and he is 'red. He has eyes larg.

.Vid tetrible. He has empty space for his
coveiiiig and he covers all llimgs.

,50 Who IS there that can

birth.


11.

Uumeots. lie IS • .. I ,

1- >"■"=

...alM.ondli.l... 10 . 1 ., "'.“‘i...

D.....od >o„...ii 10

opoo I"'". , XV di

fllyaur wi.l'.' w'il b..r I'UOi I

O Uesltoyer ol V


■nd he some-


1 wuh dreadful fierceness,
loudly. Iciglilening
yes. He smnelime*


all creaiiires wuh
lo'iiutimei yawns as he ple.ses

155 He sometimes r.eiies sacred M....-
tfas and sometimes becomes ibe god ol
Ihove Mantras which are recited, lie
aomel.mes practises p-'iances and Some
limes becomes the K»d for whose adoratwn

tUove penances are practised

mUn cJl*


d,.«..d ... I

nothing else lor ns object.

,6, I. I''k- d'“«,”k.rr

i'"‘o,»:;..r,d >»..i p->'t ,rr;.'

"“!« Mi.r Ik.t I p.'’'-l

years, hsmi: O" »>* ^


MAfMetfARArA.


22

wortliipped Malindevi (or a full tliausaiicl
divine ye irs

167—163. After tlm. llie powerful Miha»
f dev« tlie Lord of 'll! the universe became
propitiateil witli me Dc.'urniM of dete^
ininiii^ whether I was st)l«ly'<!«vijl^~lViriin
ouly.’lie'appe^rred befo e me m ihe'Torm "of
SlMitra stirroiiiideil by all the is As the
celebriteii Shiltra he liad 1 Ihxisand eyes
on his body nnd was armed with the timn*
derbnit.

169 Aiul he rofle on an elephant which
wis entirely white, with eyes red, ears
folded, the temporal juice IrieWmi; down
Ins cheeUs, wi|ii trnnSc cnniracted, dreadful
to look at, and havniv' four tuslts. Indeed
ftdint; on sncfi in elephsni, the illusirioiis
kmir of the ijiiil, seem-il to shine with his
eneruy. With a beiiiiifiil crown on lits
iiesd and adirned with ^'arlands round his
neck and bracelets round his arrns, he
came where I was

171. A white umbrella was lield over
his head. And lie wis served by miny
Apsaras, and ininy Gandharvis sandhis
praise.

17a. Addressinc me he said — O fore*
most of twice btrns, I have been pleased
witli you Be|{ of me whatever boon you
wish

173—174 ffearinr these words of
Shalcra I was not uUdieneJ O IvrisUna.
1 answered the him* of the t; >ds m these
words,— I d I MoC wish any bo m from you.
or from any other i;oJ O amiable deity, I
tell you truly that it is Ntahadeva only from
whom I may ask for boons,

175 true It IS O Shaqra true are those
words tint I say 1 1 you No other words
are at ah aareeable to me except those
about Maheshwara

176 Commanded by that Lord of alf
creatures I am ready In became a worm or
a tree with many branches If not acquired
through the favour of Maliadeva’s boons
1 would not accept the very sovereignty of

i the three worlds.

177. I may be born among the very
. Shwapakas but I will still be devoted to the
feet of tiara' Wuhoiit, again, being de*
voted to ttiat Lord of all creatures, I would
not like to be born in the palace of Indra
himself.

178 If a person has no devotion to that
Lord of the universe,— tfiat Master of the
gods and the Asiiras — In-, misery wil! not
terminate even if from want of food he has
to live upon only air and water.

179 Those persons who do not like to
live even a moment without thinkiRg of
Mahadeva's feet, have no necessity of other


subjecte friuzhf with other kinds of mofa«
lay and righteousness.

l3-» W leu the unrighteous or sinful
cycle c»ia-4, one sh ml I never pass a
msmeitt wuli'Uit devoting his heart upon
Mabadeva One wlio has drunk the am-
brosia of (he d-votum to flara. be-
comes freed from the fear of the world.

rSt. One, who has not acquired the fa*
vour of Mahadeva can never succeed to
devote hnnself to M ihadeva for a sinele
dav or for half a day or for a moment or for
* Kshana or for a Lava.

1S2 Ordered by Mahadeva I sliall
clieerfidiy become a worm or an insect, but
i do not desire for even the sovereignly of
the three worlds if bestowed by you, O
Sakra.

183. At the word of Hara I would
become even a dog. In fact, that is iii)
higliest wish. ){ not given by Maliesinvar t,
I would not have the severeignlv oi the
very gods,

184 I do not wish to have tins celestial
douiMion I do not desire to have the so
vereignly of the gods I do not wish to
have the region of Orahman, Indeed id)
not wish to have that eaimciion of iiidividiid
existence winch is called Liberaiion -uid
winch IS a complete oneness with Ur.<hina.
U«it f want to become the slave of ffara.

185. As long as that Lord of all crea*
lure-, the illustrious Maheslia witli crmvii
on his head and body white like tie lunar
divc. does not become pleased will) me,
so long shslt I cheerfully bear all those
miseries consequent upon a hundred re*
peiitiiMis of decrepitude, death and birtli,
which embodied beings come by.

^ t86 What persons in the universe can

acquire tranquillity without pleasing Jludra
who ts freed from decrepitude and death,
who IS effulgent like the bun, the Moon, or
the Fire, who is the root or onijinat cause of
everything real and unreal in the three
worlds, and who exists as llie one indivisibleT

iS/. If on account of any faults, I cone
by re-biiths I shall, in tliose new births,
devote myself solely to Dhava.

Indra said:—

188 What are your grounds for the
existence of a Supreme Being or for His
being (lie cause of all causes 7

Upamanyn said —

1S9 I beg boons from flim whom
Bralimavadms have described as exisient
and non-extslent, manifest andu nmaiiifesl,
eternal or immutable, One and many.


ANUttfASAffA PARVA,


33


19'> I bion? from Him who is

witliout and inuldle and end,

who c< Ktiiiwicdtfe ntiJ Power, w>k» is
iiiconceivible and wlia is tlie Supreme
Soul.

l9t, t pray for boons from Hnn whence
is all Power who has I'ot been produced by
any one, who is imimitahle, and who,
fhouf;h him«c!f noi sprijn** from any seed,
is the seed of all things in the universe.

tg*. I pray for boons from Hint who is
above ()'« quality of narltness who ts
LUzmt; Effnli'ence, who is the essence of
aft penances, who is above all our faculties
and winch we may devote fur tlie purpose
of comprehending him, and by knowing
(vliom every one becomes liberated front
i;ne( or sorrow.

193 1 adore him, O Purandara, who is

conversant wiili the creation of all elements
and the lliouijhts of all living creatures, 'and
wiiu IS the otit!in4it cause of tlie existence or
creation of all creatures, who it omni«
present, and who lus the power to give
evir>lhing.

tgt— 195 I pray (or boons from Him
who cinniit be compreheii<led by afginnent,
who IS the objri.f of the baiuhya and the
Yoga systems nf philosophy, ,ind who is
above all (lungs, and whom all persons
conversant with the topics of enquiry,
adore, ( pray for bvuni from Hun. O iMu*
ghavat, will) is the soul of Nf.iL*havHt Inin*
self, wliu IS satd to be the God of the gods,
and wno ts the Aiasier of all creatures

igd I pray for boons from llim who {(
was lliat first ere ited Urahm.in, that crea*
lor of uH the worlds, Imviiig fitted Cther
(with Ills energy) and called into being (he
primeval egg

107. Who else than thai Supreme Lord
could have created Pire, Water, Wind,
naiih, Space, Mind, and (lie principle of
Greatness.

ti)8 Sell me, O Shakra. whci else than
StitVd could create Mmd, L/,«lers(«Mdlit^.

•f ir^.'ll.B-vdililr^-^ieilWlKSTnib 'hU; "rfVirses’-

Wlio IS there liiKlier iiian btnvaT

199 } he wire say ihat the Grandfallier

Itiui.nian is the C’Cutof of tins universe.
{{raliiiMii however, k<»c his great puwer
and pruvpriily by w 'rshipping and gtalify*
ing Maliadeva, that G d uf gud*.

Scio. I hat C'rat power, wl ich rs rrr lliat
llhi^tiious Uni'g who created niNlitwau,
V and Kiidra, was dcitved from

Itlafiadeva i clime win is iheie wIms is
superior to the bupreine Loidf

311. Who rise than |l>at Coil of gods

> ran brslow upi n ihe sons of Dm loedslnp

i.t.d power lud^n g by (he snscicsgiity


and the power of oppressing given to
the foremost of the Daiiyas and the
DartiVds ?

loj Ihe cardinal points, Time, the
*31111, all liiminuLis bodies, planets, wind.
Wuter, and (lie stars and constellatiuiis,—
are all from Mahadeva. 1 ell ns who is^tiie
higher than the Supreme Lord t

203 Wlio else IS iherr, than Mahadeva,
in tlie creation of Sacrifice and the desiruc*
lion of rnpnral Who else than Mahadeva
has groide^ (lie enemies, coinmt' inlo con*
tact with the Uaicyas and the DaiuvasT
30 |. Whatmecessity, O Purandara, is
there of giving, vent to, tail talks full of so«
pliisiiy when 1 see you of a thousand eyes,
O best of the gods,

305. You tvlio are ‘adated by S'ddhaa
and Gandharvas and (he deities and the
Itishis f O best of llie Kiishticas, aff this is
due to the favour of that God uf gods, vie ,
Maharleva.

io6 Know, O Kesfiava, that this alf,
consisting uf animate and nmnimaie ciea<
lion With he.iveii and otlier unseen creation,
which a>e >» sliese woihis, and whiclt has
the all pervading Lord for its soul, has
emanated from Atatieshwara and hat been
created lor enjoyment of tlie individual
suul.

307. tn (he woildt that are known by
the names of Uhu, Ulmva, Swah, and
Malia, in the midst of the muunivms of
Lol(*l>V». i<> the islands, in the mountains
of Merii. tn alt things whicli produce hap*
piness, and in the lieaits of ^11 cresfiirev,
O illnsltious Maghaval, lives Mahadeva,
as lield by persons CunveiSant wiili all
the topics of enquiry,

30S If, O Shakra, the gods and the
Asuras Could see any other piwerfnl Ueing
than Bhava, would nut both of them, espe-
ciallyithe former when opposed and rp*
pressed by the latter, have eouglit tbs pro*
teciion of (list Uting T

309 In all battles of the gods, the Yak*
slias. the Uragas, and Ihe llakshasas,
which end in muiusi desiiuction, it is Bhava
wIk» gives ti> those hIiO meet with dts*
tiuction puwtr beritliig ihcir position and
acts.

3^0. Tell me. who «Ue than Mahesliwara
IS there (nr cnnlerinig boons upon, and vnee
inoie tvking D.ein away Inin Anil) aka
and Stnikra and D.mduhhi and Mahisht
ansi .mai y luisniuvi of V.ksl.as and
VaU and Itaksl.^sas and the Nitata*
kavacliail

att. Was not the seminal fuid el Ma*
ladera, diet .Matter of LcUi the gvds ami


5


34


r^AHADIIAnATA.


t^e AsiirAS, pnure^ as a libation upon the
fire ? From lliat seed originated a moun-
tain of gold Wiio else is there whose
seed can be said to be possessed of
such power.

212. Who else m this world Is described
as having the horizon only for his dress?
W'10 else can be said to be a celibate with
vital seed drawn up? Who else is there
who has half his body occupied by his dear
wife Who else is there who has been able
to subjugate Cupid?

213 lell me, O Indra, what other
Being possesses that high region of
supreme happiness wtnch is highly spoken
of by all the deities? Who else has the
crematorium as 1 is play ground ? Who
else IS there who is so lauded lor ins
dancing ?

214 Whose worship and power remains
unchangeable ? Who else is there wlio
plays with spirits and ghoils. 'lelime, O
god, who else has companions who are
possessed of strength like 1 is own and who
aie therefore, proud of that strength or
power?

315 Who else is there whose place is
described as unchangeable and adored with
reverence by tiie three svorlds? Who else
IS there who peiirs ram, gives heal, and
blazes forth >n Energy ?

316 From whom else do we get oiir

C recious herbs ? Who else upholds all
inds of riches Wlio else sports as much
as 1ie hires in the three worlds of mobile
and immobile things?

217 O Indra, know Maheshwara^o be
the original Cause lie is worsi ipped by
'Vogins by Rishis, by the Gandharvas and
by the Siddlias. with the I elp of k owledge,
of success, and of the rues laid down m ttie
scriptures.

218 lie IS worshipped by both the gnds
and the Asuras with the help oi sacririces
by acts and the ritual laid down in the
scriptures The fruits of action can never
toiirli hi n for he is above them all Being
such, I call him the original cause of every-
thing.

219 He IS bith gross and subtile He
ispeerless He ca mot be comprehended
by the senses He is endued with q lahlies
and he is stiorn of them He is the lord of
o lahti's lor they are under hts control
I'yen such is Mahesliwara's place.

320 He IS tlie cause of lie conlinumce
and the crt-iiion (o( Ihe universe) He is
Ihe'c-* !■>« >( ll e ii iiverse and the otise also
fit Its destruuiiii He is the i’asc. the
I’reseni, a li t ic future. H; li lh< pa rent


of all things He is the cause of every
thing

221 He IS mutable, he 13 the immani-
fest he IS Knowledge, he is Ignorance , he
IS every deed , he is every omission , he ts
virtue , and he is sin O Shakra, do f call
Him the cause of everything

222 See, O Indra, tn the image of
Mahadeva the marks of both tl e seXes
1 hat god of gods vts Hu Ira, that causeof
both creation and deslrnctinn shous m Ins
form the marks of both the s^xes as the one
cause of tl e creation of the universe

223 My mother formerly fold me that
he IS the cause of the 11 iiverse and the -one
cause of everylliMg 1 here rs no one who
IS higher than Ulia O binkra If it pleases
you. do you throw yourself on his kindness
and protection

224 Vou have evidence, O king of tie
gods, of the fact lh»t the universe has on*
ginated from the union of the sexes The
universe y oil know, is the sum of what has
qualities and nliat lios not them and has
lor Its immediate cause the seeds of Rrah*
man and others Drahman and Indra and
Hutasha and Vishnu and all the other gods
along with llie Daityas and the Asiiras,
having the frniinn of a thousand desi es,
always say that there is hone who is higher
than Mabadeva

22$ Moved by desire, I solicit, with
contiolled mind that god known to all the
mobile and immobile universe —hifn, wl e
IS. who has been described as the best and
highest of all the celestials and who is
auspioousness itself — forgetting forth with
that I ighest of all acq iisuions, vie , I tbera-
lion

226 What necessity is there of ollief
reasons? Hie great Maliadeva is tie
cause of alt causes We have never I eard
that the celeslnls have at any tune wor-
st ipped the emblem of any other god than
Maliadeva

227 If Maheswan be not accepted tell
me, if you have ever heard of it who ehe is
there wt ose emblem has been adored or is
being adored by all the celestials?

22S That god IS indeed, the inoit wor-
shipful of ail celestials wl ose eml Irtn
Brahma. Viihnu you, O Indra, willi *11
the Ollier gods, always adore

219 Brahman has for his eml 1cm the
lotus Vishnu has for his 0 e discns
tndra has for his the llinnder.bolt. Out
the creatures of the world do not tear any
ol the signs which maik these eelcsnsls On
tlie other hand at! creat ires bear the si.;ns
whivh mark Maliadeva and Ins coivitt.


ANOaHASANA PARVA.


35


Hence. *?? creatures tnwst be consMered
«ts belonging to Maliesbtvara.

230. All female creatures, have or»gi-
naieii irnm Urns, and lienee it ts llie^
liave ilie milk of fememniiy which charac-
terrelise Utna, while all masculine crea-
tures, who have originated fr<>m Shiva bear
the mascuhne mark that marks Shiva,
out. Ihat person who holds that tliere IS,
in the three worlds ivith thetr mobile and
immobile creatures, any other cause Ilian
the Supreme Lord, and that which is not
marked witli the mark of eilhrr Mabadeva
Or his wile, should be considered as very
wretched and should i>oi be numbered with
the creatures of (lie universe.

331. Every being having the mark o 1
the masculine sex should be known to be of
Ishana, while every benig with the mark oi
the (eminme sex should be known as he-
longmg to lima this universe of mobile
and MTiTnohde measures is t>etvaded by two
foims (are,, male and female).

232. I( ts from M^hadeva (hat I wish (0
get boons. Nni getting this, O Kaushika,

I would rather prefer dissolution usell Go '
or rematti, O Sliakra, as you fike, O stayer i
of Vala. I

I *33. I ^Nh to have boons or cnrs «9 |
/from Maliadeva. No. 1 slial) noi acknow*
ledge any other god Nor would t liave
my desires fulfilled from any other deity.

' 234. Having said these words to (he
king of tfie cefestii^Is, I became stricken
tviift grief Ihinkxtg thst Maliadevi had rrot
been piopilialed despite iny severe auste>
riues.

235—336 Wiihin the twinkling of an
eye, however, t saw the celestial elephant I
tiad seen before me changed <11(0 a bull as
while as a swan, or the Jasminum pubo-
scons, or a sialk of the lolus, or silver, or the
oce->n of milk. Uf liuge body, the hair of
Its tail wis black and the color of i(s eyes
was twany hke lliat ul honey,

1 237 Its horns were hard as adamant
'K'l.V. dwr. 'tv.’j
sharp ends, whose liue was a mild fed, the
bull appeared Jo tear the Earth.

238 1 he animal was bedecked all over

with oriiamrnis made ol the purest gold
Its face and lioofs and nose and cars were
beaulifuf and its waist too welldormed.

239 Its flanks were beaulilul, and
its neck was very tlnck Its whole
form was beaulifiil to look at. ll< hump
< was charnuiig and seemed 10 occupy the
whole ol Its s'‘oul(ier.joint.

340 And 11 looked like the sitmmil of n
snow'clad nivunum or .like a cliH oi white


efourfs m the sky. Upon the back of that
aiiimai I saw sealed the Jlluslrious Maha*
deva with liis wile Uma.

241—243. Mahadeva shone like the full-
moon. I he (ire born of his energy shone 111
cRulgeiice like figliining tliat flashes amid
cfoiids. ft seemed as if a thousand suns
rose tJiere, filling every quiner with a
dazzling splendour that energy of the
Supreme Lord looked like the Samvarlaka
fire which destroys all creatures at the end
ofclid Vuga.

* *43 Pilled to the fill with that energy,
the horizon became such tliat I could not
see anything on any side. Filled with
anxiety 1 once more , thought tliat tt could
mean.

244. That energy, fiowever, did not per-
varle every side for a long time, for soon,
throifgli the illusion of that god of gods, the
horizon became clear.

345 t (hen saw the tllustnous Sihami
or plaheshwara, seated on the back of his
bull, of blessed and sweet appearance and
looking like a smokeless fire.

246 And tlie great god was accom-
panied by ParVdti of perfect features, in-
deed. 1 saw tile blue throated and great
Sthaiiu unattached to everything, that re-
ceptacle of all sores ol energy oe laree,
iMving eigliteeii arms, and bedecked wilIi
alt sort* of ornaments.

Zip Clad ID white robes, he wore white
garlands, and l>ad white unguents smeared
upon fas person. 1 1 is banner, irresistible
m (Ire imiverse, was white i)ie tliread
round his body was also while.

248 lie was enci'cled by companions
all endued with prowess equal to his own,
wtio were smxmg or dancing or playing on
various musical tiistrumeiits.

24^ A crescent moon, of pale color,
formed his crown, and put on Ins foreliead
U looked like the moon wliicli rises in the
*iulumnal sky. He seemed to d-tzz^v with
splendour on account of h<s three eyes
wixdhlou'sxiVfa'BViiree suns.

250. The garland, of ttie purest white,
that was on his body, shone like a wreath
of toiuses. of (he purest white, adorned mill
jewels and gems

25*. i also suw, O Covinda, the wea-
pons, in their embodied forms and fraugl t
wilti every sort of energy, that belong to
Uhava of peerless prowess.

252 rtie gre,4t god field a rainbow-
colored bow, lhai bow known as Eiiiaka
as IS 111 realiiy a powerful sn.<ki.

333 Indeed, that snake of seven heads
and huge body, of sharp la i^s and virulent


36


MAIIAQIiAnATA.


\enAm, ot rec1< and (he mascutine sex,
^^as twined roii»d.with,tlie c»rd that served
as i(s bowstring.

554 — 255. And there was an arrow which
MiLite lilre that ot the sun or of the hre that
appears at the end of (he cycle. Verily,
that arrow was the rxcellent Pashupaia, that
mighty and dreadful weapon, which 1$ with*
nut a srcoiid, indescribable lor its power,
and capable of terrorising every creature.
Of huge proportions, it seemed to constant*
ly emu sparks of fire.

356 flaving one foot, large leeth, and a
ihous «nd heads and thousand stomachs, it
liad a ilioiisand arms, a thuitsaivd tongues,
and a thaiisand e>es Indeed, it seemed to
continually emit fire.

357 O you of great arms, that weapon
Is superior to the Brahma, the Narayana,
the Aindra. the Agne)a, and (he Vanina
weapons Indeed, h is capable of neutra*
Iising every other weapon in the uni«
V rse.

338 It was with that weapon that (he
great Mahadeva had, formerly burnt and
consumed in a moment the triple city ol the
Asuras. With the greatest ease. O Go*
\inda, M iliadeva, using that single arrow,
performed that feat.

359 '1 hat weapon, discharged by Maha*
deva s arms, can, forsooth, consiniie in
ball the lime taken up by a twmuhog of the
eye the entire universe with all its mobile
and immobile cieaiures.

36), In the universe there is no one in*
eluding, even D>ahman and Vishnu .«nd (he
celestials, who cannot be kitted by (hat
weapon. U sire, 1 saw that excclleni, won*
derlui and peerless weapon in the hand of
Mdhddeva,

361. There Is anoilier mysrerloiis and
sery strong weapon which is eq i^l or, per-
haps, supeiior (0 (he P-rshiipaia. I saw
lli^t also Ii IS known in all (he woitds as
the Sliula oi the bliula*armed Mahadeva.

362. Hurled by (he ilhistrioiis god, that |
weapon can iive (he entire Earth or dry t>p
the waters of the ocean or aninlitlate (he
entire universe.

263 Formerly Yiivanashwa’s son, king
Mandhatr,. that conqueror of (lie three
world-., having imperial sway and girled
wiih pioluse I It r.'t , was, witli all Ins armies,
killed by means ol that weapon.

264 Gifted with great miiiht and great
eiieigv and resemhlme Shakra himself in
I ruwes^, that kiii£. O G ivinda, was killed
by t’ e Kakshrfsa Lavana with (he lielp of

I u ShuU which he liad got (com Shiva.


365. That Shula is Iceen-poinled Hiijli*
ly terrible. It IS capable ol causing every*
body’s hair stand erect 1 beheld n in tlie
hand of Mahadeva, as if rnaring uiili
anger, having contracted its forehead into
three wnnkles.

266, It resembled, O Krishna, a smoke*
less fire or the sun that rises at the end ot
the cycle. I he handle of that Simla was
made of a great snake. It is really indes*
cnbable. It I lolced like the universal Urs*
(royer armed with Ins noose.

267 — 26S 1 saw tins weapon, O Govinda,
in the band of Mahadeva I saw also
another weapon, ttg , that sharp.edged
battle-axe winch, was given formeily unto
Kama by Maliadeva for enabling him to
root out the Kshatriyas. it was will) this
weapon dial Kama killed in dreadful battle
the great iCartiaviryya who was the king of
the entice vvoild.

269 It was with (hat weapon that
Jvmadagin's son, O Gavinda, was able to
root out the Kshatriyas for twenty -one
times.

370 Of blazing edge and higMy tern*
ble, that Bxe was hanging on (he shoulder,
adorned with a snake ol Mahadeva,
Indeed, it appeared on Mahadeva's body
like the flame of a burning fire

371. I saw wiih the highly intelfigent
Mahadeva numberles other celestial wr-a*
pons. I have, however, named only a fiw
principal ones. O sinless one.

372 On the left side of the great god
stood the Grandfather Brahman seated on
an excellent car to wlucit were yoked swans
fi ei*coiirsmg like the mind.

373 On the same side was Narajaiia
aKo, seated on Gaiiida and bearing the
couch, the discus, and the mace.

374 Near the goddes Uma was Skanda
seated on Ills peacock, healing Ins dreadful
Hfrow and bells, and louking like another
Fire-God

27s iTelbre l^fafiadeva f saw A^ttuV
si.<ii<ling armed with Ins Simla and looking
like ct second Sliankara.

376 the Munis headed by the Self*
create Maim, and the Itishis liavmg UhrigU
lor their fiist, and (he gods with Shakra at
then head, all c >me (here,

377 All the clans of spirits and ghosts,
and (he celesiul Mothers, stood surround-
ing Mahadeva and saluMiig him With

378 1 he gods were engaged in singing
thepr»iwsof Mdiadeva tn vaiions hymns.

the G«a..df.,iher Bchman. uttering *
l<utl>aiiiar.>, landed Maliadeva.


^NUSItA 5 ANA PAItVA.


37


27P Uttering Uie Jycslitha Saman
Narnyana also sang tlie praises of Uliava,
Stiakra also did t(>o same witli tfie (lelp of
lliose foremost of Vedic Mantras, , the
bliata.Rndriyam.

380 Verily, Brahman and Narayana
and Sh^kra, — those three great gods ahone
(here like three sacrificial fires.

3 S(. Ill (heir midst was the tllustrraus
god like the sun m the midst of hts corona,
come from autumnal clouds.

282. I saw countless suns and moons '
also in the sky, O Keshava. I then tauded |
the (lluflnous Lord of everything, (lie |
Great Master of the universe.

TJpamanytt said:—

283. I said,-~balcitationt to you, OiUus*
tnoiis one, O you who are the refuge ol alt
Hungs, O you who are called Mahadeval
Safutations to you who assume (he form of
Shalira, who are Shakra and who disguise
yourself in the form of Shakra.

384 Salutations to you who are armed
with the thunder, to you wlio are twany,
and you wlm are red Satucaiioiis to you
who are always armed with the Pmaka. to
you wlio always hear the conch and the
SliuU.

385 SafuUdons <9 you who are clad in
black to you who are of dark and curly
hair, to you who have dark deer^skin for
your upper garment, to you who preside
over the eiglilh lunation of the dark fort*
iiigl t.

sSfi Salutations to you who are of white
hue. to you wfio are called wtiice, (o you
who are clad 10 whne dress, 10 you who
have liinbB smeared wiili while ashes, to
you who .ire ever engaged in wince deeds
387 Satutalians to you wfio are red in
color, to you who are clad lo red drerss. to
you wfio have a red banner with red flags,
lo you who wear red gaiUiids and use red
Uii{,ueiiis.

283. Salutations to you who are brown
orforeif, fu jwtf «»W o-re CiW m bvoww ^^ 3 ,
lo you wlio luve a brown, banner will brown
flags to you who wear brown garfands and
use brown uiigueius baluiaiioiis to you
who have the umbrella of royalty held < ver
your head, to you who wear (iie foremost of
crowns.

389 balutations to you who are adorned
wuli hall a gatland and haff an armlet, lo
you who are decked with one ring fur one
ear, lo you wlio are endued wiili the sp'cd

of the inind, to you who are highly eftul-
j.eni

290 Salutalioiis to you ulio are the fore-
must of gods, 10 you who are the foteinosl


of Mums to you who are the foremost of
celesiiaKt Saluialnns to you who wear
half a wreath of Iodises, (o you who iiave
many lotuses on your body.

Saluia'ions to you who have half
your body smeared with sandal paste,
to you who have half your body decked with
garlands of flowers and smeared with frag-
ment unguents.

292, I bow to you who are bright hued
like the Sun, to you who are like the Sun,
to you whose face is like the Sun, to you
who have eyes each of which is Mce the
Sun.

293 I bow to you who are Soma, to you
who are as mild as Soma, to you who bear
(he (unar disc, to you who are of lunar as-
pect, lo you who are the foremost of.rl)
creatures to you who are adorned with
^ most beautiful teeth.

394 ) bow to you who are of a dark

color, to you who are of a fair compfexion,
to you who have a form J>a]f of which is
yellow and half while, to you wlio have a
body hall nf winch is m«l« and half female,
(0 you who are both male and female,

293— .96 I bow lo you wfio have buff for
your vehicle, to tou wtio proceed riding oil
tlie foremost oi vlrphaius, to you who are
obtained wilh diftunliy, to you who are
capable of going to places uiiapproaelMbfe
I by otheis 1 bow li> you whose praises are
, sung by the G’^nas, to you wlio are devoted
10 the various G^nas, to you wlio fufluw tlie
' (rack that is trod by the G-mss, lo thee
who are alweys devoted lo the Ganas as to
a vow.

297* 1 bow lo you who are of the com-
pIcKion of wtnte clouds, to you who I ave
tlie splendour of the evening clouds tn you
who are incapable of being described by
names, to you wtio are of your own form.

298 1 bow to you liaving a garland of

red ootor, to you who are clad ifi robes of
red..

29^ f birw Cix jocf w^ros-ir iTtoww «• reC
wuii gems, to you wl o are adorned wiili a
cresitent, 10 you who wear many beauii/ul
. grins in your diadem, Ig you who have eight
^ flowers on ycur liead.

I 300. I bow to yon who have a fiery
mouth and fiery eyes, to you who have eyes
' eifolgeut like a tlioiisand moons, lo you w)io
I are of the form of fire, to you who are beau-
tiful end agreeable, to you who are incon-
ceivable and inysierious.

301 I bow lo you who range in (le sky,

: to you who defight in liviitg in pasture-
grounds, lo you. wlio walk on the .Eaiih,


38


MAHABIIARATA.


to you who are the Earth, to you who
are infinite, to you who are highly aus-
picious.

302 I bow to you who are nude, to you
who make a happy home of every place
where you may happen to be for the time
being 1 bow to you who have the universe
for your home, to you who have both Know-
ledge and Felicity for your Soul

303, I bow to you who always wear a
diadem, to you who wear a lar^e armlet, to
you who have a snake for tliegarland round
your neck, to you wlio wear many beautiful
ornaments on your body.

304 I bow to you who have the Sun,
the Moon, and Agni for your three eyes to .
you who have a thousand eyes, to you who !
are both male and female, lo you who are
divested of sex, to you who are a Sankbya,
to you who area Yogin.

305 I bow to you who are the grace of
those gods who are adored in sacrifices, to
you who are the Atharvans, lo you who re-
move all sorts of dise,4se and pain, to you
who remove every sorrow.

36 1 bow to you who roar as deep as

the clouds, to you wl 0 display diverse kinds
of illusions, to you who lord over (he sod
and over the seed that is sown in it, to you
who are the Creator of everything.

307 1 bow toyou who are the Lord of

alt the deities, 10 you who are the Master of
the universe, to you who are fleet hke the
wind, to you who are of tlie form of the
wind.

3<iS I bow toyou who wear a garland
of'^old, to you who play on hills and moun-
tains, lo you who are adored by alt who are
enemies of the gods, to you who are endued
with fierce speed and energy.

309 I bow to yo ( who cut off one of the
beads of the Grandfather BrahmiM to you
who fiave kiffed (he Asura named Af-rbisha,
to you who have three forms, to you who
iiave every form

310 I bow to you who ire the destroyer
of tlie triple ctly of the Asuras, lo you who
are the destroyer of (Dakslia’st sacrifice, to

i ou who are (he destroyer ol the person of
Cama (the god of love) (0 you who huld the
rod of destruction.

311. I bow to you who are Sktnda, to
you who are Visakha, to you who are (he
rod of the Brehmaiia toyou who are lihava.
to you who are barva, fo you who ateol
universal form.

312 t bow lo you who are IsHsna. lo
you who are the drsirp^er nf llhjgs, to ymi
wiHi are ifesUyerol Anih.ka lo yo.t wtiO
are the univctse, to you.who arc possessed


of illusion, to you who are both conceivable
and inconceivable

313. You are the one end of all crea-
tures, you are the foremost, you are the
heart of everything You are the Brahman
of aft the gods, you are the Red and Blue of
the Rudras.

314. You are the Soul of all creatures,
you are He called Purusha in the Sankhya
philosophy, you are the Rishava among all
sacred things, you are the auspicious of the
Yogins whicli, according to them, is indivi-
sible.

31^ Amongst those who follow the
diKereiit modes of life, you arc the House-
holder, you are the great Lord amoiijtvt
the patriarchs. You are Kuvera among
all the Yalfshas, ond you are Vishnu
amongst all the sacrifices.

316 You are Meru amongst mountains,
you are the Moon among all luminaries of
the sky, you are Vashi»hiha amongst
Rishis, yor are the Sun among the planets.

317, You are the lion among all the
beasts, and the bull adored of all among all
domestic animals.

318 Among the Adilyas you are Vish-
nu (Upendra) among the Vasiis, you are
Pavaka, among birds you are Garuda, and
among snakes you are Ananta.

319 Among the Vedas you are the Ss-
mane, among the Yajushes you are the
Shata-Rudiiyam, among Yogins you are
Saiiaikuin^ra, and among bankhyas you
are Kapila.

320 Among the Maruts you areShakn,
among the Pitris you are Oevarai, amung
all the regions you are the region ol Brah-
man, and >00 are emancipaiion amongst all
the ends of creatures,

321. Of all oceans you arc the Ocean
of Milk, among all mouniains you are
Himavat, among all the casies you are the
Urahmanas, and among all learned Orah-
maiias you are he who has undergone the
initiation,

311. You nre the Sun among all things
tn the wnrid, you are the dcviroyer called
Kala You are whaiever else gilted wiih
superior energy or eminence exivimg in the
universe.

323. You are endued with supreme
power. 1 1 It IS my ceriain conel ision »

t>ow toyou O powerful and iltutifious one,

O you who are kind to all your wor-
shippers.

324 I bow to you, O lord of Vogms I
bow to you O original Cau*e *.1 It « iim-
TCTse. Ue you pleased witli me lliai am


AHVifiASAtiX PMRVA.


30


jour worshipper, that am very miserable
and, helpless

325 O Eternal Lord, "do you become
the refuge of ihts adorer of yours »»Ik» js very
Weak Slid miserable ' O Supreme Lord,
Jou should pardon me (or all the sms 1 have
commuted taking mercy on me for my
being your devoted worshipper.

326. 1 am stupefied by you O Lord of
all the gods, on account of the disguise in
which you appeared before me O Ma-
heshwara, I did not give you llie Argbya or
water to wash your feet

327. Having sung thus the praises ol
Ishana, 1 oEered him, with great devotion,
water to wash his feel and the articles of
the Arghya, arid then, with joined hands
1 resigned myself (0 him, ready to carry
out fiis command

328 Tlien, O sire, an ausptcrous shower
of flowers dropped upon my heod, curt) mg
celestial fragrance and bedewed with cold
water.

329 Ihe divine musicians began to play
on their kettle drums A dehcwiis breeze
fragrant and sweet, began to blow and fill
me with pleasure.

330—331 Then Mahadeva accompam*
ed by Ills wife, and having the bull for his
emblem, having been pleased with me. ad«
dressed the deities assembled there m these
words, filling me with great joy,— Behold
ye gods tlv* devotion ol the great Upaman*
yu Indeed, steady and great is that de>
votion, and entirely fixed, for it remains
unaltered

33a — 333 Thus addressed by the great
God ariued with the Simla, uie gods, O
Krishna, > aving bowed down to him and
joined their hands in respect, said these
words— O illustrious one, O God ol the
gods O Lord ol the universe, O Lord of all,
let this best of twice born persons obtain
from you the Iruition of all his desires *

33^ Thus addressed by all the gods
with the GrandfacSer Brahman among
them Sharva, otherwise called Jsba and
Shankara, said these words, as ti smiling,
to me

The jllastrione Shaakara said —

f am pleased
wiili you. Sec me, O foieinosl of asccticsl
O learned Kishi, you are fiimly devoted
to me and you have been well tested
by me.

336 I have been very highly pleased
with joii on accoiiiil of this jour devotion to
Sliiva t shall, therefore give you to«day
the ((union ol your desires.


337 Thus aiiJressrd by the highly wise
Maludeva, tears of joy carne i/ito my ejes
and my hair stood erect

338 Kneeling down to him and bowing
to him repeatedly, 1 then with a voice that
was suppressed with joy, said to him.

339 O illustrious god. It appears to me
that I was hiiherto dead and that it is only
to day that I have taken my birth, and that
my birth has to. day borne fruit, since I am
standing now tn the presence of Him who
ts the Master of both the gods and the
Asuras I

3to Who efse is more praisewortbjr
than 1, since 1 am seeing with these eyes of
mine Him ol immeasurable prowess whom
the very gods are unable to see without first
paying hearty worsliip f

34 1 — 342. The learned and the wise con*
sidrr that as (he Ingliest of all topics, which
IS FieriiA/ winch is dislinguished from nil
else, which is unborn which is Knowledge,
which IS indestructible, at one with you,
O powerful and illustrious one, you who
are the beginning of all the topics, you
who are indesiruciible and challengeless,
you who know all ilie ordinances, you who
are the loremosi of Piirushas, you who are
tlie highest of the high

313 Vou wlio had created from your
right side the Grandfather Brahman, the
Creator ef all things, you are he who had
Created from your left*stde Visliou iar
protecting the Creation.

344—345 You are that powerful Lord!
wlio diJ create Rudra when the end of thej
cycle came and when the Creation was!
once more to be destroyed * I hat Rudra who I
originated From you destroyed the Creation '
wiUi all Its mobile and immobile beings,
assurnirtg the form of highly powerful
Kala, ol the cloud Samvartaka ami of tlie
all destroying fire Indeed, wl en the time
lor the dusotuiion ol the universe sets in,
tliat Rudra stands, ready to swallow up the
uriiverse

346 You are that Mahadeva who is the
original Cieator of (he iiiKverse with all its
mobde and immobile creatures Yon are
he who at the end of the son, stands,
withdrawing all things into yourself.

347 You arc he who pervades all things,
you are the Soul ol all things, you are the
Creator of tie Creator ol all pmciples
Incapable of being beheld by even any
of the gods, you are be who exists, peryad*
ing all principles

348 If, O Lord, you have been pleased
swith me and If you wo >ld grant me boons
let this be the boon, O Lord ol all the gods


40


MAilADilAflATA.


that ray devotion to you may remain un>
chaxk’ed.

349 O best o( the g^ids, let me tliroiti;li
your (>r?ice, liave kiiowlc(it>e of tlie Pie*
sent, tlie Past, and tlie Future,

350 1 stiafi also, wit'i all my kinsmen
and friends, always eat food mixed witli
milk And let your illustrious self bs for
ever present at our gifted liermiiage.

351. Ilius addressed by me, tlie illus-
trious Maliesliwara gifted with supreme
energy, that Klasier of all mobile and im-
mobile creations, via , Sliiva, adored of all
the universe, then said to me these words.

The Illastrious God said

352 Be free frum every misery and pain
and be above decrepitude and death. Be
gifted with fame, be endued with great
energy, and spiritual knowledge.

353 You shall through my grace, be
always sought by the ffishrs. Ue your
behaviour good and righteous. May you
possess all atliibutes and universal know-
ledge. Be you of agreeable appearance.

354—353 May you possess everlasting
youlli, and let your energy be like that ol
fire VVlieneVer, again, you may wisli fur
tlie presence, which is so agreeable to you
ol the ocean of inillc, ili«re shall that
ocean appear before you Do yon, with your
friends, always obtain fund prepared with
millci wuh the celestial nectar being mixed
with It.

356. After the expiration of an xon
you will enjoy my company. Unending
shall be your iaiiiily and race and Kinsnieti.

357, O foremost of twice-born ones
your devotion to me shall be eternal. And,
O best of Brahmanas I stiall always be
present at your hermitage.

358 Live, O son, wherever you like
shorn of anxiety. Ih>ught uf by you I
shall, O learned Brahmaiia, appear before
you again.

jyy .Yavinij* jwu* .tlvw* wwsA; anu*
granted me these boons, the illusirlous
isbana, effulgent like inilliuns of Suns,
'disappeared there and then

360. It was even, O Krishna, tliat 1
saw, with the help of austere penances, that
God of gods, 1 also got all that was said
by the great God endued with supreme
intelligence

361. See, O Krishna, before your eyes,
these Siddhas living here and these Rishis
and Vidyadhaias and Yakshas and
Gandharvas and Apsaras.

362. See these trees and creepers and
plants yielding ail sorts of flowers and


fruits. See lliern besrlng the fliwers ef
every se.-iton, with beantifiil leaves, and
spreading a sweet smell all around.

. 363 O you of mighty arms, all these
are gifted wuh a celestial nature through
■lie favour of that god of gods, that
supreme Lord, that great Oeityi

Vasudeva continned

361—365. Hearing these Words of Ids
and seeing, as it were, with my own eyes all
that lie had described to me, I became
fllled with woiiiler. I then addressed the
great ascetic Upamanyu and said to him,
Hig ily praiseworthy as you arr, O foremost
of learned Brahiiiaius, fur what riglilrous
man IS there except you whose retreat
enjoys the distinction of being honored witli
the presence of that God of gods.

-.-W,

366 Will the powerful blnva, will tlie
great Shankara, O chief of ascetics, grant
me also a Sight of his body and show me
favour 7

Upamanyn said

367. Forsooth, O you having ejea lik
lotus petals, you will very s>on see Malu
deva as, O sinless one, 1 succeeded 11
'peeing him,

363 O you of irnineasurable prowess
1 see with my spiriliul eyes that you wil
in the sixth mnnih Iroin this, succeed n
getting a sight of Maiiadeva, O best of al
persons.

369. You, O foremost of the Yadm
will obtain from Malieshwara and Ins wifi
(wenty-four boons. I tell you wIi it >> true.

370. Through the favour of that Deiiy
■'•lied wilh supreme wisdom, I know the
Past, the Future, and the Present.

371 — 372 The great Hara has f.svoineJ

these thousands of Kislns and others Wity
will not the powerful Deity sliuw favour to
you, O Matiliava ' I always like the meet-
-nv»-nf Jlietf'jiri.sjis jlAii.«.niu* hke,«r>il- wh • i'*
devoted to the Biabmanas. wlio is lull ol
mercy and who is full of failli I sh.jlJ_g'_*[®.
you ce rtain Mantras Keciie ihein coi l>*
numSsTJT*" By this you are sure lo“
Stunkara 1 -

The blessed Vishnu said ’• —

373 r"r''lFen said to him^— O twice-horn

one, through your favour, O great aseelir, I
shall see (he lord of the deities, that guilder
of Oiti's numberless^sons.

374. Eight days, O Bharala, passed
there like an hour, all of us being ihus
occupied with talk on Mshadeva.


AHUS!tAS\N\ PAHVA.


» On llie ctgtith day, t underwent

IJ B imliation acconlinp lo due rtte^. at
»lie liaiiHs of lf>at Brnlimana I received
l(ie staff from Ins liatids I werit throMch
I* e prcsciibed sliave I took tip a quantity
of JCiisha lilades m my fmnd I wore raRS
or my raiments I nibbed my person wllli
Untied Initter, I put a cord of Mun{a
;rass round my loins.

3/6 Tor one monfli I lived on fruita
riie second moniU I lived upon water.

1 be third, ibe fotirib, and llie filth months
I passed, living upon air only.

3?7. I stood alt the whlU, upon one
foot, and wiili my arms also raised up-
wards, and piving tip slerp for all the time
I tben saw, O Dharaia In the sky a light
that seemed to be as dazzling asthatofa
tlioiisaiid Suns

3J8 Towards the centre of that eflnl-
gence, O son of Pandu I saw a cloud
looking like « mass of blue bills, adorned
With rows of cranes, decorated with many
• grand rainbow, with flaslies of lightning
•nd the fire looking like eyes set on tt.

379 Within that ctogd was the powerful
Maliadeva. himself of dazzling splendour,
accompanied bi his eo>i<or( Uma. indeed,
the great God appeared to si me with his

r eliances, energy, beauty, effulgence, and I
IS beloved consort by his side. j

380 The powerful Maheshwara, with
his wife hy Ins Side, shone m tl'e midst of
that cloud Ihe appearance seemed to be
like that of the Sun in the midst of clouds
with (he Moon by Iks side.

381 llie hair on my body, O son of
Knnti Stood erect, and my eyes expanded
vith wonder upon «eemg I lara, (be refute
of all the gods and the remover of all ihelr
griels.

3SZ Afabadesa was adorned with a
dndem on Ins I ead. Me was armed with
Ins bhnla He was cNd in a iiger-skin,
had msiTed locks on Ms head, and bore
ttie staff in one of I is hands Me was
armed', ciesifles, wiiri ilis iHnaa'a anrt'stie
lhunder*ho1t Mis irelh were sharp point-
ed Me was adorned witri an excellent
bracelet lor ilm upper arm Mis sacred
thread was formed by a snake.

^^3 Me wore an escrtlent garland of
various colors di Ins bosom |lia| hung down
lo lus^toes Indeed, I saw turn like the high-
ly bn)(t<t moon of an autumnal evening.

Surrounded by sarious eUns of
Spiliu and ghosts, he appeared fiVn |he
au'untnal Sun <1 ffic'ih of l/elng looked al
lor Its dizrhng brigt tnesi,

3S5 A Ihontand and hundred Rtidras
livod around that Cod cl tonirel'ed aou)

C


and white deeds, seated upon Ins buff. Alt
of them weru employed In singing Ins
praises.

386 The Adit^as, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Vjshwedetas, and the |wm
Asliwins praised that Lhrd of the universe,
by singtng the hymns.

387. The powerful Indra and Ins
brother Upendra, the two sons of Adui.
and the Grandfather Brahman, all sang
in Ibe presence ef Bhava the Kalhantars
Saman.

388 — 390. Numberless masters of Ynga,
all (he (cvice-born ff ishis with (beir children,
all the celestial Rishis, the goddess Earth,
Ihe Sky. the Constellations, the Planets, the
Months, the Fortnights, iJie Seasons, Night,
tlie Years, the ICshanas, the Miihurtas the
Nimeshas, (lie Vugas one after another,
all tlie celestial Sciences and branches of
knowledge, and all beings conversant with
1 ruth, were seen boivmg down (hat Su-
preme Preceptor, that great Father, that
giver of Yoga.

39t— 393 Sanattomara, the Vedas, the
I Histones Marichi, Angtras Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, the 'even Manus, Soma,
Ihe Alharvans, and Vri)i»spaUi Bhzigu,
Oaksha, Kashyapa, Vaslnshtlia, Kashya,
(he Cchchandas, Diksin (tie Sflcrificef,
Dakshina, the Sacrificial Fires, ihe Mavis
poured m sacrifices, and alt the articles of
ibe sacrifices, were seen by me, O yodhish*
ihira, standing there in their embodied
forms.

391—397 All the presiding deities cf
the worlut, nil the Ilivera, all the snakes,
the mountains, Ihe celestial Mothers, all
the wives and daughters of Die ceirstials,
thousands upon thousands and irnliioiis of
asccocs, were seen to bow down to that
powerful I ord who is the soul of tranquil-
ity. 1 he Mountains, Ihe Oceans, and the
I'clnfs of ilie compass also did the same,
the Oindiiarvas and Ihe Apsaras Ingtily
proficient m music, (n celestial songt, sang
and h>mned the praises of Bhava uho is
fiiU ot wonder. the Vidyadharas, the
Danavas, the Guhyakas, the Itakshasas.
ar<d all created beings mobile and im-
mebife were wnrsluppinf^, m thou^hr, word,
and deed, that powerful Lord 1 hat l.nrd
of aft tie gods, eif , harva, appeared
before me, sealed In all h!s glory,

398 Seeing lh»t Ishana lad showed
himsvff to me (ly being seaierf 1 1 glory
\ efore my eyes, (he who’r universe, with tl>e
Graridfather and Shakra, looked at me.

393 f, hnweser, had not the power ro I
took at Mahadeva He great gr><| (hen \
address'd me. saying,— see, O KtUhna, J
•ftd speak lo me {


MAHAQtlAAATA.


400. You have worshipped me hundreds
and thousands of times there is no one
in the three worlds who is dearer lo me
than }ou t

401. After I had bowed lo him, his wife*
SI3, the goddess Uma, became pleased
with me. I then addressed in tliese words
the great God whose prais«s are hymned
by all the gods headed by the Grandfatlicr
Brahman.

The blessed Yishnu said 5—

402 ‘ I saluted Mahadeva, saying,—*
I bow to )oii, O )ou who are the origin
of all tlimijs 1 lie Uishis declaie that yon
are tlie master of the Vedas the pions
bold that you are Penance, you are Satuva,
you are Kajas, you are tamas, andyou
are truth.

403 You are Brahman, yon are Ritdra.
you .ire Varuna, you are *gni. you are
Manu, yon are Bliava, you are Dhatri, you
are laslilri, you are Vidhalri, you ^rc the
powerful Lord of all things, yoaare every*
where.

404 All beings, mobile and immobile,
hove OMginated from yeu You have
oreated this world with all its mobile and
immobile creations.

405 The Rishis say that you are
superior to the senses, the mind, the vital
air, the seven fires, everything else which
rests upon llie alNpervsduig Soul, and all
the celestials who are worshipped.

40d Yon, O illustrious one, are the
Vedas, |t>e Sscriflces, Soma, Dakshina,
ravaha, llavi, and all other ingredients of
sacrifice.

407. The merit of sacrifices, gifts, the
study of the Vedas, vows, practices of res-
traint, Modesty , Fnine, Prosperiiy, Glory,
Contentment, and Success, are all for ac-
quiimg you

40S. Desire, Anger, Fear, Cupidity,
Fride, Stupefaction, and Mai ce, Pams and
Diseases, are, O illustrious cue, all your
cTtspriiig.

40Q Yon are the eels of creatures, you
are the joy and sorrow of those acts, you
are the absence of )iy and sorrow,you are
that Nrscience wh ch is the cternil seeds of
Desire, you aie tlie great origin of Mind,
you are Power, and you are i leriiiiy,

4tO. You are the Unmsnifrst, you are
Pavana, yon aie mcoMceiv,*b1e, >oii are the
(hdimnd rayed Sim. you are the stimmg
■ swtelhgence, you are tlie fi<si of ait Itie
subjects, and, you are the support of i fe.

411— 412 By the words Greatness, Soul.
Understanding, Brahmin, Universe, Sharn-
bhu, and ScIf'Create, as well as ellKf


wordrseen (in the Vedas), your nature tf
comprehended as being at one with Great*
ness and Soul Knowing y ou as all It is,
tlie learned Bralunana conquers that Ignor-
aim which is the root of tlie world.

4*3 are the heart of all creatures,

and you are worslnpped by the Itishis as
Soul. Your arms and feet extend to every
place, and yonr eyes, head, and face «re
everywhere You hear everywhere in tlie
universe, and you exist permeating every-
thing.

414. You are the frnit of all nets
which are performed m the Nimeshas and
Ollier divisions of time which originate from
the Son.

4 tS You are the original loslre. You
are Male Being living in the hearts of all
tilings. You are the successful fruits of
Yoga.

416 Understanding and Inlelhgence
and all the worlds depend upon y on I iiose
who are given to meditaiton, who ire
always busy with Yoga, who are devoted
to or firm m Truth and who hnve conquer*
ed ilieir passions, seek you and depend on
you.

427. They who know yon as the one
unchangeable, or one who lives in alt
hearts, or one who is endowed with
supreme power, or one wl n is iho
ancient Male Being, or one who is pure
Knowledge, or one tl'at is the effulklt'tf
understanding, or one (hat is the hiithesi
refuge of all persons gifted wiih inielh*
gence. are, indeed, higl )y mirihgent men,
Indeed, such persons reign supreme over
intelligence.

418 By understanding the seven subide
principles, by compre) ending your sK at*
tributes, and by mastering ihe true Yo{!*i
the man of knowledge succeeds in enieiiog
into your great Sell.

417 After I hid said these words. O
Partha, to Bhava, that remover of vrirf
and pam, the universe, both mobile aod
•mmt^ite, roared 'n'lie a 'iron.

420. The numberless Brahmins present
there, the gods am! i)ie A«nr»s, the Na<*s»
the Pishaehas the Purrs, the birds, vario is
Itakshasas. vaiioiis classes of ghosts ard
spiiils, and all the great Bishis, then bowed
down to that great Deity.

4»l. Tliere then, dropped iiponmv frid
showers of IngUy fragrant celrsinl /!.>w<fs
and sweet winds blew on Ihe spot.

413. Tlie powerful Shsnkara l‘ *n. givf'
lo the belxMif of the wniwrse looked ■!
the gorldess Urns, and the king of the
celfsiiats and myself also, •'’<1 thus Jpo»®
to me.


ANi/iilAdArtA rAMVA.


We know, O Krjs>ina, that you,
O slayer of foes, are greatly devoted to
us 1 Do wliat IS for your good My tove
and aftection for you is very great,

424 ^ Do you ask for eiglit boons. I
sliall grant lliem O Krishna, O best of all
persons I ell me what they are, O chief
of the Yadavas. Say what yon wish You
will have them, however difficult af attain*
menl they may be.


CHAPTER XV.
(ANUSHASANfKA PARVAJ —

4 Co>if<n>«i.

rishna said —

t — 2 Bending low my head with a con.
trolled soul to iliat mass of energy and
eftuigence, t said to the great god, with a
lojous heart, these words— f ash for these
herns from you, namely, firmness in virtue,
the destruction of ei<em«f tn battle, the
1 (ghest glory, the greatest power, devotion
to Yoga, your nearness, and hundreds upon
hundreds of children.

3—4 Wliereto ShanWara said, so be »t,
repeating tlie words 1 had said After this,
tlie mother of the universe, the uplioldiess
of all thiiigs, site who purifi*s a|| things,
Vif , the wife of Sarva that huge r«eepiacle
of penances, said with controlled s,>nl these
words to me — Ihe powerful Mahadeva
fias htanted you, O sinless one, a son who
shall be named Siiamva.


5—6 Do you lake from me also eight
boons whicli you cho ise I shall, indeed,
grant tfiem 10 yon {{ >wiiig her vr ih my
head bended, I siid to tier, C) son of
Panda — J pray from you uniform afTeciion
for tile nrahmaiias the favour of my father,
a hundred sons the highest enjoyments]
love for niy fain ly. ilie favour of n>y> mother]
the attaiiiKieiit of Iraitjiiihly and peace]
and cleveiness III every deed. '


ITjjm JU’i?

7 . Yon wiU fiave them, O you who are
endued wiUi prowess equal to that of a
celrstul { never say wliat IS iintfde You
lull have sixteen thousand wives, Vour
Jove for them and tJicirs also for teu shall
be limiiless


3 . Trom all your kinsmen also, you wdl
get the highest alfrciion You wdlhave
a m M beauiiful peisem. Seven thousand
guests will daily feed at your palac^,

Vasudeva coutiaaed —

9 . Having thus granled me boohj, both


the god and the goddess, O Dharata, dis-
appeared tliere and then witli Uieif asso-
ciates, O etder brolfier of Ohima. ,
to Alt those wonderful deeds I described
fully, O best of kings to that higl ly
energetic Brahmana Upamanyu Bowing
j down to the great God, Upainaiiyu said
I these words to me.

Upamanyu said

ti. 1 here IS no god like Sarva Tliere
IS no end or refuge like Sarva I here is
none who can grant so many or so high
boons i here IS none who IS his equal m
battle.


Cl! \P 1 ER XVI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PAUVAJ —

Cfnhitued.

Upataanyn said •—

t— 2 lliere was in the golden cycle, O
Sire, a Rishi named landi Witli devoted
heart he worshipped with the help of Yoga-
meditation the great God lor ten tho isand
years Hear me as I tell you the fruit or
reward he reaped of such wonderful devo-
tion He succeeded in seeing Malmdevs
and lauded turn by uttering some liyinns.

3—6 Thmlimg, with the I elp of his
penances of Him who is ihe suprenm Soul
and who 18 eiernal and undecaying, randi
became stncicen irifh wonder and said
these wo/d«,— I seek Hit refnce whom ihe
bankfiy as describe and the Yogins llimk
of as the yrraj the friremosb the Male
Being the peivader of all ihnips, and lie
Lord of all exisient objects who, n tlm
cause of both the creation and the rfesinir-
tio'i of the universe , who is supenor to all
Hie gods the Asnras and the Mu"i« "ho
lias nothing hiefier wtio is imcreate, who is
the Lord of all ihmes who hat neilhef
beginning nor end. and who is pitied wuti
supreme power, nho is possrsseil of the
highest liappiness, and who is effuTgent and
sinless

7—10 Afier he h»d said these words,
Tandi, Saw before him that ocean if pen-
ances, that great God who is eltrn-l and
undreaying who is peerless who is incon.
ceival fe, who 1$ eternal, and who is will out
any change wt>o is indivisible wloiswliole,
who ts Bral ma, who ij above s>U sfjribiiies,
and wlio is gdted with aitribiiier, wl o is the
luxi est delight ol Yogms wt>a is without
decrease, wlio is called I iber^ition, who is
the seluL« of the mind of indra, of Agni,
oltlic Wind Cod, of the enlne univetsr.


44


MAllABHARArA.


and of the Grandfather Brahman , who
cannot he comprehended by (he mmd, who
IS without change of any kind, who is pure,
who Is capable of being apprehended by
the Understanding only, and who is imina*
terial the mind , who cannot be compre
bended, who cannot be measured, who is
difficult of being attained, by persons of
impute souls, who is the origin o( the uni-
verse, and who is above boih the universe
and the quality of darkness; who is an
cient, who is Purusha, who is gifted with
e^ulgence, and who is higher than the
highest.

II. Desirous of seeing Him who invest-
ing himself with vital airs, lives in tl>e in-
dividual soul, in the form of that eHjIgence
which IS called the Mind, the Kishi taiidin
passed many years practising the severest
austerities, and having succeeded in seeing
lliin as the reward of those penances, lie
lauded the great God in the following
terms,

Tandi said

13 You are the purffier of all purifiers
-and the refuge of all, O foremost of ett
beings gifted with intelligence I You are
the most dreadful energy of all kinds ol
energy. You are the austerest penance of
all penances.

13 You, O powerful one. are the liberal
giver«o{ blessings You are the supreme
iruili. lbowto)Ou.

14 I bow to you O you of a tuousand
ra)s, and, O refuge of all happiness f You
are the bestuwer of that emancipation for
which, O powerful one, Yatis, standing in
fear^of birth and death, strive so hard

15. Tlie Grandfather Drahman, Indra
of a hundred sacrifices. Vishiiu. Ilie
Vishwedevat, the great Ristiis cannot coni-
preliend your real nature. How then can
persons tike ourselves expect to coinptehend
you.

id. £’ver>tfiing originates from you
Upon you depends everyilnng You are
called Kala, you are called Purusha, you
are called Brahma Celestial Kisliis well-
read in the Puranas, say that you are triune

17. You are Adhi.Purusha, Adhyatma,
Adiiibhuia, Adlii-Daivata. Adhi Loka,
Adhi-Vijnanam.'and Adlii-Yajna.

15 Wise men, when they succeed in
knnwing yon that lives in themselves and
that can be knuivii by tbe very gods, be-
en we freed from all fetters and enier into a
stale of existence that is above all sorrow.

19. Ihey who do not wish to know you.
are cooiiraiiieJ to pass lhrou<li iiuinuer
ess bull send dtsUs. Yvu are the do9(


of heaven and of Liberation You are I «
who bring all beings into existence and
withdraw them agdin into yourself. You
are the great giver.

20 You are heaven, you are liberation,
yon are desire You are the anger ivhtch
inspires creatures You are battwa, you
are Rayas, you are lamas, you are (he
nether regions, and you are the upper
r^ions

2t. You are itie Grandfather Brahman,
you are Bhava, you are Vishnu, you are
Skaiida von are Indra, you are Savitn,
you are Yarns you are Varuna youare
doma. you are Diiatn, you are Manu, you
are Vidhatri, and you are Kuvera the Lord
of riches

22 You are E<rlh, you are Wind,
you are Water, you are Agni, you are
Ether, you are Speech, you arc the Uiider-
siandnig, you are Steadiness, you are
Intelligence, yon are the Acts, you are
truth, you are Untruth, you are existent,
you are iion-exisient

23 You Afs the senses, you are what
IS above Nature, you are immutable You
are superior to existent objects, you are,
superior to non-existent objects, you are
capaiile of being conceived, you are tnespa*
ble of being conceived.

24 You arc at one with what is
Supreme Brahma, witli what is the highest
eniity, wnb what is the end cl both Vie
Sankhyas and the Yogins

23 Indeed, I have been greatly re-
warded by you to day on acciunt ofjour
granting me a sight of your form. I
have aitaiiied the end of the righteous I
have been rewarded with that end whicli
IS prayed for by pprsons whose understand-
ings have been purified by Knowledge

26 Alas. SO long I was steeped m
Ignorance , for this long time I was an
insensate fool, since 1 had no knowledge
of you who are (■ e Supreme Deity, you
who are the only Eternal Entity a» known
by ail persons.

27 )n course ol numberless lives h»ve
I at last succeeded in acq itrmg that Devo-
tion towards you for winch yon have
shown yoursell to me, O you who are ever
inclined to favour itiose who are devoted
10 you’ He who knows you enjoy*
iinmortality,

25 You are always a mystery wth the
god* llie Asiiras.and the ascelKr* Brahma
iscoocealedm a cave. Ihe very ascetic*
caunot see or know tiim.

29 You are that powerful god who I*
the Creator ol everything and whose
ts lutued towards all direction*, aouafo


AKC/iriASANA PARVA.


45


Uie Soul of a'l things, joii see ail things,
you peivade all Uuiigs, and you know <tli
|t.ings.

30 You make a body ^or yourseW,
You bear ihat body. You are an embo*
died Being You have a body, and you
are the refuge of all embodied creatutes.
You are (he creator of the vital airs, you
possess the vital airs, you are endued with
vital airs, you arc the giver of the vital
airs, and you are the reluge ol all beings
endued with vita! airs

31, You are that Adhyatma, which is
the refuge of all pious persons wlio are
given to Yoga meditation and conversant
with the Soul and who seek to avoid re*
birth Indeed, you are that Supreme Lord
who IS at one with that refuge.

32 You distribute ail ends, happy or
miserable, to all creatures You ordam the
birth and death for all created beings.

33 You are the powerful Lord who
grams success to Rishis crowned with
success regarding tlie fruition of their
wishes Having created all (he worlds
beginning with Bhu, together wttli all
the dwellers of heaven, you uphold and
cherish them all, dividing yourself into
your Well known eight forms.

34 Everything originates from you. All
things depend upon you All llitutts, again,
disappeur in you. You are the sole Eternal
object,

35 You are that region of Truth which
IS sought by the righteous and considered j
by (hem as (he highest. You are Uiai I
stoppage of individual existence sought by ,
tlie Vogins You are that Liberation whicli
IS suugiit by persons conversant with the
boul.

36. Beings crowned with success and
having Brahman amongst them have con*
ce-iled you in a cave for preveniiRg the
deities and Asuras and human beings from
seeing you

37 Although you live m the heart, yet
are you concealed. Hence, stupefied by
you tlie denies and Asuras and ni'en cannot '
understand you, O Bliava, truly and matt ,
your details.

3S O you living in all heart you appear
before those persons who succeed in ait.>Mi'
mg to you after having purified themselves
by devution.

35 By knowing you one can avoid both
death and re birih. You are (he highest
object of knowledge. By knowing you no
liiglier object remains for one to know.

40 You are the greatest object of
acquirement. The person that is truly


wise, who by acquiring you, thinks lhat
there IS no higher object of acquisition By
attaining to you who are greatly subtile
and who are the highest object of acquisi«
tion, the wise man becomes immortal

4(. fhe followers of the Sankhyasys*
tem, welt read in their own system of philo*
sophy and possessing a knowledge of the
quHliues and of all the topics of enquiry,'—
Omse learned rnen who reign over the
destructible by attaining to a knowledge
of (lie subtile or iiidestruclihie , — succeed
by knowing you in freeing themselves from
all fetters.

42. Persons well read in the Vedas con*
aider you as the one object of knowledi^e
winch lias been explained in the Vedanta,
these men, given to the suppression of
vital airs, always meditate on you and at
last enter rota you as tlieir highest end.

43 Riding on (he car of OM, (fmse
men enter inter into Maheshwara. You
are the solar door of the celestial road,

44 You are the lunar door, of lhat
which is called the road of the Puns. You
are Kashiha, You are the points of the
honzon. you are the year, and you are the
Cycles.

4S- Vou are the sovereignty of the
heavens, you are the sovereignty of the
I Earth, you are the Northern and the
Soutliern solisiices In d^ys of yore the
Grandfather Brahman sang your praises.
O you who are called blue and red, by
reciting various hymns and urged you to
create living crealutes.

46 Draliinanas conversant with Richs
praise you by uttering Richs, considering
you as unattached to all tliniiis and as shorn
of all forms. In sacrifices, Adhyaryus, pour
libations, uttering YajiislieS in honor of
you who are the sole object of knowledge,
according to the three well known ways.

47 Persons of purified understandings,
who are conversant with Samans, sing you
with the iielp of Samans 1 hose iwice-
born, again, wJio are conversant wiili the
Alhnrvans. hymn you as Rita, as truth,
as the Highest, and as Brahma You are
the highest cause of the Sacrifice. You
are the Lord, and you are Supreme.

48 The night and day are your organs
of hearing and organ of sight The fort*
nights and months for your head and arms.

J fie seasons are your energy, penances are
are your patience, and the year is your
anu^ and thighs, and feet.

49 You are Death, you are Yama, you
are Huusha, you are f<sla, you are gifted
with speed of destruction, you ate the


46


MA1IABIIARATA.


prime cause of Time tnd are eternal


50. You are tlie Moon and the Sim, with
all the stars and planets and (lie atmos*
pliere thst nils space You are (he pole-
star, )o<i are ttie constellation catted the
seven Uisliis, joii are ti<e seven regions
beginning ivith Bhn.

5(. Von are Pradhana and Mahat, }0(l
are Unmanifest, and jou are tins world.
You are the universe beginning witli
Frshma and ending with the lowest vege-
table creation You are the beginning of
all creatures You are identical with the
existent and the non existent.

52. You are the eight Prakntis. You
are, again, above tlic eight Prakrilis
Fvery thing that exists, represents a por-
()oi) of jour diviite Self.

53 You are the Supreme Ciernal Hap-
piness You are this end tf alt things
You are the lughest existence of the
Rigliteous.

54 You are tliat stale which is freed
Iroin every anxiety You are Eternal
Brahma You are that highest stale winch
forms the meditation of persons well-read
in the auxiliary branches of the Vedas.

55 You are thejnehest Kashtha, you
are the highest KaU You are live highest
Success, and jou are the higliest Refuge.

55 You are the highest Iraiquihiy
You are the highest stoppage of Existence
By attaining to you, Yogins think that
they have acquired the Highest success

57. You are Contentment, you are Suc-
cess >ou are Shruti, and you are (he
Smriit You are that neftige of (he Soul
which Vogins seek and >auare (hat in-
destiuclible Prapti which men of knowledge
seek.

58 You are, forsooth, that End which is
sought by persons given to sacrifices and
those who pour sacrificial libations, moved
by particular desires, and* who make large
presents on such occasions

59 You are that high End which those
persons seek who consume and C rcli their
bodies with austere penances wi(h conti-
nued recitations wilh those rigid vows and
fasts vvhicli belong to their peaceful lives,
and with other means of self affliction

60 O Eternal One, )ou are the End
of those who are unattached to all things
and who have given up all acts

61 You O Eternal One, are that End
of those who seek Liberation from re birth,
who give up all enjoyments, and who desire
the amuhilalion of the elements.


63. You are that high End, O lUititriou?
one, which cannot be described, whicti is
pure, which is the immutable one, and
which IS theirs who are given to ki>0wledge
and science.

63 These are the five Ends described
Ml the Vedas and the Scriptures and the
Piiranas. it is throiich your favour that
persons acq lire those Ends, or, if Ihej fad
(o attain to them, it ts through your favour
being denied to them,

64 It was thus that Tnodi, who was a
heap of penances, lauded Ishana And he
sang also that high Brahma winch m days
of yore was sung by the Creator himself.

Upamanyu said

65 Thus lauded by that utterer oi
Brahira, ns , iandi, Mabadeva, (hat illus-
trious and powerful god who was accom-
panied by Ins wife Uma, said these words.

Taudf said.—

06 Neither Brahman, nor Indra, nor
Vishnu, nor the Vishwedevas. nor >ho
great hnew you Pleased at tlub

bUiva said the following words.

The Holy One said’—

67 You slisfi be indesiructibfe and
eternal You shall be freed from all sorroiV
You will have great tame You will be
gified »)th energy. You wiU get Spiriiuil
Knowledge.

68 AH the Rishis shall seek you, snd
your son, through my favour, shall beCome
iheautliof of Sutras, O foremost of twice-
born ones

69 What Wishes of yours shall I grant
to-dayT lellme O sou wh^t do you seek-
—At tins, I aiidi joined his hands and s-ud,

— O Lord, let my devotion to you be
steady.

I Upamanyu said ' —

70^ Havnng given to Tantfin these fioonV
and received the adorations of both (ho
gods and ihe Rishis, the great Deity dis-
appeared there and then

71 When the illustrious Deity, O I®'’.'?
of the Yadavas thus disappeared witli
bis followers, the Rishi came to my * o'"*
niitage and said to me all that had taken

72 Da you hear, D foremost of meoi
for your success, all iliose celebrated names
that Tandi said to me.

73 The Grandfather had at 0 "®*'”’®
recited ten thousand names of Mahadeva.

In the scriptures, a thousand names of ine

god occur.


AHUStfASANA PARVA.


47


7^ Thess tiSmes arc not known fo all
O >00 who « above destniclion, ui day» of
yore, llie Grandfatl er Brahman uttered
these names for worshippnij* it>e ^reat
Derfy Havirrg ftcrjuired them jhrongb Ihe
favour oljilie Grandiaiher, laiidt comntuni*
caied them to me.


CHAPTER XVJl.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Couitttuad.

Vasndeva said*--

1 Concentrating his mind, O Yndhish*
thira, the Iwice^born Rishi Upaiuaoyu,
will) hands joined together i» r*■^pecl,
uttered this abstract of names beguimng
from the very commencement.

‘Dpamanyu said

3, 1 shall worship that great Deity who
IS worthy of tlie adorations of alf creatures,
by uttering those names which are celebra*
ted over all the worlds,— names sonte of
which were uttered by ttie Greudfaiher
Brahman, some by the RhIks, and some of
which occur in the Vedas, and the auxili*
ary sciences,

3 Ihose names have been used by
eminent persons they are, again, trne and
fraught with success and are capable of
accomplishing all the objects of the utterer.
they have been given to Mafiadeva by
Tandi whose soul was purifiel by Vedic
learning and who invented those names
with the help of hi$ devotion.

4 With those names that have been
UUered by many veil known pious persons
and hy ascetics conversant with all the sub
Jects t shall worship him wlio is the greatest,
who IS llie first, wlm lakes to 1)ea»en,,who >s
ready to give benefits upon all creatures,
and wlio is auspicious j

5 i hose names have been heard )n the

universe, having spread from the region of
Brahman All of them are fraught with
Iruth With ti Dse names ( shah worship
liiin who IS Supreme Brahma, who lios
been described by tlie Vedas, and who is
Eternal I

6 , I shall noiv tell you O chief of Vadu’s >
race, those names. Hear tliem with rapt
attention Vou are a devout worshipper
of (he Supreme Lord Adore the iHus*
Inous Dhava, knowing him above all the
deities.

y, And because you are devoted to Inm,

2 shall, therefore, recite those names before


yoa Maliadeva is Eierna] Brahme. No
one even one endued wiili Yoga is able to
describe, m even a Imndrrd >ears, tl e gfoi y
and power of ifiat great Ueity in full liic
beginning, middle, or rnd ol M.il,adrva
cannot be apprehended by the very gods.

9 Such being the fact, who IS tliere, O
Maliadeva, (hat can recite the q lahiies of
M.r>i.rdeva lo full? I sliall, tioMever.—
through tfie faionr of ifiat illustrious su-
preme and perlecily wise Deity, ettended
to me for iny devotion to linn —recite liis
sllribities in an abstract of few words
and letters,

lo. 1 he Supreme Lord Is incapable of
being worshipped by ^ny one if he does not
grant Utt perinisiioit lo the worshipper. As
for myself, It IS only when I become fortu-
nate enough to receive Ins permission that 1
succeed 111 worshipping linn.

t(. { shall mention only a few names of r

(hat great God who is without birth ami |
without destnicii in, wlio is the ori),tnal 1
cause of the u iiverse, who is gifted with;
the highest Svul.and whose origin Jsun«>

, manifest.

I t) Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that
were uttered by Brahman himself, of that
giver oj boons, that worshipful god, iliat
powerful one who has tlie universe for
his form, and who is gifted wtili supreme
wisdom.

>3 These names that I sImI} reeiie art [
taken from the ten ihousai d names that the i
great Grandiaiher had uttered in days'O
of yore, as clarified butter r$ extracted from k
curds.

14 As gold IS the essence of rocky |
mountains, as* honey 1$ the essence of |
gowers, as Msnda is ilie extract from cUri-|
fied butler, so have these names been ex- 1
iracted from and repiesent the cream of v
(hose ten thousand names that were uttered t
by the Grandf«llier Bratiman

t3 I his abstract of names can remove^
every siu however heinous It possessesfl
the merit of the four Vedas ft should be 1
understood with care, and be kept in ihe>
memory wiih concentrated suul.

16 It IS fraught with auspiciousness.

It brings on advancement It destroys
Raksbasas It is a great purifier. It should
be given only to hint wloisdevited lo the
great Lord, to 1 nn tv) o las Faith, to hitn 1
who believes It should never be commu- |\
nicaied to I im wl o has no laiih, him who is

an unbeliever, him who has not conquered*
his soul

17 That creature. O Krishna, who
entertain malice towards the illustrious
Mabadeva who is the original cause of


MAHABIIARATA.'


48


everything, who ts the Supreme Soul, nnd
who IS the great Lord, lias surety to go to
hell with all his ancestors before and all
ins children after him.

tS. This abstract of names that t shall
recite to )OU is regarded as Vnga>medita-
tion I his IS regarded AS Yoga, this is
regarded as the highest object of medila*
lion. This IS what one should constantly
recite This Is knowledge. This is the
highest Mystery.

19. If one, even on the eve of death,
recites it or hears it recited to him, he
succeeds m attaining to the highest end
'this IS holy. Ihis is auspicious, this is
fraught with every sort of benefit. Tins
IS the best of all things.

20 Brahman the Grandfather of all
the universe, having in days of yore, com-
posed it, gave to It the foremost pbce
among all excellent hymns.

21. Since then, this hymn of the great-
ness and glory 0! the great Mahadeva,
which IS held m the highest reverence by
all the gods, ts known as the king of all
hymns,

92. This king of all hvmns was first
‘‘taken (rom-^the-regton of Brahman to
heaven, the region of the gods • landi

t hen got It from heaven. Hence it is
jnown as the hymn composed by Tandi.

93 From heaven Tandi brought it
down on Earth. It is the most sacred of
all sacred things, and is capable of re-
moving all sms however heinous,

2^, O you of powerful arms, 1 shall
recite to you that best of all hymns This
hymn belongs to him who is ihe Veda
of the Vedas, and the most ancient of all
ancient objects,

25 To him who Is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penances ,
to him who IS the most tranquil of all
creatures gifted with tranquility, and who
IS the splendour of all splendours.

2(5 To him who is regarded as the
most restrained of all creatures who are
restrained, and him who is the intelligence
of all creatures gified with intelligence .
to him who IS regarded AS the god of all
gods, and the Rishi of all Rishis,

27. To him who is regarded AS the
sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most aus-
picious of all auspicious things , to him who
IS the Rudra of all the Riidras, and Ihe
effulgence of all cffulxent things.

aS To him who Is the Yogin of all
Yogins, and the cause of all causes , to
him from whom all the worlds come into


being, and ?o whom all the worlds feldfrt
when they cease to exist

99 *10 him who ts the Soul of all

creatures, and wlio is called Hara of great
energy Hear me recite tliose thousand
and eight names of the great Siiarva.

30- Hearing those names. O foremost
of all men, you will get the fruition of all
your desires— OM* you are Immobile,
you are Fixed, you are Powerful, you are
lerrible, you are Foremost, you are Boon-
giving, and you are Superior.

31 You are the Soul of all creatures,
you are celebrated over all creaiures, yoii
are all things, yon Are the Creator of all.
and you are Bhava. You carry matted
locks on jour head You put on animal
skins for your dress* You have a crest of
matted hair on your head like Ihe peacock.
You are he who has the whole universe
for your limbs You are the Creator vf
all tilings You are Hara because you
destroy all things.

32. You are he svho has eyes of the
gazelle. You are the destroyer of all
creatures You are tlie supreme enjoyef
of all things.

1 33 Yau are that Pravrlti whence all

actions originate You are that Nivirtti ot
' abstention from acts, you are observant of
I fasts and vows ynu are Eternal, you are
I Unchangeable You live in erematoria,

I you possess the six well-known lordly
I powers and the rest, you live the heart of
I every creature you enjoy all things with
I the senses, and you are the grinder oi all
I sinful creatures.

34. You are he who Is worthy of salu*
tationsof all, you are of great feats, yo'<
are he who has asceticism for Ins riche<f
you create all the elements at your will, y*’'*
conceal your real nature by putting on the
•dress of a lunatic. You are the Lord of
all the worlds and of all living creatures.
Yon are of immeasurable form yon are of
huge body, you are of the form of
eoiisness, you are of great fame, you are oi
great Soul, you are the Soul of all creatiur*'
you have lie universe for your form, I®'*
are of vast jaws.

36, You are the pr®**ctof of all ihf
worlds, you allow your Soul tO disappraf
behind tlic darkness of Ignoiance Y®**
are gladness Yon are he whose ear W
borne by mules You ire he who proterts
individual soul from the thunder of re.birih*
You are adorable You are obtained bf
purtty and self-control and vows Y «u »t*
again the refuge of alt kinds of vows a"^
observances including purity and *eU**P***

irol, ‘


AMUSUASAHA PAnVA.


^7. Vo'i are tlie Divine ArcliJlect who
U cDiwrfs-iiit with every art. Vou are
self. create Yon are Uie beginniin* ol all
creatiires ami tilings. Yon are Hiranya-
^.arlilia, Ifie Creator of all tilings. You are
endless powier and happiness You have
ft Imndred 6)68, yon have etpansive
eyes. Yon are boon. Von are he who
tnakes powerful all righteous creatiirts to
assume glorious forms for shining 111 the
Sky.

33. Yon are the Moon, you are the Sim
yon are the planet Saturn, you are the
de'Cenditig node (of the Moon), you are
the ascending node, yon are Maiigala
(Mars), and you are Vrihaspaii (jnpiter)
and Shukra (Venus), ton are Bndha (Mer*
cuff), you arc the worshipper of Alrt’s wife,
you aretie wlio stiot his arrow at Sacrifice
when Sacrifice fled from his anger in the
form of ft deer. You are sinless

39 You possess penances by wbicli you
can creale the universe. You possess
penances bv which you can destroy the
universe. Von are high. minded Vou
satisfy ibe wishes of all wliu dedicate them,
selves to you. Vou are the m-ilcer of the
year. Voti are Mantra. You are the
authority lor all acts. You arc the highest
Feiiaiice.

40. Vou are given to Yoga. Vou are
he who merges I imself in Urabmaii You
are the great seed. You display what is
uiimanifest as thie tnanifert form m «hich
the universe exi'its. Yuii liave Mifimie
'*niivlit You are lie whose seed is gold
You are oninnoent Vou are the caii>e of
nil things. You are he who has the seed of
BLtioii for the ineans of going from (his
world to the otlier and the other to this.* ,
4(. Vou have ten arms. You have
wnutess eyes You have a bine throat.
Von are t 1 e husband of Uina. You are the
origin of all the infiiiKe forms that are lu
the mitverse. You are he wliose sttpetioruy
is due to yourself. You arr a hero iii power
You lire inert mailer. You are all the
topics ol el quiry. ^

42 Yon are the ordamer aitd governor
of the topics. You are the chief of those
beings wlio serve you and are called Gftiias,
You cover nvfiniie space. You are Kama
the god of fove. Vou are cniiverseot swtit
Mantras You are the higtiest Manira
You aie tfie cause of the universe. You
aie the universal destroyer.

\ 43 You carry m one of your hands llm
caUbash. In another )o<> liohl |l r bnw.
Iirai'ocTer jou have arrows Jrt -Oioffrer
you caity a sVnll Vou c.*ri) the ll under,
loll Vnu-aTr^nu-d with the Sh-la|.lini
%'ou aie aimed with the swoid. You hold


49

the bftttle.ave, Vou are ftrmed wtiliUie
ShutaTtTfde^it), Vou/ne worsliipfif.

4f. You have tlie S'lirilli.n) Ld e m one
nf your hands. You liive beaOtTfiTl form.
You are gifted with .tbundant energ).
You give most lavishly all that lends 10
adorn those who are devoted to )nii You
put Ol) a turban on vour head. Vuii have
a beautiful face. Vou are he who is full of
splendour and power. You ate be who is
humble and modest.

45, You are eeceedmgly falJ. You are
he who has the senses for your rays.
Vou are the greatest of preceptors.
You are Supreme Brahma. You are be
who took the shape of a jackal (fur consol,
■ng a Urahmana who, insulted by ft rich
V^ishya. bad determined tu commit sui*
cide, Yuu are he wliose objects all become
fruitful of tfiemselvee You are one who
has a bald bead. You are one who does
good to alt.

4f5. You arc iinbofo, Vou have titint*
berless forms. Yuu have all sorts of fra*
grance Oil your body, llie matted lucks
oil your head lied sucked up the lliver
Q inga when It first dropped from heaven.
You are tlie giver of sovereignty. You am
a Urabinachann wiiliout luving ever <ieg«
lecled the rigid vow of cehbacy, Yuu are
famous for you sexual coniini-nce Vou
always he on your back. You live ui
power.

47. You have three matted focls on your
he,4d You are he who is cUd in rags.
You are Rudra. You are the crlestul
commander in chief, and you are alNper.
vading. You are he who moves about
during the day. You are he who moves
about Ml the night You are o[ dreadful
anger. You are endued with tfl ilgence.

4S. You are the destroyer of ihe power,
ful Asura who liad coine ui liie fotrn of a>i
inbiiiate elephant for destroy mg the sacred
City of Varanasi Vou aie llir destroyer of
Dailyas oppressing the universe. You ate
KaU or lime which is the iniiveisat des.
(royer. You a»e the sapreicte arj^iner o(
the universe. You are a mine of q lahlieft.
lions. You ftre of the form of ibe hon .'iiuf
the tiger. You are he who is cUJ in an
elephant sliiiu

49 You are tl e Yogin wlm deceives
Tune bv eeitirg over «cs ir.e»(siibfe 11 flu*
e» ce Yon ure the original sound. You
are the finuion of all desnes. Vmi are he
who u worshipped m four ways \ ou aie
ft iiighi ranger. Yniiarrleulo walks in
lie company cf ‘pnU., Y' « ..retealu
wftksin ihe company of gl rslly brii>y.S,
You ftie tie Snpienie Loid of sstn India
and the oil tt deities.


50


MAHAdllAitATA.


50 Yob i*f^(ie who lias miilupliei him*
ssli infinittlj >i1 ilie form of all existent and
non existent ll ini’s Yon are the upholder
of Mahal and all oilier compounds of llw
fivc'pnin^l elements You are the prune-
val Ij^iTormice or that is known by the
name of Stahu You are infiiiue You are
the supceiiie Fnd of tlie liberated You are
fond of datKiny You are he who makes
oiheis dance. You are the friend ol the
ui iversc.

51 You are he whose aspect is calm
and mild Yuu are endued with penances
which can create and destroy the umvetsfe
You are he who fetters all creatures with
] our illusion. You are he wlio is above
destruction You are he who lived on a
mouiiiain You are above all bonds and
are unattached to all things, like Space
You have a thousand arms You arc vie*
lory You are that perseverance which
b'lWfis ois succes*. or victory Vow are vutb*
out idleness or procrastination which inter*
Itiis with perseVeriOgUcTivity.

5* You are brave You are fear. You
Kie he who put a stop to Vali's sacrifice
Vou gratify tlie desires of all )our devotees
Vou are the destroyer of Dakslia’s sacrifice
Viu nre amiable. You are slightly ami*

" able.

53 You are exceedingly fierce and rob
all creatures of their energy. You are the
destroyer of the Asura Vala You are
always cheerful You are of the form of
riches which is coveted by all You liave
never been defeated there is none more
worihipfiil than you Vou are he who
emus deep roars You are that which is
so deep thai no one can measure it. Vou
are lie wliose power and the might of whose
companions and bull have never been
gauged toy anybody.

54 You are the tree of the world. You
are the banian You are lie who sleeps on
a banun leaf when the universe, alter dis*
tolulion beciimes one infinite sheet of water.
Yiuaichewlio shows mercy to all wor.
shippers as^umin^ as you like, the form of
llari or Hara nr Ganesha or Arka or Agni
or Wind etc. ^ ou have rxceedn gly sharp
teeth. You are of l>uge proporiioiis You
have a moiuti vast enough to swallow the
universe at once.

5 S y* * he whose followers are wor*
shipped everywhere. You are he wlio re*
moved all the feat* of the gods when (he
mtr-cfc tol elephants had to be captured.
Yon are 0 >e seed ol Oie Universe. You
are he WIkj has tile Sahie bull for Vourcar*
rwti that forms aeal 1 lie embletd oh hiS
banner iit baiiK You have AgiU for your
• anal. Y.m ate Ihf, Sun who has Rieet
t-oraes yeked to his car. You arellite ftwini


of the lodividiial s6ul Vmi fli** be wild
conversant with the proper time for ll>e
pericrniance o{ all religious rites

56 You are he fo whom Vishnu had
paid Ills adorations You are Vislmu.
You are the ocean You are the Mares
head ifiat ranges within the ocean, cease*
lessly emitting fire and drinking the salin^
waters as if tliey were sacrificial butter.
Vou are \Vtnd. the fttend of A<ni. Yod
are of tranquil soul tike tlie ocean wlncli
fenialns at rest iknd immoved by iho mildest
air Vow are Agiii Ibat drinks the libations
of cldrtfied butter podted m sacrifices with
(he help of Mantras.

57 You are he whom it is difficult W
approach. You are he whose effiilgei'ce
spreads over the infinite universe Yon a**!
expert «> battle. You are well conver-
snnt with the time wlien one should engage
HI battle so that victory may be won. You
Ore that science which dea^s whVi lb*
ingtions (>< fieavenly bodies You are of
the form of success or victory. You have
a tx^y for all lime.

5$ You arc a house holder for you

(have a tnfl of hair on your head , you ore
a Sannyasm lor your iiead is bald , you
have matted locks On your head , you are
known for your fiery rays , you are hc
who appears in the sky of the heart encased
III the body ol every creature ; you nre he
who enters into the brain of.every creature •
you bear the wrinkles of age , you
carry the bamboo flute ; you have also the
labour , you possess the musical instru*
ment called fall, you have the wooden
moiur used lor husking gram , you arc
he who covers that illusion which covert
Yama,

59 Yoh are an astrologer because youf
undefstanding is always directed towards
the motion of the wheel ol Time which it
made up of the luminaries m the sky ; y^"
are the individual soul whose understand*
ing IS directed to things that are the out*
come of the qualities of Sattwa Ra}as, and
I'amas , ynu are that in which all thing*
roerae wlien dissolutions sets in; you are
stable and fixed, there being nolinng in yoo
which IS subject to change or nnuaiion ol
any sort , you arc the Lord of all crea*
lures , your arms extend all over ih*
great universe . you appear m numberle**
forms which are but portions of yourself •
you pervade all tilings , you liave oo
mouth.

60 You are he who frees creatures fm^
the fetters of the world , you are easily
attainable; )dii are be who appeared wk"
a golden mall, you are he who appe*^
w the phallic emblem i you are h** w«»
roams tn tlie fore.ts ill search of fowls 10^


• the


antnia?< { yaii arc l»e wJifl roamt ov
entire Earth , you are omuipresenti

6i. Vpu are tlie blare o( a)I the
trumpet* Wowu lit the three wftrhli , jon
have all creatures ior your relatives ' you
are of the form of a snake; you live in
mountaif) caves , you are at one with the
commander in-chief of the celestials , you
wear garlands of flowers , you are he who
enjoys the happiness which originates from
the possession of earthly ohfeccs.

6i. You are he from whom all creatures
have got their three states of birtK exist*
ence and destruction , you uphold all
things which exist or occur in the three
stages of litne, tKS. llie Past, the Present,
and the Future, you yourself free crea*
tures from the effects of all pristine deeds
as well as tlie present ones and from all the
bonds of Ignorance and Desire, you are
the binder of Asura chiefs, jou are the
slayer of foes iii battle.

63. You are attainable by knowledge
alone, you are Durvasas , you are he
who IS setved and worshipped by all tie
righteous , you are he who brings about
the fall of even Brahman and the others ,
you are lie who gives to all creatures (he
one share ol joy and sorrow that eadi de*
serves according to Ins own deeds , you
are peerless, you are well conversant
with the shares which are given and up.
propriated m sacrifices,
d4 You live everywhere , you wander
every wfiere, you have wretched clothes ,
you ate Vasava , you are nntuortai , ywu
are at one with the Himav^i mountains ,
you are the maker of pure gold, you arc
without acts, you uplmld tn yourseli the
fruits of alluccs, you are (lie foremost of
all upl older,

• 65 You have bloody eyes , you have

eyes whose vision extends over the infinite
universe , yuu Imvc a car whose wl eels aie
ever viuonous , you are greatly teamed ,
you ate he who accepts your devotees for
your servants , you are lie who restrains
vtrii •utJi ywgWit'b 'yuut vwi-ves , yim wit Vit
wild acts , you put On clothes whose warp
and woof are made of snakes,

66' You are Supreme , youarehewho
IS the lowest of the celestials , you are lie
who IS well.grown , you have the musical
instrument called KaiiaU , you are the
giver of every wish , you are the grace
personified in all the three stages of time,
aie , the Past, the Present, ami the Folure,
you are endued with power which ts always
Well spent ; you are he who had assumed
the form of Vdlarama.

67. You are the foremost of all coveted
IhiugS; being Liberation or tin. highest of


ANUSHASANA PATlVAr

‘ I. ^ , .

stll endf a( creatiifesTiJ^ifm are ('i« grver
of all tlinigs , y >ur face >t turned towards
all dlrectinis, you are he from >vlioin
various creatures have originated even ,«s
all forms liav* originated from spipe or
arc madification* of that primal elprijenf ,
ynu are he wio jails nuo the pit Called
body , you are fie wlio is helpless , you
live III tile sky of the heart.

68 You are of terrilic form , you are
(he Hetty called Ansliu , you are (he
companion of Aiishii and are called
Adilya , you are endued with inniiiner.
able rays, you are possessed of dazslmj,'
effulgence, you are licet like the Wind,
tou have speed greater (hail (httof the
Wind, you are fleet lue (he mind,
you enjoy all things, being invested Yrith
Ignorance. .

60 You live in every body, you live
with Prosperity as your cdmpamoii , you
are Ite w} o imparts knowledge and iiiitruc-
lion , you are he who delivers instruc'ioii
Silently , you are lie who observes the vow
of silence, you are lie who passes out of
the body for looking at ihe soul , y ou are
he that IS well worshipped, you are jhe
giver of thousands

Yuu are tlie kmj^ of bird* , you are
the friend who gives aid , yuu are pus*
sessed of H'tul effulgence, you are’tlie Lord
of ail Cfe4ied beings , you are lie wlio
excites (he appetilies , you are (he god uf
luve , you are ol the form of lovely
women wlio are coveted hy all , y >u arts
(lie tree of the woild , you are the king ot
riches , you are the giver uf fame.

You are god who distributes to alf
creatures tlie fruits of their deeds , you are
yourself those , fruits winch you distribute ,
you are tlie most ancient , you a^cuiti.
petent to cover wit h a. 8mgle** ^oots^ ep of
yOHts aif the^tl^ee^^w^J /> you aTe tin.
dwarl^who vdeceived llie AsuraHTiig Vali,
yoti'are the Yogm crowned with success,
y< u are a great Uishi , >ou are one whnse
objects beoiiie always successful j you are


7s You are he who is adorned with the
■narirs of (he mendicant order , you are
lie who IS wiihubt'Slich'inarks , you are
I e who IS above tlie usages of the nsendi*
cant order, you are le who assuresatl
creatures from every soit of fear , you
are wilhout any passions , you are thy
commander.iii cl lef ol thecelesiial army,
you are tl>al''Vishakha wliu sprang from
the person ot the celestial commander in*
chief when Iiidra hurled his thunder holt
at Inin , you are l>e who enjoys tlie sixty
subjects or heads of objects tn (hr universe ,
you ore the Master of tb> *rn>M.


5 =


MAHATinAAATA.


7j Ym arcliewlinn afned uUli tlie
t1iunJ-r-h .II , \ot* are inflnue . > on ate

it.esnipefiur of U«il)a aimieson tlie baule
lifirt ; }ou are lie moves Ins car in

circles snioii); l>is ouii soldiers and t^lio
iiultes MiniUr circles amont> tlie foes and
ilevastailiii’ tliem reliirns safe and sound ,
sou are he ssho hiiows the lowest depili
Ilf the world’s ocean, jou are AUdUu,
sou have ejes whose color resembles that
ut lionc>.

74 • You are he who has taVen birth
after Vrihaspali , jou are he who does
the acts which priests hate to do in ssct|.
fices , }ou are he who is alwajs wwr>
shipped b> persons of vanoui modes nf
life , 50U att devoted to tlrahwsa ; jon
roani in the habiiatiniis of men 111 the
voild , jou pervade all bemgs , jou are
lie who knows truth.

75. You know and Rulde every heart ;
jou aie he who oterspreads the enure |
vwviveise *, ^ou are he who coHeets or I
stores the {{oad and had deeds (of all
creatures in order to distubute the fiuits
thereof ; jou are he who lues during even
lliemght that follows ilie tnnversal disso*
lution , )Ou are the holder of the buw
called Tinaka , )ou live in even the
Dait>as whence are the marks o( )our
arrows ; you are the author of prosperii) ,

\ ou are the powerful monkey wiro helped
ftshnw in the incaiwatiow ol Uatwa in Ins
iNpediiiun against Havana.

761 You are the master of those Canas
^ Viho are your associates , you «re each
member of those various Gaiias , you are
he who gladdens al] creatures; you are
the enhancer of llie joys of aU , you take
away the sovereigni) and prosperuy of
even such high beings as Indra and others .
you are the universat destroier in the fuiin
ol Deaih , )<iu are he who lives in the
sixiy-four Kolas; you are seiy great;
you are the grandfather. ^

77. You ate the supreme phalhc emblem
w'liicti IS worslMpped by both gods and
Asuras , you are of agreeable and beauti-
lul features, you are he who makes all 1
beings comprehend tlie various sorts of
proofs winch exi.t as evidence of all ideas
^nd nolw.is , you are the Lord of vision
and the other proofs of all ideas derived '
from the ‘enies , you are the Lord of
Yoga.

7S You are the Lord of seeds , you
arc the oiiginal cau»e of such seeds , you
act ill the ways that have been pointed
out III the scriptures beginning witli those
/ which (led with the bout, you are he ill
whom hve power and the other qualities,
you ate the MiUabUaiata and oVhei liisio*


licit wot kt ; ynii are the treatises called*
Mimins-t, you ore Cmtama , jou are
the author of the giosi wotit on Graiiiinar
named ;ifter tfic Moon,

79 You arc he who punishes his enr*
mics ; you are he whom none can piiiii>h I
you are he whu is sincere in all his reh'
giouc acts and observances ; you are fie
who becomes obedient to those who are
devoted to y oil , y riu are he who can subdue
otliers i you aie he who fotnents quarirlt
among the gods and tlie Asuras , you are
lie svlio Ins created the fimriecii woiMsf
you are the protector and cberislier of all
Deiiigs begDiKig front Brahman and ending
with the I laest foini. of vrgelahfe life , you
arc the Creator of even the five priwcip*!
elriiienis ; you are he who neser enjiy*
riny thing.

80 You are free from decay ; you ar*
the liighcsl form of happiness ; you a'C
a dally ptoiid if his power, you are
bhakia : yon aie the pituulunent described
III treatises on Poliiics and inflicted od
offenders , you are the tyranny winch prf
vails over the wnthl . you are of pwte
Soul, you are stainless , you se worthy
of ado'aiiin, yon are the world that
appears and disappear ceaselessly.

81. Vnu are he wliose favour is of tlie
largest measure; you aie he who has
go^ dieam. , you ate a inirnir in which
the universe IS ii-flecieil , you are he who
lias subyugatid of alt miernal and eN'ertial
enemy . yon ate the makci of the Veda 1
you ..le the iimker of the sayings contained
in Ihe 1 anlras and the Hurntias and wl ich
aie embodied in human language , you aic
highly learned , yuU are tlie guilder of
enemies m battle.

81 Yost are he who lives tu the dread-
ful clouds iImI appear at the lime of the
universal dissoluuon , you are most terii-
ble , you are he who succeeds in suhjiigat*
ingall pecsoiis and all ilniigs , jou are

file preA 'ibesirojcr, y ou are'ne "’iro’ioA
fire (oV his cneig) , you are lie whose
energy is mire powerful than fire, y*”*
are the Yuga fire that cnnsinnes all things J
you are he who IS capable of being pleased
by means of sacnficial libations , youaie
water and oilies liquids that are pouted m
sacrifices with the help of Mantras.

8j You are in the form of the god of
Righieousness, the scaiterer of the fruits
of acts good and bad , you are the giver
of happiness, you are always gifted wnh
elTuigeiice , yon are of the form of fire,
you are emerald liued , you are al-
ways present in ilie phallic emblem , you
dtc Uic source of blessedness , you can


ANUSIIAS^r^A TARVA.


ii>>ver be defeiled in (be [larsuit o( )our
obj--cts

8j You pre tbe piver cl bVs»ii»ps,
^Oii are o( lliefxiii of I Irb^cdnes^ , \ou
.■re lie lo »boni is j!! veil a sliaie of sacrtrcial
ifTeimes, )oii air tl<e distributer ol 'acrt*
ficial ofTeriiiKs , \<>ii are Rifled wUh irreat

speed , )ou are he vvt a is dissociated (ro>n
all ihiii^s , ]oii ate he who is possessed
ol the most piweifiil hmh ; )ou are be
who IS employed in the ^ci ol geiieraiion.

85 You are of a dark hue , )au are
of a while complexion , jou are the senses
of all einhodied cieaiines , 300 have liu^e
feet I )ou have luge hands, }Ou are of
huge bod)' , you have wide extending
fame.

S6 You have a tiufre head , you atC
of huge propoiiion , you are of vast vision .
^oii are the liuiiie of the darkness of
Ignorance , you are the Ueslroyer , you
are possessed of hiue ears , you have liuge
lips , you are he who has vast e>te«k$.

8;. You ha\e a huge nose; you are
of a vast ihroat ■ you have n vast neck,
you ate lie who tears the bond of society,
ou have a vast chest, you late a vast
lovoin , you aie tl e luiier soul which lives
III uU cieattires , you have a deer on your
lap

8S You ate he from tsliom niimberless
Wiiildt hang dunn fiae fruns liAngnig down
liuin a Uce , you are he who stretches Ins
hit bps at (he tune of the innveisal dis*
hduti n (or detounug tie innvetse , you
Hie tfie (Cean of rnilk , you have Inige
(VFtli , you tiave I uge yaws , you have
a hu^e longue , you have a huge inouiti

Sy You hate lug naiU , you have
lAfge li lira , you luve tery long hairs,
oil I ate a tug siuiiMCfi , you (lave matted
ucics of treat Ivugili , yi ii are ever cheer*
fill , y<T>i are ol (fie form uf grace , you
are of (fii* form of hchef , you are lie who
hj« motuilams for hi< bow.

Ol You are he wlio 11 full nf aff'cmn '
(o Mfrcretl nrv I'lte a ptieiii lowarils Ins
cfotdieii', yuti Hie fie who lias no Hfieclion ,
you «ie uivHi q 1 slied , jou are li<ffy
«!eVO(rct to (\ Uk.«} 'iieifUali 111 . you arc of
He fofiij al lie (rre of (he world, you
are he who i> marked out by tbetreeof
the world , you are never srliared with
*■*(' ’h’ » >'*'* he wl a has the Wind
lor your vehicle for going Irom p’ace to
place.

rji Vrtu are he wha ranges o»er h«lf<
a Ml I illocks , you are he who h»e» on the
tnoiinUius a! >l(iti. you are tic king of
the ctlrttivls , you have the All atvaits for
year lead, you have t'lc Samans ler


53

ycur mouth , y au have Uie thousand Hicht
lor youi I iirneasu nblc «y ■!

91 Yoo’av'T' sour feet

an i liai is , you Hie |l Upn i <t$ , yon
nre (I e ritnals , y»ii n lue < lie, you
aioii.. w, ovr v>1 <tAti .re never inifuf.
filled, yo ( ore I c whu 1 Iwayv bent on
I ivou mg , yuii re 1 1 wliu is of beautiful
form.

93 You ar» o' ihc form af the good
that OMc does to aneilmr , you wre iliat
which IS dear, you are he who always
advances towanfs your devotees , you are
gold wild other precious metals held dear
by all , your effutiience is like that of
burnished gold , yonaiellie iiHvel , you
are be who makes the fruits of sacrifices
grow , you are ( f the form ol that faith
and devotion wl ich the pious lave for
sacrifices , y ou are the maker the universe ,
you arethe immobile.

9; You are the twelve stales through
which a peison passes , you are he who
causes fear ; you are the begnming of all
things , Y^n ha who tinitrs Individual
Soul vrtih Supreme Brahma ihroiigh Yoga ,
you are at on' with that Yoga winch
himgs about such a union between the
Individual bout and Supreme tirafnna ,
you are til maifrst , you are llie presiding
god of (he fourth age

95 You ate eietnal Time , ymt are
of the foim of ihe tortoise, you ate
adored hy the Destroyer iuniself,

96 You hve in the midst company ;
you admit your orvoires as members of
your Griia , you have Biahman hnnselC
lor the diiwr of your car, you steep on
avte», JOU protect the universe wiih
avi es , you ate he wtiose hudytv made of
ashcH , yon arc the Irre that Brwiits fli-
fi Mid III of all wishes , youareof (he form
of those who make up your Cana.

97. Yo I arethe protector of the four*
tern re(,ians , you are above al* (he re*
Clone , y m are full , you aie wor>t<>p{>e«l
tiy afi' creatines , yoii aie wViire , you aie
he who has petfrcily pure body, speech and
mini, you are be who has atlained <0
(hat purity of exnience winch it railed
Liherniion , you are he who is incaptble
ol being suKied hy trnpunty ol any >ir(;
you are fe who has been attained to by
tbe great preceptors of old.

9? You hve in (he form of RtehteouS*
ness or dory e«« tl e four modes of file . j oa
are (fat Kiel leou.ness winch Is of ihe
lofiri of rues and socrihces , you arr of the
form of that skill wl >ch the Divine ArchU
ictt psvsesvvs . you a'e he wlio is worst, ip*
ped as the primeval form ol Uic uniTcrsc;


MAHABtfARATA.


)0uli3<e Tinge arms, )ourlips sre of a
coppery color , jou are of ilie form of ihe
vast waters that are contained >tt the
Ocean , you are higlily stable and fixed
99 You are Kapda *, you are brown ,
you are all the hues whose mixture produ*
ces white , you are the period of life ,
you are ancient , you are recent , you
are a Gandharva , you are the mother of
the celestials m the form of Aditi , you are
Garuda, t)ie king of birds, born of Vmala
by' Kashyapa otherwise called larkshya,
you are capable of being comprehended
easily, you are of excellent and agreeable
speech.

too You are he who is armed with the
battle axe , you are he that is desirous of
victory , you are he who assists others in
the accomplishment of their objects , you
are an excellent Irtend , you are he who
carries a lute made of two hollow gourds ,
yon are of terrible aneer , you have Cor
your children beings higher than men and
gods , you are of the (orm of that Vislmu
who floats on the waters after the universal
diitolulton I you devour all tlungs with
great ferocity , you are he who procreates
offspring , you are (amity and race. con«
liiiuing from generation to generation {
you are the blare that a bamboo flute
emits, you are (auhless , you are he whose
limbs are all very beauiUi. I , you ace full
of illusion , you do good to others without
expecting any return , you are Wind . you
are Fire.

loi. Ynti are the fellers of the world
which bind Individual Soul , you are the
creator of those fetters , you are the tear*
er o( such fetters , you are he who lives
with evni the Llaiiyas , you live with those
who are (he enemies of all acts , you have
huge teeth and powerful weapons

102 You are lie who has been grea<ly
censured , you are he who stupened the
llishis living in the naruka (urest , you
are he who did good to even your delrac*
tors, vtf , those Hishis living lu the Daruka
loresl , you are he wl o removes all (ears
and who removini' all (lie feats of those
itiihis gave them liberation, you are
he wlio lias no wealth , you are the kiMg
of the celestials, yo i are the greatest ol
the guds , you are an object of adoration
whh even Vishnu , you ore the destroyer
of those who are the en-tnies of the gods.

t03 You are he who lives in the
nethermost region , you are invisible but
can be comprelwnded, even at the wind
winch tliough invisible is perceived by
every body: you are he whose know*
ledge extends to the bottom of every*
thing and who know lire inner nature
ef all thinxi y you ate the object wliicb


IS enjoyed by him who enjoys ft j yoil ttfS
the Ajaikapat am >iig ilie eleven Rudras |
you are the king o( the entire universe,
you are of tlie form of all souls m the
universe, you are he who is not subject
to those three qnaliiies , you are he who
IS above all attributes and is a state of
pure existence ivliicli is incapable of being
described with the help o( any adjective of
a language.

104 You are the king of physicians
called Dhanwantari , you are a commet ,
you are the celestial commander in chief
called Skaflda , you are tlie king of the

, Yakshas, called Kiivcra, who is your in-
separable coiHpanion anil who is the king
of all riches in the world , you are Dliairi ,
you are Shakra , you are Vishnu , you
are Mitra , you are lashin, you are the
l*ole Star , you are the upholder all things.
You are the Prabhava amongst the Vasus.

105 You are Vhe wind which caw go
everywhere , you are Aryyaman, you are
Savitrt; you ate Ravi, you are that
ancient king of great celebrity known by
the name of Ushatign , you are he who
protects all creatures in various ways,
you ere Mandhelri , you are lie (roiu
wliom all creatures uriginate

to6. You arehewito exists in various
forms , you are he wl>o makes the variuiis
colours exi,t in the universe, you are lie
wlio upholds all deiires and all attributes ,
you Hre he wlio has tlie lulus on your
navel . you are he within whose womb
are numbeiless mighty creatures , you
lave a lace beautiful as the moon, you
are wind , you are Are.

107. You are po<sessed of great power,
you arc giFted wiili iranqinlluy nt soul,
you ate old , yuu are lie who is known
with the help of Ittghteoiisness j you are
Lvk?hmt . yon are the maker of the field
ol action , you are he wlio resides m llie
field of action , vou are the soul of the
field of action, you are the medicine of
Ihe attributes of sovereignly and the'clhers.

SoS AU things he in y oil , yon arethe
master of all creatures having life breatlis,
you are the god of the gods , you are he
who IS attached to happiness , you are
existent, you are non existent , you ate
he who possesses the best of all tilings.

109 Yoti are he who lives on the
summit of KaiUsa , you are tie who goes
to the mountains of Ifirnavat , you carry
aw«y all things by you like a ppuerful
current washing away trees and other
objects Standing on its banks , you are
the maker ol Pushkara and other large
lakes and receptacles of natural water;


JiUViUASAM MnVA.


55


jo'i are ot inflniib knowledge;

)'<>u nre ll>e fiivcr ol ifir^mie btcSsiM|>s.

no You aie « merdiant } )oii ate a
tarpenter j you are «he fr»e ( you are tite
tree called V.>kuU (J/i>nwt4^t iCUiigl,
/.mu); you ate tl>c »andat*wAit| tree
{SanlaluiH ol6nni, Linn ) ; you are the
tree ca)>>-d C>>i£<>ada { Ahfania Sehehris,
ajn. Echilti Seholarit, you are

l>e wliose ueck i» \ery &iron;< | you ate lie
rv)io«e 9l(ou>Jer>tO)i>( it t>iipe > yo» ate not
retilesa I youarellie piioopal kerbs and
plants nith tlieir pioduce.

lit. You ate lie «lto grants success
upon oibers reirardto^ (tie objecu upon
tvlncli tliey bettuN tlieir heart , yoil are
the correct conctuMoiii of Ixitli the V'edas
and CranKtiar | ytxi are lie hIio aeiiii* out
leonine roars { you aie endued with leonine
iansf : you ride on the b^cU of a tion for
perfarmifiK your journeys | you lute a car
diawn b> a hon.

113 You are the Irulli of truth j you
are tie who^e dish or plate is formed by the
Destroyer of iheuiiiverse ; you are atways
eni>8KeJ III seeking the well'bei'i|> ol the
worlds t you are he who saves att creatures
from distress , you are the bird called
Saranga t you ate a new swan ; yoiiare
he who IS shown in heauty on account of
the crest on your head, yon are he who
protects the place w>>ere asiembhes of (he
wise stl for dispensing justice.

tl}. You are the abode of all creatures;
you are the cherisher of all creatures]
you are Day and NiKht I you are he who
is wulioul fault and, therefore, never cen.
sured , you are the upholder of alt crea*
tures ; ynu areflhe refuge of a{( Creatures ;
you ate without birth , you are existent.

H 4 You are ever feuillit! f you are
endued with concentration and meduatfnn ,
you are ttie horse Uchcliaishravas ] you
are the giver of food; you are he who
Upholds the vital bus of living creatures;
you are wiiti patience ; you are '

possessed of iMieiJigence ; you are endued.
With exertion and cleverness I yoil are
respected by all , you are tlie giver of the
frinis of virtue and sin , you are the che«
usher of (he senses ; you are the lord of
all (he lutninanes ; you are utl colfeciions
of objects , you are lie whose dresses are
made oi cuw.liides , you are he who re*
moves the sorrow of his devoiees.

115. You have a gofden arm , you are
he who proiecis (he bodies of Yogni* wlio
seek to enter their own selves / you afe he
who has reduced alt lusfnestonoihineness,
you air he the nieasute of whose gladness
is very great ; you are he who won victory .


ever the god ot love wlxi is irresistible ;
you are he who has conttnIleJ Ins senses.

ltd. You are ihe note called Gsndhara
lit the ffliivica! octave j you are he who
lias an excrllent ami beautifulhome ; you
are he wln> is ever Kiven to peuancvs , ynu
are of the form uf chceifuloess ami conlent*
mem ) you are lie ca)].-<j vast or indiiile ;
you are lie ni whose I'onor the foremost rtf
liynttis has been composed ; you are he
whote d«neirig is clia'aCJeriserl by b't!
Strides and large leaps ; you are he who
IS worshipped revcrciuUlly by the various
cfaos of Apsarar.

tr/. You are be who owns a vast slan*
dard I you are the mnuniain of Mem ,
you ate he who roves among ail the sum*
inrts of that great monnlam , you ar« so
mobile that It IS very diOicuU to caicti you i
you are Capable of being explained by pte*
cepiors to disciples alilioiigh you are loca*
/table of bring described in words; you
are ol ilig form of that instruction which
preceptois give to disciples ; you are be
wlio call prrceive all agreeable scents
s 3 multan«ou>ly.

ttS You are of the form of (he perched
gates of cities and palaces , you are of tlie
fortnol ih* moais and duciies that sur*
round fovtiried towns and give the victory
10 the besieged garruon ; you are the
Wind ) you ate of ll<e lotm ot toriiried
cities am) towns begirt by walls and moats )
you are the prinCe of all winged creafures ;
ouareol the form of Garuda ; you are
e wlio Causes the creation by union of the
Opposite sexes I you are the furemest a/
all us virtues and knowledge ; you are
superior to even him who is the foremost of
att III vfriues and knowledge ; you are
above aii the viitues and knowledge.

119 You are eternal and immutable
as slso dependent on yourself ; you are
the lord and protector of the god* am)
Asuras ; you are the master and protector
of all creatures , you are he who puts on
! a coat o{ mail , you are f»a wl>ose arnrs
ate competent to gri id all enemies; yon
aie an object of worship with even him who

IS called S'lparvaii ui he >vei).

130 . You are he who gives the power of
bearing or upholding all iliings ; you are
yourself competent to bear all things i you
are Reed and steady ; you nre wtute or
pure , you carry the trident that can des*
troy fall things) , you give bodies to those
that const;>i>t]y revolve in the uniyerte ol
birtli anr) death , you are more valuable
than riclies ; you ate the conduct of the

righteous.

I2t. You are he who tiad torn the iiead
of Brahman after due iliovglit;. you are


MAIIARIIARATA.


5^


lie who U rnc}iied witli atl tlio^e autpiciAiif
tnark^ ulii(.li xre ile'cnbeil ni ihe !i<.i«itce4 of
pxlini^tf s, • plifeiinldiiy and other

Ur^hclies ol kn o*lrdi;c.irratiiic of pli)Mn*
t.iioin>, etc, as the iiiiticalor of itic meiinl
ten<ieMC> ; >011 ^rc tliat wooden liar wb el»»ts
Crttled the axle fli a car and, lliercfore. )c>u
ate lie nlto is atiaclied to the car represent*
e I by the bod) ; }ou are attached in all
tl M>t.''|i y*’" (lifted with very ^reat power,
belii(' as )Ou are n hero of heroes.

tai. Yon are the Veda; )on arethe
Smntis, the Itiliasas, the Piiratras, anil
other scriptures ; )oit are the iltusirioiis
god of every sacred shntic • you- are he
%vhn has il e Earth for lux car , you are
|lie inert elemenis that form every creiturr;
you ate he who gives life into every coin-
biiiatioii of those iiierl elcmriiis ; you are
the Praiiava and oilier sacred Mantras that
pul life into dead matter , you arc he who
casts peaceful looks , you are severely
liarsli.

IS3. You are he in whom csl« rtitmher-
less precious attributes and possessions,
you liave a body II at is red , you are he
who has all the vast oceans (or so many
ponds filled for your dnuking } you are
(he root of the Icee of the s\oild ; you are
tqinsitely beaiiliful snd shmes wiih superior
grandeur ; you are of the form of ambrosia
or nectar , you are both cause and effect ;
you are an ocean of penances

t34. You are he svlio is desirous of
gelling to the liighesc state of existence ,
you are lie who lias already acquired that
state, you are tie who is ItuHwn (or the
purity of his conduct ami acts ,irid observ
nnees, you are he wlio la p issessed of
great fame , you are the ornament of
• ii-.ies , you are he who is bedrcked with
celestial ornameuts , you are Yoga , you
are he from whom ori,{inales eternal t me
ineasuied by Vugas and Knlpas , you are

he who conveys all creatures from place to

place.


1*5. You are of the form of Righteous*
ness and sm and their compounds , you
are great aud witimiic form, you are he
who killed the powe'ful Asiira lliat had an.

‘"'5'

' finale elephant


of iho
i"t all Cicatures


of huge proporlions ,
form of dealli , you ^
fruition of iheir wishs'

their merits , yon are aopVnaH.abie’’ sou

know alt ilm.gs bejonl ce ke„ of ,|,e
senses , you know 11 e css-nccs

^ 126 You arc he who coiitinudly shines

«n beauij you p.u on girl .mfs from
neck to the feet, yon ire Kara hairu.o
l ie Moon for Ins beau.fi.l eyT, joC ar?
the salt octwn of unmeasurable extent j you


are lli** first three Ydgnj you afe li*
whose appenr-tnee is always lull of advaii^
lagr to others,

lay Yiiii are he who lias tliree eyes;
you are he whose forms are greatly siihtile ;
you are he whose ears dre hored (nr pntiing
on ]ewe!!rd ear.iings j yuii arc tl e bearer
of iiiaiierf locks I you are the point winch
iiidrc-ites the nasal sound ; ynn are tlie
two dots (m the alphabet) which indicate
the sound of llie.aspiraie<i II \ you have an
escrlfent face; you are (he arrow that is
shot by (he warrior (or bringing about the
desiriictioii of liis enemy, you are all the
weapons (hat ate used by ivirriorS , you
are gifted »nth psileiice capable of bear-
ing all things.

ijS. You are he whose knowleifge has
oiigin-iied from the stoppage of all physical
and mental Innctions ; you ire fie who
appears as I null on account of the cessa-
tion ol .1)1 other faculties ; you are lliat
note which, oiiginaiing from the region
called Gandliarn, is greatly sweet to the
ear; you are he who if armed with llie
powerful bow (called Piiiaka) ; you are
he who IS ttie uiiderstinding and the
desires wincfi exisi in all creatures, hestdee
being the supreme upliotder of all beings j
you are he from whom all acts originate
, 129 You are that wind which originates
at Ihe time of the universal dissolution and
which IS capable ©I clnirning tl e enure
universe as il.e start m the hands of tie
d-ify.ma,d churns the milk in the mill, pot I
you are he who is full , you are he who sees
all (lungs, you are the sound whiJi ariseo
from slapping palm against palm , your
palm s*tves (as the dish or plate whence to
lake his food , you have an adainaiilins
boi-y , you are exceedingly great.


>3^. « ou are of the shape an umbrella l

you are he who has an excllent umbrella i
you are well known lo^ be at one with all
creatures, you are lie'who having put
(orih three feet covered all the universe
with two and ivanied space for the third;
you have a bald head , you arc he whose
(ornt ts greatly ugly and dreadful , you
are he who has undergone many inodifica*
Irons and become all things in the universe ;
you are he who has tlie well known badge
oMtenuncwiion 1 1« , tl e suck , you are he
who has a Ivim.Ia , i on are he who Is tn-
^pable of being attained to by means of


• 3t ^ou are he who IS at ooe witli (he
green eyed king of beasts , jou are of the
torin of dll (he poiiils (f (I e compnss , ynU
are he who is armed with the tl iiiidtr ,
you are he who las a Jundied tongues,
you are he who has a thousand feet and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


57


(imUanil fields, }0U are ihe tord and
tciii^ of (li« f you are who Is

m;<(ie up of all tlie , you are the great
t o(d or preceptor.

132 V011 are (le wlio has a thousand
arms , you are he who is competent to get
the fru tioii of every wish , you are he
whose protection ts sought by every one |
3011 are h* who IS the creator of alt (I e
worl Is sou are lie who IS the great ptirl*
fier of «II from every sin, in the form of
si rmes and sacred waters , yon are he
who lias three i igh Mantras , you are the
joiMitest (son of Aditi and Kasbyapa) }
301 are both black and Iwany.

133 Von are the maker of the Orah*
msns's rod , yon are armed with the
Satashni the noose, and the dart ; you
are lie who was born within the pnmeval
I'ttiis , you are he who has a huge womb ,
you nre he who has the Vedas in his
womb, you are lie who take* his rise
fro n ifiat infinite span of waters which
appears after the d ssolutian of the uni>
Verse

rjl Von are he who has the effulgent
rays 1 you are the creator of (he Vedas |
VO I ste he who stu lies the Vedas t you are
lie who knows the meaning ol the Vedas ,
you are deviteJto Brahma | you are the
refuge of all persnns devoted to Qralttna ,

J ot are of numberless form, you have
III mierable bodies , you have irresistible
prowess

135 Your nalore transcends the three
•inlversst tendencies (of Saitwa, Itayas and
lamss) , you are (he lord of afi seileiictes
yn I are fleet like the wind, yn 1 are fleet
like th'' mind , you are always smeared wiih
) ,1 piste , you are the end of (lie slock
of the prim'val lotus , yon are lie who
bfaii|.ht the celestial cow Surabhi down
from a superior station to an infertor one by
imprreating a curse upon her , you are
that Oialiman wiio was unable CO see your
end

136 You arc adorned with a targe gar^
l«(iU of ICaniiicara fiawers , you are adorned
«nth a dudem of blue gems , yo<i are the
tvirlder of the bow called Binaka , you
nre Oie matter of the science of Brahma,
ynii are he who has controlled his senses
ti) (he Mp of your knowledge of Brahma {

f oi are lie who beaiest Ganga oi your
■rail , yo«i are ih^ Inisband of Umt the
daughter of Itinvavat-

137 You are powerful; you, are he
•alto protects the universe by assurmitg
Various incamatious , you are woithy ol
adoration , yen are that primeval Dcmg
with O'* equine head who recited the Vedas
with a thundering voice , you are he whose
8


favour is very great ; you are tlm great
subjugator , you are he who has killed all
Ins enemies , you are both while and
iwany.

13S You have a gold fiued body , you
are he who is of the form of pure joy , you
are of a controlled soul , yon are the basis
of Ignorance whrdi is caffed Pradhana and
which, consisting of the three qualities of
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas is tie cause
whence the universe has originated , you
are he whose faces are turned to every
direction , you are he who has three
ej es , you are be who is superior lo all
creatures.

139 You are the soul of all mobile and
immobile beings ; you are of the form of tlie
subijfe soul , you are the giver of iminor>
tality in the form of Liberation as the fruit
of all acts of virtue achieved by creatures
wiibout the desire of fruits , you are the
preceptor of even those who are the gods of
(he gods , you are Vatu the son of Aditi (
you are he who lus niiuinerable rays of
hehl, who bn igs forth the universe, and
wtK) 19 ol il>e form of that Soma whirli if
drunk in sacrifices

140 You are Vyasa, the author of llie
Puranas and ether sacred fistoriM, you
are the cresuons of Vyasa's brain both
abridged and uisbriJged , you are the
•um>to(ai of aentiencies , you are (he
Season, you are the Year , you are the
Month , you are the Purlniuht , you are-
(>>o$e sacred Days that end or conclude
these periods

t4t> You are the Katas, you are
Kashthas , you are Uie L^svas , you are
the Alairas , you are the Muhurta and
Aha and Kshaps , you are the Kshanas ,
you are the soil upon which the tree of the
uriverse stands , yotr are the seed of
all creatures , you are tl e principle of
greatness , you are the sprout of sen*
liency.

14a You are existent , y^ou are non<
existent, you are Manifest , you arc L/ii*
manifest , you are the Tather , you are
(he Mother I you are the Gr^ndfaihes- ,
you are (Ite door of Heaven , you are the
door ol the generatio 1 of all creatures , you
are the door of Liberation , you are those
acts ol virtue which lead to the fthcity c!

I eaven,

r-tr You are extinction , you are (he
gladJener , you are tlie reision of truth ,
you are superwr tn even that reKwn el
Truth which is attsinable by the pious,
you are he who is the cealor ol both lli«
gods and the Asuras , you are sfie refuge
«I both the gods and ilie Asvuu.


MAHABIIARATA.


141. You are llie preceptor of both the
gods and the Asuras , you are ever vic-
torious , you are ever worshipped by the
gods and tlie Asuras , you guide the
deities and the Asuras even as ilte Maha-
malra guides the elephant , you are the
refuge of all the gods and the Asuras,

145 You are the king of b ith the deities
and the Asuras , you are ihe leader in
battle of bocl) tlie god:> an 1 the Asuras ,
you are ha who transcends the senses and
slimes by limiself , you are of the form of
the celestial Itishu , you grant boons to the
deities and the Asuras.

146 You arc he who rules the hearts
of the gods and the Asuras, you ar^ he
into whom the universe enters , you are
the refuge of even him who is the ruler of
the hearts of both tlie gnds and tlie
Asuras , yon are he whose boify is mad-^
up of all the gods , you are he wh • has no
Being superi )r li yo i of whom to think,
you are tie who ii the inner soul of the
gods; you are he who lias ortgiuaied from
hts own self.


* 47 * You are nf th* form of intmobde
things , you are lie who cover-, the three
worlds with three steps of ht> , you are
pnisessed of great leaning you are
stainless , you are he wtio is fr eJ from the
quality of Rajas , you are above destritc-


u are lie 111 whose honor h^m


r,

rto.ildb.i.m;
irresistible elrphanc of lime lou are ol
the form of that I ird of Tigers who .s ador.
eJ m the country of the Kalingis , you are
he who IS called the lion among the gods
jou arc he who is (he foremost of men.

14S You are profoundly wise . you an
lie wh. first lakes a sliare of the offenr.gs 1.
saentices, you are impercepi.ble . voi
are tlie collection of all ilie celesi^ls soi
are he in whom penances prevail v*>ii ar

always in excellent Yoga , you are^a .sn.

Clous, youarcarm-d with the U, .mi;.-.

tJoli, you are (tie source wlienc- the w,.a.
pons cdled maces have lakru it.e.r origu,
vou are lie whom your devoiees acquire i.

various ways. 4**'= *•

IW Vou .r, Gol,a<ihot,t„„,|

ll ‘f' •"P-"

It of happiness , yuu are at one^ <vi 1

y™ 1.0 .1.0

.oor eroat„r„ trooi d,o,l, , „

■ VP" II,c''p'.°n.
Y.k.hA of Ill-
ness" ’ ^ ‘=‘=’'»“'’'msle faultless


IS*. You are he who gives gladness ;
3rou are all the celestials m a body , yoif
are ti.e cessaiioir of all lhin,>s ; you are dll
the dut es that belorrg to all tlie inodes of
life , you are he wlio has an eye on lus
forehead, y m are he «lio sports wrili' the
universe as his marble ball f you dre of the
f .rm of deer; you are gifted with the
energy that rs of the form of knowledge and
pc laiice

*51. Yon are the master of all immobile
things , you are lie who has restrained tils
senses by vatioiis regulations and vows ,
you are he whosd ol j ets have all been
fulfilled you are at one with Liberalinn ,
you are different from him wh »m we erfore ,
you have truth for your peiidiices , you are
of a pure heart.

*52 You are he who I irds over over all
vows and fasts, you are the t igliest ,
y.ii are Bralima , yoi are tlie I igliest
refuge of your devotees | you are above all
feiters , you nre frred from ihe corporeal
b)dy, ><> I are endued uitli every kind of
prosperity , vo 1 multiply the prosperity
of joir dev .lees, you are what i» con*
tmually undergoing ctiaages

*53 f have irtiis O ICnshns, sang the
I praises of the illustrious god |»y reciting lii»

I names n die order of their importance.

I Who IS there wiio Cdii sing tiie praises ol
I the lord of the universe, tiui great I.ird of
; all who is worthy ol our adoratonis, worship,

I and reverence, whom the very gods headed
by Brahman are unable to praise and whom
Ihe Rishis also fad to sing.

*54 Helped, however, by my devotion
10 him and having received his perrnissiort,

I have la.i led that I.ord of sacrifices, that
Deity of snpi erne power, iliat foremost of all
creatures gifted with intelligence


*55 By praising witli these names
whn.li increase nne'a auspiciousness the
great l»rd of blessedness rf worsliipper of
devoted soul and pure heart gums lus own


* 5*5 Ihese names Form a hymn wluch
supplies tliC best means of attsiniiig t>
Brail na With tlie help of this hymn one
issure to acqi re Liberaimn llie Kishis
ami the god-, nil p ,4ise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn

•57 Hymned hy persons of controlled
soul, Maludeva becomes pleased with those
whosing tus praises thus Ihe illusinous
god ts always full of mercy towards hi*
devotees Gifted with omnipotence, he it
n who gives Liberation to those who adoro

him


•58 Those foremost of m«
endued with faith and devotio


1 who are
I, hear and


l^miSliASANA PARVA.


59


T«3te for clliers and uller \7ilH respect ihe
praises 6f that higliesl and elerml f ord,
VIS , Isharia. «\ all Vtetr successive lives and
worship him in ihouglit, word, and deed,
(itid worshippiOK hiin thus at all times, »<*’ ,
when they arc lying or sealed or walking or
awake or opening ihc eyelids or shiiUing
them and thinking ol him again and again,
become objects of respect with all iheif
Irllaw men and derive treat pleasure and
exceeding joy.

162. When a creature becomes purged
oi all hts sins in course of millions ol births
in various orders of Being, it is then that
devotion originates in his heart lor Maiia*
deva.

163 !t IS by good luck only that nndi*
vided devotion to Bliava who is the original
cause (of the universe) fully originates «u
rhe heart of one who is conversant with
every mode of adoring that great Deity.

164 Such stainless and pure devotion to
Riidra, winch has singleness of purpose and
winch IS simply irresistible in us course, is
seldom to be found among even the gods,
but never among men

163 It IS througli the favour of Riidra
(hat such devolton originates in the hearts
oi human beings On account of such
devotion, men identifying themselves
wholly with Mahadeva, succeeds m ac<
quning ilK highest success

The illustrious Ooty. wl>o is always
bent upon showing favour to them who seek
him wKli humility rescues them from the
world wlio throw themselves whole minded,
(y upon hiin.

1G7 Save the great god who frees crea.
tares from re.birth all other gods continn.
ally nullify (he Penances of men, for men
have no other source of power (hat ft is as
great as these.

i63 It was thus tiiat Tandt of (ranq iil
soul, resembling tndra In nseff iii glory,
fjuded the illustrious Master of all existent
and non.exisient things, that great Deny
clad in animal skms

I'Gq, Tins liymn was borne by Brah*
tnana himself Indeed, Brahman had
sung It before Shankara. You are a Biah.
mMia. You Wilt, therefore, comprehend it
welt.

170 This is cleansing, and washes
away all sms I his confers Yoga, Libera*
tion, heaven and vontentment.

171. Me who recites this hymn with
rapt devotion to Shankara, succeeds in ac*
quiring that high end which is theirs who
•re devoted to (be doctrines of the Sankhya
^ philosophy.


I 15* That worshipper who recites this
nynin daily for one year with singleness of
devotion succeeds in acquiring the end that
lie desires.

X73 fhis hymn IS a'greai mystery, ft
formerly lived m the breast of Brahman the
Creator. Brahman gave it to blialtra.,
:>)iakra gave it to Death.

174 Death gave it to the Rudras.
From (he itudras landi got it. Indeed,
tandi got It m the region of Brahman as
the reward of his austere penances.

175. Tandi communicated it to 'Shukra|
and bhokra of Bhngu's race' communicated
It to Gautama Gautama, again, O des-
coidanc of Afadliu, communicated it to
Vaivaswata.Manu.

176 Mann communicated it to the
highly (fitelhgent Narayana, nuinbere 1
among the Sadliyas and held highly dear
by (urn fhe illustrious Narayana, num*

I hered among the Sadhyas and endued
with tiDdecayiiig glory, communicated it to
I Yama

I 177. Vaivaswaf.Vami communicated
' «t to Nschiketa. Nachifceta, O you of
I Vrishiii'a race, communicated it to Mar*

, ksitdeya.

' »78 Prom Afarkandeya, O Janirddana

t got It as tlie reward of my vows and fasts,
loyoii O slayer of enemies, f communi*

, cate that hymn unheard by others.

, 178 This hymn leads to heaven. It

removes disease and bestows fang life.

I This IS worthy of the highest praiSe, and is
I consisteni with (he Vedas.

I Krishna said

(79 — So That person, O Partha, who
I recites this h>mn with a pure heart observ*
««g the vow of celibacy, and with his
I smses tinder restraint, regularly for one
I whole year, succeeds in acquiring the fruits
I of a horse sacriRce Danavas and Yakshas
and Kakshasas and Pishachas and Vatu.

I dhanas and Guhyakas and snakes can do J
I no harm to him.


CHAPTER XVIll. ‘

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Cojt/HTueJ,

Vaishampayana said *—

I. After Vasudeva iiad stopped, the
great Vogm via, Krishna.Dwsipayana,
addressed Yudhiililhtra, saying,— O son,


63


MAHAQIIARATA.


recite tius liymn cen«tslin(» of the tbousand
And eight names ol Mahadeva, and let
Matieshwira be pleased with you.

3. Formerly, O son, I was engaged in
the practice ol penances on the breast of
the mountains of Meru for getting a son.
It IS this very hymn that was recited
by me.

3. As the reward of this, t acquired the
fruition ol alt my wishes, O son ol Panda.
You will also, by reciting this same hymn,
get from Sharva the fruition of all your
nishes.

4. After tins, Kaptia, the nishi who
preached the doctrines of *>anttl'ya. and
who IS honoured by the gods themselves,
said,— I adored Bhava witti great devotion
for many lives. 1 he illusinous god at last
became pleased with me and gave me
knowledge which can help one in avoiding
re.birih.

5—7 Alter this, the Itishi named
Charushirsha, that dear friend nf Shakra
and known nlso as Alamvana’s son and
who IS lilted with mercy, said,— 1 m former
days went to the mountains of G>karna
and sat myself to practise hard austerities
for a hundred wars. As the reward of
^hose penances 1 got from Sharva, O son
bf bhtg Pandu, a hundred sons, all of
wliorp were born witliout ttie agency of
wreman, of well controlled soul, conversant
With ngliteousress, gifted with great splen*
dour, free from disease and sorrow, and
endued with lives extending for a hundred
thousand years.

3. Then the illustrious Valmiki addres-
sing Yudhishihira, said —Once upon a
time, tn course of a disputation, certain
ascetics who possessed the Horoa-fire con-
,demiied me as one guiUy of □ralimanicide

As soon as they had condemned roe as
such the si« -of Drahcnanicide O Bliarata,
possess'd me 1 t'len, for purifying myself,
sought the protection of the sinless Ishana
who IS itresisiible m energy.

10 4 beesme purged of all rny sms

That remover of all sorrows, vtg , the
desirojer of the tnpfe city of the Asuras,
s4iJ to me — You will acquire great fame
in the world.


13. I sang the praises of the great God
by reciting Ins names. At this, Bliavn he.
came pleased with me, and gave me
baille-axe and many other celestial
weapons.

14. And he said to me,— you will be
freed from sin and you will be invnicihle
tn battle. Death himself shall not succeed
in overcoming you, for you, will be freed
from disease.

15. Thus did the illustrious and crested
god of auspicious form said this to me.
Ihfough the favour of that god of great
iiiletligence 1 got all that He had said.

16. Tlien Vishwamitra said,— I was
formerly a Kshatriya I paid my worship
to Dhava with the desire of hecoining A
Bralimana. I lir()Ui>h tl<e favour of lliat
great god I succeeded in getting the high
status, that IS so difTuult to acquire, of a
Bralimana. >


17— iS Then addressing the royal son
of Pandu, the Rishi Asita.DevaU said,—
Formerly O son of Kunli, through the
curse of Shakra, all the meric of my pious
deeds was destroyed. The power, Malia*
deva kindly gave me back that merit
together with great fame and a long life.

ip The illustrious Rislii Gntsaintda,
the dear fivtnlof Sh.kra who resembled
the celestial preceptor Vrihaapaii himselfi
addressing Yudlnsliiliira of Ajainidlia's
race said,—


30— SI The inconceivable Shakr-i had
formerly celebrated a sacrifice extending
lor a thousand years While that sacnfii-c
waseoingon, I wasengaired by Slukra m
reciting the S-iinans Varishtha, the s <1
of that Alanii who originated from the eye-,
of Brahman, came to that sacrifice and
addressing me, said, — O foremost of iwice-
boru ones, the Raihancara is not being
recited properly by you.


22 O best of Brahmanas, cease to ac-
quire dement by reading {so faultily, and
■with the help of jour understanding
do you read the Samans correctly O you
« wicked understaiidini;, why do you per-
petrate such sin destructive of Sicrifice


f ,ll. Then Jamadagni's son that iore.
unAct of all pious persons effulgent like the
Sun 411 4Ke midst of that assembly of Rishis
said to tlie son of Kunti.

1 3 I was possessed by the <m, O eldest
son of Pandu, of Bralimanicide for bavmg
^ dulled my brothers who were all learned
I llrahmanas. Purifying mysrif, I sought
'■ Ibe protection, O king, ol Mahadeva.


33—34 Having said these words, the
Rishi Varishtha, who was very wrail ful,
yielded to that passion and addressing roe
once more, said, — Be thou an animal shorn
of intelligence, subject to Rrief, ever filled
with fear, and an inbabliant of trackless
forests destitute of both wind and water
and abandoned by other animals. Do you
thus pass ten thousand years with ten and
etglil hundred years in addition.


ANUSHASANA PARVA


6 l


25. That forest m which you wiH have
to this time will be shorn of all holy
trees and wilt, besides, be the haunt of
ituni deer and lions Verily, you shall
have <0 become b cruel deer plunfted tii
excess of grief.

26—37. As soon as he had said these
words, O son of Pntha, 1 immediately be*
came chant'ed into a deer. | then slroiiglit
the protection of Maheshwara. The great
god said to me,— You will be freed from
disease of every tort, and besides immorta*
lity shall be yours. You will never suder
Irotn grief Your friendship with Indra
shall remain unchanged, and let (he sacri*
fices oi both Indra and yourself multiply.

2S. The illustrious and puissant Afaha.
deva favors all creatures in this way He
IS alwaysihe great dispenser and ordainer
of the happiness and sorrow of alt hvtiig
creatures.

30 That ilIusiriQui god is incapable of
being crimprehended in thouglii, word, or
deed. O son, O you who are the best of
warriors, (here as none who is equal to me
in Icariiiiig

' 30. After this, Vasadeva, that foremost

of all intelligent men, o»ce more satd,o
Mahadeva of golden eyes was pleased by
tne with my penances.

3(. Pfeaied with me. O Vudhishthira,
the illustrious god said to tne,— You wilt, O
ktishna, through my favour, become
dearer to all persons than riches which $s
covcied by all

33 You will be invincible in bailie
Vuur energy si all be equal to that of I ire
Maliadvva gave me tliousandi ol other
boons at that lime.

33 In a former incarnation I worshipped
Maliadrva on the Afanimantha mountain j
fur millions of years. ^

^ 34 Pleased With me, the illustrious god ^

said to me those words —Blessed be you, '
do you solicit boons you wish lor.

tS— 36 Iloaing him J faid these srordr,
—'ll ttie powerful Msliadeva has been
pUased with me, then let devotion to him
Le uiirhanged, O lihana 1 J7iit If the boon
that I Solicit — 1 he great God said me —
Uc It so * — and dissppeared tlicre and tiicn.

Jaigiihavya «aid •—

37 O \ uilhi\hih(ra. formnly in the city
«l Varanasi, the powerful Maharfees, find*
ug me «>ui, conferred upeti me lb« eiglit
aUitbuusof sovereignty'

Gar(;ti lald

3S. O ef Panda, f teased withne.


on account of a mental sacrifice which ( had
performed, the great God besluwed upon
me. on the batiks of the sacred river Saras*
wati, that wonderful science, vit ■ the
knowledge of irme, with its sixty-four
branches

39 He also conferred upon me a Ihon*
sand sons, all possessed of equal merit and
fully conversant with the Vedas rhroiii;h
has favour tlieir periods of lilt as also mine
have become extended to ten millions of
years.

Parashara said

41—43 Formerly I pleased Sarva, O
king. ] ifien clienshed the desire of get*
ting A son who would be endued with great
ascetic merit, and superior energy, And
addressed to high Yoga, that would acquire
world-wide lame, arrange ihe Vedas and
become tlie home of prosperity, tliat would
be devoted to the Vedas and the Brah*
manat, and be famous lor mercy, buch a
son was desired by me from Maheshwara.

43 Knowing that this was the wish of
my heart, (hat foicmost of gods Said to
me,— through the fruition ol that object
of yours winch you with to get from iiiei
you will have a son named Krishna.

43 In that creation which shall be
known after ihe name of Savarni>Mantt,
that son ol yours shall he reckoned among
lire seven itUliis He sliali arrange liie
' Vedas, and be the propagator of Kiiru's
, race. ,

I 44 He shall, besides, be the author of /
thv ancient histones and do behoof to (h«/
world Oihed with severe penances he shall, i
again, be the dear Inend ol Shakra

45 Treed from all sorts diseases, that
son uf yours, O Parashara.shall, besides be
nnmortal '—Having said these wuids, the
|,rca( god disappeared there and then.
b«cif It the go^, O Vudhishtl ira, lhal I
have got (rnin that indestructible and
immutable God, gifted with the hiifliest
penances And supreme energy,

Mandarya laid —

46—47 Fermerlf, inspected wrenclyof
thett. I was impaled 1 then worvh pped the
illuitrsous MaUadeva who aaid to me,—
You shall toon be freed and live for millions
of yours Ihe pangs due to imprison*
ment shall not be yours,

45—49 Veu wilt also be freed from alt
sorts ol afn<ti‘>n and disease And since.
O ascetic, this body oi yours has or>|*maieu
Irons U>a fourth loot el Oharnia, frre^
TnalV 7^ w> I be peerUss cm Fanh On
you make your tie fruitfuf. Veu » (I.


62


MMIaBIIAHATA


wttlio'it any obstnicimn able to bathe
in all the sacred waters o! the Earth

50—51 And after the dissolution of
your body, I shall O learned Brahmana,
oidain that you ojill et\i y tl e pure febciij of
heaven eienully Havi •{» said these words
to me, the worshipful eod having fhe bull
for hts carnage, oia , Mahcshwara of peer-
less splendour and clad \u animal skin, O
king, disappeared there and then with all
his companions.

54—53 Formerly I studied from my pre-
ceptor Vishwarnilra Getting fits permts
siofi 1 started for home with the object of
seeing^ my father My widowed mother
stricken with sorrow and, weeping bitterly,
said to me, — Alas your father will never
'ee Ins jon who, endued with Vedic know-
ledge, has been allowed hj Ins preceptor
to come home and wlio havi >g alt the
graces of youth, is endued witl* self-con
troU

54—55 Hearing these words of my
mother, I became stricken with de«pair
about seeing again niy father I ii>ei
paid my adorations with a rapt soul to
Maheshwara who, pleased wnh me, ap
peared before me and said— Your father
our mother and yourself, O sot. sUalt ail
e freed from death, Go quickly and enter
your abode, you shall see your father
there

56 Having got the permission of the
illustrious god, I then went home, O Yu-
dliishtliira, and saw my father, O son,
coming out after having finished Ins daily
sacrifice

S7> And he came out, having bis hands
a quiiuity of sacrificial fuel a id Kuslia
grass ann some fallen fruits And he ap

J ieartd to have already taken his daily food
or he had waslied himself properly
58 Throwing down those things from
his hand my father, with eyes bathed in
teats, raised me, lor I had prostrated my-
self at Ins feel, and embracing me smelt my
head, O son of Handu and said ^By good
luck, O son, are you seen by me You
have returned having acquired knowledge
from your preceptor.

Valshampayana said;—

Sq Hearing these macvellons and most
wonderful deed* of tt,e great Mahadeva
sung by the ascetics, the son of Pandu
became amsted

60 Then Krishna that foremost of all
initlligent persons, tlien spoke once more to
\ udhishihira. that sea of virtue, like V«h.
nu speaking to Puruliuta-


Vasudeva said

61—64 Upamanyu, who appeared to
shine like t) e Sim said to me — 1 hose sin-
ful ine» who are s illied with impious deeds,
do not siiceeeil in altaming to Ishana
Having tlieir nature snlhed bv the qualities
of Dal kness and Ignorance they can never
approach tlie Supreme Deity It is only
llose Iwtce-borit persons *\vho Are of puri-
fied souls that succeed in attaining to (he
Supreme Deity. > '

63 Even if a person enjojs every plea-

sure and luxury, yet if he be devoted to the
Supreme Deity he is considered equal to
iiermiis of purified souls 1

64 If Rudfa be pleased rvillt a person
he can confer upon him the dignity of
either Brahma Or of Keshava or of Shalcra
Willi all tlie gods under him, or the sove-
reignly of the three worlds

65 I hose men O sire, who adore
Bliava even mentally, succeed in freeing
themselves from all sms and live in the
celestial region witli all the gods

66 A person who raises houses to iheir
(on idatio IS and destroys tanks and takes,
indeed who lays waste the entire universe,
does not become stained with sin if he
adores and worships the illustrious (Itree-
eyed god

67 A person who is shorn of every aus-
picious mark and who IS stained by every
sin destroys all lussins by meditating upon
Shiva

68 Even worms insects and birds, O
KesiMV.,, ih.ti devote themselves to Mahs-
deva, are enabled to move about fearlessly,

69 1 1 IV IS my belief that those men
wIk) drv ie iliemselves to Mahadeva be-
come I isooih, freed from re birth

70 After this Krishna again addressed
Vudlu->tl ira the son of Dharma in the fol-
fowui^ >orils

Yis^inu Bald —

71—78 1 he Sun the Moon, Wind fire.

Heaven Earth, tl e Vasu* the Vishwe-
devas, Dhatn Aryyaman. bhukra, Vnhas*
pati the Itudras, the Saddliyas, Vanina,
Gopa, Brahman, ShsUra, Maruts, the Up**
nishats that leach a knowledge of Brahma,
Truth the Vedas, the Sacrifices, Sacrificial
Presents, Bralimanas reciting the Vedas,
Soma, Sacrificer, the shares of the gods in
sacrincial offerings, clarified butter poured
111 sacrifices, itaksha, Diksha, all kinds of
restraints in the lorm of vows and fasts and
rigid observances, Swaha, Vashat, the
Orahmanas the celestial cow, the foremost
acts of piety, the wheel of Time, Strength,


AHUaMA^AflA Pa^VA.


Frftne, Self controf, the Steadrness of all
ii'telliKerti persons, all acts of goodness and
otherwise, tlie seven Hishis, UnderstAiiding
of the /oremosi order, all kinds of excelleiil
touch, tlie success of all deeds, the various
tabes of (fie celestials, those bcfngs lh-*(
drink heat, those that are drinkers of Soma/
Liklias, SiiyaiiMs, lushita, <ilt creatures
having Maniras for their bodies, Ab 1 ia>
suras, tfiose brings that live upon scents
only, tliose ilia! live upon vision only, those
that control their Speech, those that restrain
their minds tlie pure, they who are capable
d{ assuming diverse iorms through Voga
power, those cele'lials wfio five on touch,
those celestials who live on vision and those
who live upon the butter poured In aacri
f}Ces, those beings who 'sn create by their
will the objects they require they who a<e
regarded as (he foremast ones among (he
Celestials, and all the other celestials. O
Ajamida the Suparnas, the Caoifiiarvas,
the Pishaclias, the Danavas the Vaksiias,
the Charanas, the snakes, all Iliac is g'oss
and all that >s subtile, all that is soli and
all that IS net subtile, all sorrows and all
joy*, all sorrow (hat comes after |oy
and all joy that comes after sorrow, the
Sankhya philosophy. Yoga, and that
winch IS above all objects regarded as
foremost and very superior, >-3tl ador«
able things, all the celestials, and all
the protectors of the universe who en(er>
me mto the pliysiCMl forces suitam and up*
hold this ancient creation of that illustnous
Deity, — have ongwatitd from (hat Creator
of all creatures.

79 Alt that I have mentioned is grosser
than whai the wise ihink of wiih |he help of
Penances Indeed, that subtile Urahma is
the cause of life { bow respectfully to
It. Let that immutaljle and indestructible
Lord, alwa)s woisfiipped by us, grant us
desirable boons. *

So. Ihal person who, governing lus
senses and purrljutg fnms.-lf, revices (Ins
hymn, continually for his vow for one
month, Succeed* in acq'iuing th« merit of a

81. fly reciting tins hymn lire Drah*
mana succeeds in acqi)n„i^ „j| »>»" Vedas j
the Kshatnya becomes crownrd with vie*
tory, O son of Pruba^ ((„> Vaishja, in
acquiring riches and eleven ess , nhiI the
bliudra, fn arq unrig happmess (lere and a
good end hereafter

82. By reciting the best of hymns that
can cleanse every sm aniLlhaiis highly
sacred and purifying, highly illustrious
persons set their hearts on fludra.

I 8j A man by reciting this best of hymns
I succeeds in living in the celestial region lor


C3


as many years as tf ere are pores in ht^
body.


CIUPIER XlX.

(ANUSH \SANIKA PARVA) —
Conitniud

Yndlushthira said

I. I ask, O foremost of Bharata's race,
what fs the orrgm of the declaralion, about
satisfying all duties jointly, which is made
an (lie occasion of a person’s m>trruge

2 Is that dectaraiioii about satisfying
all duties togetlier, due only to what is laic^
dowri by (he great Jlishts in days of yore,
or does It refer to the duty of procreating
children from religious motives, or has it
reletcnce to only the carnal pleasure that is
expected from such an intercourse of the
sexes?

3 Great is the doubt lhal fills my mind
about. Indeed, ( thrnk (hat the declaratiofr
to winch I refer is coniray to the natural
impulses which lead to a union of the sexes,
the union in tins world lor performing
duties together ceases with death and (S not
10 be seen to exist I ereafier.

4. This union for doing ail duties to* t
geiher leads to heaven. But heaven, O I
grandfather, is attained to by persons lhat j
are dead It is seen of a married couple (
that only one dies at a time Where does
the other then remain Do tell me tins.

5. Men obtain various kinds of fruits by
performing various kinds of duties 1 he
occupations, again, to winch menlollow are
of various kinds Various, again, are (lie
hells to winch they gu on accuunt of such
diversity of dudes and acts

6 Ihe Rishis have said that women, in t
particular are false in behaviour, Wlien 1
Iniman beings are such, and when women *
m particular are described in tl e Shastras f
to be false, how. D sire, can lliere be aj
union lietween (he sexes for purposes off
performing all dunes together

y. Ill the very Vedas one may read that
women are fatse, Ifie word ‘Duty,' as
used m the Vedas, appears to have been
coined first for t.etieralapplicatioii. Ihere*
tore the application of that word to the rites
of marriage is. instead of being correct, '

only a form_jof speech forcibly applied

where It has no application.

8—9 The Subject appears to me to be
inexplicable although 1 think of It always,

O grandfather, O you of great wisdom,


64


MMIAfitlARATA.


^nii MiohM explain lhi9 to fuHy» clearly
and acc<’rdiiijT to itie Shrutt, In lacl, do
j 111 explain 10 me wtiat it is, whal its
riiaracleiistics are, and the way ti« wViich U
I MS come to pass.

Blitsliina said •—

10 Regarditig it is cited the old dis-

course between AslitavaUra and the lady
Uiiciwn by the name of Dislia. |

11 Formerly Ashtavakra of austere
penances, desirous of tnarnaRe, beeged
the great Rishl Vadanya of hia daiigbtet.

12 The name by which the lady was
known was Suprabha In beauty she was
peerl»ss on Earth In Virtues, dignity,
conduct, and manners, she was superior to
all girls

13 By a look only that girl of beauliftil
eyes had robbed him of his heart even as
a detighifiil grove in spring, decked with
flowers, robs the spectator of Ins heart.

14. The Rishl addressed Ashiavakra
and said,— Yes, I shall give my daughter
to you Listen, however, to me Maken
journey to the sacred North. You wdl see
many things there.

Ashtavakra said

ts You should tell me what I shall see
in that region Indeed, I am ready to
carry out wtutever command may be lard
Utd upon me by you.

Vadanya said

t6 pMssii'g over the dommiom of the
lord of Ireasiires you will cross Che
Hiinavai mniiniams. You will iIimo see
Ihe plMleaii on which Itudra lives It is
mhahited by Siddhas and Cliaranas.

ty— 18. It IS fnrt ol tlie eompavnens ol
Maliadeva, frolicsome and fond of dance
and possessed of various f»ces it is peopled
with alss many I'lshachas, O lord, ol
various forms and all daubed with fragrant
powders nf vaiious colors and dancing wiib
joymis hearts m accompaniment with
Irraren lositHments of difTerent kinds. En-
circled by these who dance wiili electric
lapiihty or rciram at times ahogeiher from
f.rwatil or backward cr transverse nTiniOfi I
cl every sort Mahadeva lives there. |

19 That eliaimmg spot on the moun.
lams, we have heard, is the favourite abode
ol tl>e gieat god. U is said that that great
god as also Ins companions are always
present iheie

* 20. It was there that the goddess Uma
had practised the severest aiisleiities for
the take of the three-eyed god. Hence,


It i« said, that spot Is muclt liked by 6ofb
Mahadeva and Uma,

21—22, Formerly there, on the summit
ol the Mshaparshwa mountains, which are
situate to the north of the mountains sacred
to Mahadeva, the Seasons, and the last
Night, and many gods, and many human
beings also, in their embodied forms, had
worshipped Mahadeva. You will cross
that region also in thy northward journey.

23 You will then see a beautiful and
cliarming forest blue of color and resem-
bling a mass of clouds Hiere. m (hat
forest, you will see a beautiful female
ascetic looking like the goddess ol pros-
perity herself,

24. Venerable for ae* »nd higUy
blessed, she is going through the nuiialory
(ite. Seeing her there you should duly
adore her wiih reverence.

25 Returning to this place after having
seen her, you will take live hand of my
daughter m marriage. II )0U can make
this agreement, proceed then on your
journey and do what 1 order you.

Aalitavakra said*—

96 So be It I I shall do your Bidding,
Verily, } shall proceed to that region of
which you mention, O yon of righieout
aouH On your side, you should make your
words truthful

Bbishma saiil

27. I he illusirious Ashiavakra started
on Ills journey He proceeded more and
more towards the north and at last reached
the Himavat mountains- inhabKcd by
Siddhas and Cheraiias,

t 9 Arrived at the Hirrmvat mountains

that foremost pf Brahmanas then reached

the sacred rrver Vahuda whose waters pro-
duce great merit.

2? Hebatlied m one ol the charming
Tirthas nf that river, which was free froiTT
tnnd, and pleased the gods with oblations
of water. His ablutions being over, her
spread a quantity of Kuslia grass and laid
hunself down upon it for taking rest for
some tune.

Passing the night m this way ihr
urnhmana rose wnh the day. He once
more performed his ablutions in the sacred
waters of the Vahoda and then lighted Ins
noma fire and adored it with the help 0!
many foremost of Vedre mantras.

3 n* He Uien adored with the due rites
Mih Rudra and hii wife Uma, and resied
ter some more time by the side of that lake
>n the course ol Use Vahuda whose shores


M 1 U 5 H^SANA PARVA.


G5


he had reached. Refreshed by sHch rest.h*
started from that region and then proceed*
ed (nw^rdj KatUsa.

3« He then saiv a enldeii pate that
seemed to hlaie wii't Beaniy He saw ats»
the Nlandaki.it an.i the Nalmt of the great
Kuvera tlie Lord of Riche*.

33 ’Seeing the Rlsht arrJved there, aJJ
the Raksfiasas headed by Mambhadra
who were engaged fn protecting ifut Uke
full of beamifnl lotme* came out m a body
for tvelcoinhig and honouring the illustrious
travetler.

3t. Ihe Rishl adored In return those
Rakshasas of lernfale pro #ess and asked
them to tepori, lorihwith, itis arrival to the
Loidol Riches.

35. Rcqiisted by I'lm to do this, those
Rakshasas, O Icing, said to him. — King
Vaishravana, without waiinii; fur the news,
is coming ol iii> own accord to your pre-
sence.

38. The Illustrious Lord of Riche* fs
urll acquainted with ilie objoet of this your
Jouri ey. See tnm.^lhai blessed Master,
who bta<es with his own energy.

3J. I lien king. Valsliravana, approach*
fug the innocent Ashtavakra, duly enquired
abiiiit Ins welfare, the usual potne ei qui*
nea being 1 ver. the Lord of Riches iheu ad*
dressed the twice horn Risfn, saying,—
Yon are welcome Do tell me what do you
want from me. Inform me of it, I shall, O
twice. born one do whatever you may order |
me loaccompfidi, ^

r 39 Do yon enter my house as pleases
you. O foremost of Rrahnianas Duly '
entertafiied tiy me, and after yo rr business '
Is dune yon may go without any obstacles .
being placed in your way.

40. Having sail lhe<e words. Kuvera
took (he hart ) of that fnrcmmt of Oral.ma.
lias and conducted linn into Ins palace
He (ffered Inin Ins own scat as also water
to w..sh (us (cet aud die present of Che usual .
Ingredieiiis

41 After t> e two had hren seaieil the
Yakshas of Kiirrra lieadrd by Maiubtiadra,
a»i) many GsnUliarvas and Hiniiaras, also
tat down before them

4]. After all of them had taken iheir
Seats, ill' ford rt Rictessaid-Under-
staiiclnig whst your pJeai le^ IS die y-ho n
tilbcs ol Apsaras will begi(i dieir dance.

4y It is proper that 1 sliontJ rnirrlain
you wall t ospii.’hv a. d that yo 1 itmuld
lie served with pr piuty— thus addtrascd
tic asc'iic AOiiavakra said, tn a sweet
voice, -.-Let the dance go on.


44. Then Urvara, Mishrakeshi, Ram*
bha, Urvaslu, Ahimvitsha, G'lritnclii,
Clittra, Cfuirangada, Riicl 1 Msiinharaf
Siikesht, biimukln, Hasim, Prnhhs, Vidyiita,
Prashami, Danta, Vidyota nil f Ran — diese
and many olljer beaunful Apsaras began
to dance. 1 lie G ndharvas played oil
various kinds of musical instruments.

4f. After such exiellent music and
dance (lad begun, die Kisin Ashtavakra of
austere penances iiiiconscioiisly passed a
full celestial year there in the house of king
Vaisfiravana. ^

4S Ihen king Vaishravan'i said to the
Rislii,— O learned Rrafiinaiia, see a little
more than a year has passed away since
your arrival here.

49 (Ids music and dance, etpeCially
kiiuwn by the name of Gsii Iharva, ts n
sCeaterof the heart (and of lime] Act as
you lice, or let tins go on if diat be your
pleasure.

50 Yon are my g test snd, therefore,
tvordiy of worship fhi* <* your hiius*.
Do yon set your comniands. We are all
bound to yon.

51. liiiis addressed by king Vaishra*
vaiM. the illustrious Ashtavakra, replied t<t
turn, with a pleased heart, saying,— | have
been dniv lio inred by yun I desire now, O
t ord of Riches, to go hence.

$2—53 Indeed) I am highly pleased.
Alt dns befits you, O L'rd vf Richet*
I lirniigli yo ir grace, O illiisinons one, and
according to d‘B command of the gieai Rishi
Vad.4nya, I sb*l) now proceed lO III/
I Mirney’s end May you euj ly prosperity,
—Having s^id these words, Uie ill ismuiis
Itishi I'ft Kuvera's palace and proceeded
northwards.

$1 He crossed the Kailasa anil Ihe
M-udara as also the g Men innuiitsius.
Oryond those high and great inoM.ilaros i*
situate I>i4t cxcellBiU teflon wieie MiIm-
deva dressed as an liuiiibfe ascetic wa*
living,

53 He went roUnd the spot, with a
ceinpiised mind bending lus iiead In let*
p«ct (he wfiile. Oescciuiing tUen ou the
K«rth, he regarded himS'lf piirtried lor
having Seen that Imty spot winch is tliO
rcstdeucc of iMatiadena

3d JIvviMg gone round lhal moimram
ihtice the Iti'lii wiih Uc' tiimed Inwards
thciiorih went on wiifi u f lyons iieaic.

jy Th»i* he «aw anntbrr fnrrst lh*t
seas very (lehchtfiii fi was ad rued euli
I the fruits and roots of evrrv s«*s«n, and it
[ was rd'ed with the musie vt bsrdi.


66


MAtlABtlAftATA.


5S Tliere were m»ny cliarrrung groves
ill ilie forest liie illustrious Uislii tlien
san a beauiifiit as) luin.

59 ] lie Ifislii saw also m«iiy grilJen
lulls decked willi gems and possessed of
various loims. iheteliesaw many lakes
and tanks also

60 And lie saw various otlier Inglity
tieaiiiiliil objects SeeiUk! these things the
mind of that Kislii of puiiRed soul l^came
filled with joy,

61. lie then saw a beautiful palace
made ol gold and a hirned with mII soils of
gems Uf wondeifiil slrnciiire, that paUie
surpassed ll e palace of Kuvera htntseli 111
every respect.

Cl. Around it there vieit many lulls and
mounts of jewels and gems Many hcauii*
fill cars and heaps uf jewels also were seen
Ihete.

63 *1 lie Rislii saw there the river Man*
(laMiii nhose waters were covered witli
liiiiiiljeiless Maiidara floweis I liere also
weie seen many self luuiinnns gems> and
the sod all aioimd was decked with dia*
iiiuiids of taiious species

64 Ihe palace which the nishi saw
contained many chanihets wliose arches
Weie set with various kinds wl stones
I hose chanihers were adorned also with
nets of peails interspersed with jewela and
Ijcma of vaiious species

C5 Various sorts ol beautiful objects,
capable of stealing ilie heart muiS the eye
suriuiiiided lliat pafice i >>ai clia'nu >g
leticat was inhabited by numberless KisUrs ,
06 beeini! these beautliill sights a1)
around the Uislii began lu think of wlieae
he would take slieller rroceeding then to
the i.Hie ul the p.iljce( lie inieied these
words — ,

67. let those that hve here know that a
pnest has come —nearmi' ih« voice ul lire
Kisl 1, a number of maidens came out tu ^
body from that pnlace.

C3. i hey weie seven m number, O king,
Ol different sons ol beauty, all of them
were I ■y.hly ciMiiniiig Lvery one of lliose
maidens the itisin saw stile ins hea«t.

Ct) ’Hie sage could not. with even Irrs
iiiniost stiiit,t.lrs cooirul his immi In feel,
seeing lliose iiianirns of very great brants,
hit hea«t lost US bsiancr. 'treiiiir hi n^clf to
give way 10 sucli n f| leixes. (he llishi made
tk sigoruut «t] ut. an I gfcaily ssneastx
was * e at last succeeded in cvoiruilint;
I in.tai.

;o. Hioie Uihes (lien ad hessed the
Iti.i I. S4)iii)> •— I et ilie ill (iirious one enter,
'-biiitktu with cutiosit) about tWse Inghly


beautiful ladieS, as also of that palace,^ ihtf
twice*born llithi entered as he was com*
inauded C ilerint; the ptUce he saw an
old lady, with marks of decrepitude, dressed
»•» white robes and adorned with eVery

kind of ornaiiieitt 1 lie Itishi blessed hei’,

saying,— Good be to you— Uie old lady
reiiiiiied lii« good wishes in diift toriri.
Rising up. she offered a seal to the Rishl.

73 Having taken hij seat, Ashtavakr4
said, — Lei all the ladies go to llieir rcsprC*
Itveqiiailers Only let one stay here Wt
that line remain here who is endued with
tsisdoiii and who has tranquillity of heart.
Indeed, lei all tile Others gu away as llw/
like

74 1 lilts addressed, all those damsels
went round the Uishi and then lelt the
chamber, only that aged lady reina"‘"'l»
(here


75 'Ihe day quickly passed and nieht

cane Ihe Uislii, seated on a splendid
bed addressed the old lady, saying,— «
blessed lady, the night IS growing deeprf*
Do you go to sleep

76 I heir conversation being thus put
a stop to by the UisKi, (he old lady laid het •
sell down on an escellenl bed of gf^^t
beauty,

77, Soon after, she rose from her brd
and preietidiiig to tremble with Cold, lelt
for (he bed of the Rishi.


77 Ihe great Aslitavakra welcomed
her vourieonsiy, I he lady, however, Birrieh*
ii>< her anus, tenderly embraced the Riil’li
O foremost of men.


79 Rtenig the Risht q nie unmoved
and as inaiiiinate as a piece of wood, site
became very sorry and began to conv«>e
with him.


80 1 Iwre IS no pleasure, except that

from desire, whii.li women can derive from
a person of the utliei Sex I 1 am nuw uu frr
iW i>,niieiice ol hr»t 1 seeh yon for
reason. l>a yon seeh me m reliirii.

Si, Be clieerful, O learned Rishi, *n<f

ninie yurseil with me I Do yon eiiit’rar*
me. O lenined one, for I desire y uu gie-dly*


S'*. O yon of righteous soul lliisum*"
WiOttne IS lliebest ami desirable rewaid m
ti»ose seveie penances wluch ynU
praciiseii At the f,.st sight I tiave bmun*
disposed to seek yoo. Du you also see*

83 All this ' ndms and every olhrr
precious article that you see here, sr^
mine 1) > you, rmleed. become the tnasl**
of all this with iny person and haart*

84 I shall satisfy every wish of yO<ir* 1
Do you sport with me, therefore, in thr*®


ANUaiiASANA PARVA.


67


forests, 0 Hrafimana, winch can
grant every wish.

85 I shall flhey you impl cny m every
|l<ir>i;, ami) yon will Sport with me accarrititi;
In your pleasure 1 All ol>)«^is ol desire shat
are (nipiaii or (hat ttelorig (<J fteaven shaJI
be enioyed by sis.

85 'I'lirre is no Bthee pleasure more
agreeable <n women. |ndee<i, iiiiUMt with a
per-«Ki of the opposite sex is <l<e fTtost .
desirable object ol joy that we can get.

87. When moved hy tli« god of love
Women become very whimsical llini
U ey do tml feet a«sy pain even if they walk
over a desert ol biirimig sand.

Aelitttvakra. «aid •—

88 U blessed lady, | never approach
fliir»(her’s wife. One's W'lrnn wtth .imHliee
snail's wde is condemned by persona con*
veraant with Oie scriptures on moialrty.

S9. I ain an niiee stranger to enjoy,
tnenis iif every hind O bbssed la<ly,
know that i Imvp become desirous of
tiMfffage for getting children, f iwe.<r hy
irviili Itself.

9s. Ihrongh the help of offspring
fi|,h<eow«ly got, I shaft proceed «• (hos«
rei.t»ni of happiness wlucii cannot he
attsnied wilhnnt tnch help O good lady,
know what is c nisisieiit with innratiiy, and
knowing It, desist from your cffoits.

ITie lady said:—

91. 1 Iv very gods of wind ar»d fire and

water, or ibe oilier crlesiial* O twice boin
One, are not *<> agreeable to womeousUie
S.od of five frnlced, wumen me greatly
iund ol scsual union.

I 91 Aniniig a thnussnd women, nr
perhaps, among fmndrrds of ih usands,
sometimes only One may be (uuiid wl o i>
devoted to her Imshand.


tfi That lady then sm I to return -a-O
illitstrioits one, you will alf see f,<xar6u>i'
to moo and place, f) > you only live here (luf
som'liinel U highly blessed one. anil I
slirfll Consider ruyseJf snnjLienlly rewarded '
97— 9S TInrt addressed by her, the
twice li M-it Uishi, O Vuiihislitlnra, expressed
(115 •«£O(t>«0ii to satisfy her rrijurst. saytng
~I sliafl hve with you in tins place as long
as 1 can veiiinre to do SI ~l be llisln then
seeing ikaf lidy possessed hy riecrrpiin le,

, began t> think seri,>usly on the ntsller.
He appeared U be even pnned by his
thoughts.

99 Ihe eyes of that foremost of Brail*
mauas could not get any dehvhi from those
pmli of th*l lady's person wliermipon they
were fixed On the oih*r hand, his looks
appeared to lie dispelled by the ugliness
ol those patiicnlar {iinbs.

lot Ilnsiadvis, forsooth, the rnittress
of this palace Has she been made «i.ly
OrotiKhsome ciirseT It is not proper that
I should qnckly determine the coiise of
(Ixs.

mt. Ilnnking thus 111 I11S lietfi, and
cunmis in know ll>e reason, the Ulslii passed
thereat of that day m anxiety.

ins Tie Isdy then addressed lifffl,
eating O illosiiioiis one. loik at the Sint
, reddeoerl by ihe evening clouds * Wiiot
SCI vice shnil I do (o you

lot I lie Uishi addressed her, Satine,—
•retch water for mj abhnion ' llaving
hafl rd, 1 shall frcue my evenine prayers,
conttvlling my longue and (he senses.’


CIIAPIER \X.

(ANUSHASNNIKA PAUVA)/—
CgittlHUtd,


QJ Under ll e II 11 iriicr of desire, titey
Cate »oi ( If faiinlv vr Inther or moli.er or
I rnther ur liutbaiid or suits or huibeiid S
brother.

9|. SceVmx what ihry consider liappi*
■lets, It c) ilctirnj t1 e lainily evtu as many
llVriS w^sh away ||je iM.itiS If .*1 CiMHelU
Hem liie Creator I imstU h«d s^nS ihia,
ntatkmg the (suits of wumcn.


Bltiihma laid .—

95 The Ilitin. bent upon finding
tlcUuhs ol wo nen, addiesseii that lady,
sayvig— Cease co speak lu w< It

ori^malcs fiotn hkmg. Icll

wliai t am lu do.


BlHsTinia said —

I. ( I ut ordered, the fady said, ^ Re
It vi'~»Slie then hrniitlit oil Mini a piece of
clutli fur Ins wear during the abintiuns.

t. With the ascetic's permission she
tubbed eiery pan ol his Unly wiiti the
irugsant oil she had brought (or Inm.

3 The Rishi was fnbbecf and when th*
I process of rubbing w^s over, Ifc went to

ll<e room set apait for tlie performance of
jtblutfons. there lie sat upvn a new and
cxccUcnl seat.

4 After the Rishi tiad taken l»s seat
ujHiu it, the 6'd fady began 10 wash 1 is


68


mahabharata.


l)ndy,\M(l< tier own soft hands whose touch
SV<is hl^lily rigrecdble

5 — 6 One After another in due course,
the lady helped the Rishi in his Ablutions
Uelween the Inkewrirm water with which he
was washed, and the soft hands which were
engaged in washing him, tl>e Rislii of rigid
vows could not understand that the whole
night had passed awa) in the work Rising
Iruin the bath, the Rislii became highly
surprised.

7. He saw the Sun risen above the
lionzon on the East He was surprised at
tins and asked himself, — Was it leally so
or was It a mistake of the understanding

8. n>e Rishi then duly adored the god
of a tliou-and rajs llusdime, he asked
the lady as to wliat he shantd do the
old Udj prepared some food fur the Rishi
sweet to the taste like ambrosia itself.

9 On account of the sweetness of that
food the Risl 1 could not take much. In
taking that little however, the day passed
away and evening set in.

to Ihe old lady llien asked the RisIm
to go to bed and sleep An excellent bed
was given In lli« Uishi and another was
taken by herself.

1 1. Hie Rishi and the old lady occupied |
difTecent beds at fi<st, but wlieii it was niid*
iitglil, the Udy left her own bed for that of
the Rishi.

Ashtavakra said:—

t3 O blessed Udy, I am not inclined
for sexual union willi one who iy the wife of
aiioilier. Leave my bed, O cood Udy.
Blessed be >OU do, you desist ftoill tills of
jour own atcoid.

Skishma said :~-

13 llius dissuaded by the Brahmana
with the help of Ins self Lontrol, Hie Udy
Miiswered 1 im, saying, — 1 am my own
mistress' III accepting me yoj will
commit no sm.


the man who acts as he likes. As for my-
self, I am able la govern my inclinations by
self control. U good lady, return to your
own bed.

The lady said;—

17 I bow to you You should show me
jouf favour O sinless one. I prostrate
myself before you, do you become my
refuge.

18 If ) ou see sm in knowing one who is
not your wife, 1 jield myself to you Do
)ou, O twice-born one, accept niy hand III
marriage

ig Yon will incur no sm. I tell you
truly. Know that 1 am my own mistress.
If there be any sm m tins, let it visit me
only. My heal t IS devoted to you 1 am'
my own mistress. Do you accept me.

Aslitavakra said?—

30 . How IS It, O good lad}, that youare
your own mistress? lell me the reason
of this I liere IS not a single woman m
the three woilfs who can be considered as
the i»i>iiess of her own self.

31 I he father protects her while she IS
a maiden. 1 he husband protects her while
she ts joimg. bons protect her when she is
aged Woman can never be independent
as long as they live.

The lady said. —

72 I have, since my maidenhood
adopted the vow of celibacy Do not
doubt It. I am still a maid Doyoii make
me jour wile O Bralnnaiia, do not kill
this devotion of niiiie to you.

Abhtavakra said —

33 As 'you are inclined to me SO am I
•iiOined to jou llieie is this question.
Imwever, that should be settled It is I'ue
‘*'*t/*y g'ving way to my inclinxitons I
SI all iKit be considered as actiiii contrary to
what tl e Rishi (Vadatija) ivtsiies


Ashtavakra B3id —

14 Women can never be Ihetr own mis-
tresses I Ins IS the opinion ol the Creator
liimsejf, t>is , Ilia} a woman should never
lie indepent.


The lady said:—


IS- O learned
by desire. Maiki
roinimi iin by
loviiigly.


Brahmxna 1 am pained
in I devotion to y»ii You
refusing to accept me


Ashtavakra said

16. Vaiious shoiicomtngs drag away


34. 1 his IS very wonderful Will this
lead to what IS good? Here is a maiden
adorned with good oniaiiienis and robe* !

35 She IS highly heaiiliful. Why did
deciepnude In fc her beamy so long? At
I'ir*''* *.'‘® " beautiful maiden-

I do not knuw what form she may assume
lierealter. '

I 36. i shall never swerve from that con-
I trot winch I liave over desire and ihe other
I passions or ffom conieniment wilh whal I
I have already got. bnoli swerving »s «’ol
good I shall keep myself united wUli noth-


At^USHASAtfA PARVA


69


CHAPTER XXI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAJ —

Continued,

YudhiBbthira said:—

I 1 el! me wby had that lady no fear of
Ashtavakra's curse although Ashiavakra
was Killed Willi great energy 7 How also
did AshtavaUra succeed lu returning from
that palace?" ,

Bhishma said •— '

2. Ashtavalcra asked her, saving, — How
do you change your form so ? You should
iilit say anylhiiig false 1 wish 10 know
this. Do you speak truly before 3
tnana. ^

I'he lady said

3 O best of Orahmanas, wherever you
may live, in the Crjes]).i) region or ot> Earih
llus desire ol uman between tl>e sexes is to
be observed U you of infatiiUle prowess,
bear with rapt aiienlion, what it alt is,

4 riiis trial was converted by me. O sln«
less one, for examnttiig you aright, O you
nf infallible prowess, you have conquered
all the wDtlds by the strength u( tnuid.

5 Know me as the embodiment of the

Nuctliern point ol the compass. You have
areii the lightness cf the female character.
Even old women are tortured by the desire
of sexual union. I

6 the grandfather Inmsetf and aff the '
gods with Indra have been pleased wiili
you I know the object lor which your
illustrious self has come here,

7. O foremaat ol twice born persons you
have been sent here by the Rislu Vadanya
•—the faiher of your bride-— in order tlwt 1
may instruct you According to the
wislies uf that Rislii I luve already instruct*
ed you,

8 You Witt return home safety. Vour
journey back will not be toilsome. You
will get for wife Uie girl you have dioseit
bhe Will bear you a sun.

Q Through desire I had •oheited you
You gave me tlie very best answer People
of the three worlds cannot get over she
desire for sexual union,

10 Return to your qnarlers, having
achieved such merit, \vnat eUe Is there
which joii Wish to hear (from me; T t sfiall
truly describe it to you. O Ashtavakra,

1 1. 1 was gratified by the Rishi Vadanyw

in the first instance lor your sake, O twice*
bornarceticl For the sake of hoiMriitg
him, t luvx said all this to you.


Bbishma said *—

S 3 Hearing these words of hers, the
twice*barn Aslitavakra jmied his hands
respectfully He then beyt>ed the lady for^
Iwr permission to return Getting the per-
mission he sought, he returned to his own
hermitage.

13. Resting himself for sometime at
home and getting the permission of his
kinsmen and friends, he then, in a proper
way, Went, O deligliter of tfie Kurus, to (h«
Brahtnana Vadaiiya.

14 Welcomed with the usual enquiries
by Vadanya tlie Rislii Ashtavakra, with a
well pleased heart, described all that lie had
seen.

He said, — ordered hy you I pro-
ceeded to the mountains of Gandliamadana.

' in the quarter lying to Che north of those
I mountains 1 saw a very superior goddess,

1 I was received hy her Hith cooriesy.

She named ynu beiure me, and also instrue-
j ted me in various matters Having listen-
I cd IP her I have returned, O turd '

[ 17 T he learned Vadar»ys»a»d to lum,—

I take iny daughter's hsiid according to
I due rites and under the proper consietla-
t'ons. You are the fittest hude^grcetn 1
can select for tlie giil.

Bhishma said >

t8 Ashtavakra said,— So be it'— and
espoused the girl Indeed, having married
the girl, the highly pious ttiihi, became
filled with joy

19 Having taken as hiS wife that beau-
tiful Udy. tlie RisIn Cuniinued to live in Ins
own herinnage freed from eVery sort of
mental trouble.


CHAPIER XXU.

(ANUSH ASANfKA RARVA) —
Cortimued.

Tudhishthira said:—

t. Whom hate the elernal nrahmanas
selected a proper object of eillsT Is a
Orahmana wlo bears the maikv ol the
order of hfe he follows to be considered «5
such, or IS one divested of such marks to
be so regarded

Bbtshma said

3 O king It has been said that gifts
slioutd be made a Br^hma'ia wIms toiloe>$
j Ulc duties e! Ins own order, whcllier he'


70


MAHADItARATA.


hears the of nralimacliarj\a nr not,

for biHli are (aiillless, ?f«,he who hears
such tnaiks and he whii is divested of them

Tudhiahthira said

s Wital sm does an impure person
commit if he makes Rifts of sacrificial
bmter or food or with ^real devoliOH, lo
persons ol (he twice>born order 7

BUishma said *—

4 He wlio lias no seU-conlrn] becomes,
forsooth, cleansed hy devniinn Such a
nun, becomes purified in respect of every
act

Yudliishthira said

5 U baa been said that a Brahmana
wlie IS soiiKlit for (he performance of a
rehjjions rile should never be examined

I lie learned, however, hold Oivl while per-
formurmiiig rites for the Funs, the Biah*
mana who is sought, to be cn^^ged, should
be examined,

BUislitna said

6 As reRards the reheioiii rite for (he
drilies, these do not yield fruits on account
of tie Bralimana who IS enKatced in dontR
them bill ihrniiRh ihe deities

Iheinselves Forsooth, ttiose persons wlir>
perform sacrifices acquire ttie inent of
those acts, through the favour of the
deities

7. H»e Brahmanas, O chief of tie
Bharatas, are alwa) s uMerers of Brahma
'file nueiliRent Uishi Mark^dndeja, gave
vent to these words |ii days of yore. 1 1

Yudhuhtliira said; — I

8 Why, O graniifailier, are these five
SI* , he who IS a alrariRer, he wfio is Riited
with learning, he wlio is coniiectetf bv innr*
liage. lie llut IS endued with peiunces,
ami he who is devoted to He pertonn*
aiice of sacrifices, considered as proper
p.r»ons7

Bhishma said*—

9 ll>e first three s*t* , slranpers, rrla-'
lives, and ascetics wtien endued with iliese
allrihutcs, ns , puuiy of birth, devotion 10
»rhj,i us sets learning, iiietcy, modesty,
shiceritt, and IrutI fulness, are cansiderril
at proper persons 1 he other \wo, ris ,

men of and those given to sacrifi,.es

when Rifled with five of the*e adribnIeS.
s-ia , puiiiy of birih, mercy, moJrsiy, sns*
cent) , and trnttifulness, are also coiisufereil
as proper persons.

10 {.isten now (o me, O son of IVttlia.
*» I teate to j ou the opinions of these four


persons of ereal energy, vis, the goddes,
Earth, the jlishi Kashy.ip^, the god of fire*
and the ascetic Mark-rndeya. ’

The Earth said j —

II A* a clod of earth, when thrown into
the great ocean, quickly dissolves away, so
every soil of sin disappears by ihe three
Ingli qiiafificatinns of officiatim al sacit*
ficcs, teaciiing, and receiving of gifts.

Kashyapa said

13 ihe Vedas with their six aiixiha*

I Ties, tliebankliva pliuusnpliy, the Puranas,

! and Ingh biilh, these cannoi rescue a
I twice*boia peison if he (dUs away from
I good conduct. 1

Agni said'—

13. Ihe Drahmana who, engaged in
stnrly and considering hnnseU learned,
seeks With the help of his learning to des*
uoy the reputaiion of otliers, falls away
from virtue and comes 10 be regarded as
divorced from tniili biich persons of re<
Iractoiy spiiit never acquire regiuiis of hap<
piness herealter.

Markandeya said

14 If a thousand finres sacrifices anti
Irnih were weighed in (lie balance, Id*
not know wlietlier the former would equal
even h»tf of the latter in weight.

Bhisbma said —

I 15 ilnviiig spoken these words, those
four persons, each of whom is gifted with
nninedSiiialilc energy, vit , the g iddess
Eailh, Knsiiyapa, Agni, an 1 BhngnS sun
urnied with weapons, quickly weniawdy.

Tudhishthira said —

iC II Oialimanas observing the vow of
celibacy in this w.ild eat, begemg ihe
sdine the orferin|:s one mates during (line-
ml ri»«s, I ask, can the bliraddlia he consi-
dered well performed if Ihe performer ac-
(iMtly makes over those oBerings to such
BrahmaiidS.

Bbisbrna said —

17. If, having practised the vow of
Urdlimachar) ya lor ()>« prescribed pen >d
(<i( twelve sears) and seq nred proficiency
in tlie Vedas and tneir braticltes, a Urah-
inana inniself asks for the ofTerings nude
in Sbraddhas and eats ihe same, he « co'i'i*
dered to fall away fruin his vow. Ihe
2>hraddha, liowever, is nut considered as
sullied m any way.

Yadiiislitbira said*'— *

18. i'henuehold thtl duly or virtue


ANUS1IASANA PARVA.


7*


has many end? and nitmerons ilnors. Tell
ti)e> U \v)i,tt( however, dire ilic

decHions ■» tins iu<tUer,

Bhisbma said —

19. Ateiteiuion from injury (0 others'
It uilifiiliiess, ihe alisence of Miitier, m«rc>‘
»elf ciintiol, and sincriii) or candour, U
king, die ihe maiks of virtue.

20. There are persons wlio wander over
tl<c Earlli, landing vnlue hni wiilnnil pr^c*
tiMfig ivfiwi they prewJiaiid engaged ail the
while in sin, O kin(*.

2 1—22. lie who ewes such persons gold ^
or uenis or kine or liorses lias to siiiii lit 1
liell and there live lor ten years, on tlie
Ixces oi such persons as live tipnn the
ficsli d( ikad kine .«iid biifTalos »l men
c.<lled Piikkasas, of nihers who live in the
tiiiiskiris of cities and vdUires, and oi me»
who give out under tlie inflneKCe id anger
•ind folly, the acts <in<J ointssions of '
olheis.

2^ Those foolish men wlio do not give
a UrwhrnaiiB observant of ilievowof l)iah>
inacharjya the offerini>s made in bhrad<lhas
(unto one's deceased ancestors), liave to
pioceed, O king, into regions of greet
inuery,

Yudbislitbira. said s—

24, left me, O grand fath'r, what <s
siiprrior to Qratiinactiarjya T Wiint is the
highest matk of virtue T Wliat is the
highest kind of purity 7

Bhishma said : —

25. 1 tell you, O son, that alistcniion
from honey and ine<il is even superior to
ltrahinachHr)>a Virtue lies witino troiit'
d.4ties. file hesi mark of virtue ts Ke>
nuncialioii.


Yudhislithira said

76 In what time should one practise
vittue? In wtiac time shonfd we.4iih lie
f.vmr j,w.vM he

enjoyed? O grandfather, do tell me this.


Bfaishma said. —

) 27 One should ac-qnire riches the first

i paitot I IS hie then sliotild one acquire
vtrlii'', and ll'en e»{ ry plew^ure. One
shiuld nut, however, be addicted to any 0I


2S One should respect the Brahmanas,
worship Ins preceptor and seiunrs. slwrw
mere) lo all creatures, be oi mild duposilitm
ond sweet speech,

29 1 u utter niitruih in a court of justice

to behave deceitfully towards the kmg, to


act faKefy (otvards preceptors and eMera,
art* considered as equivalent to Urahiiiaiil*
Cide.

30. One shoulif never do *11 act of vio-
lence lo ilie king's body. Nor shniiM one
ever strike a cow. B itfi these ufTetices afe
eqiial to the stii of fmticide.

31. One slmnhl never quit his Oiom/i)
fire. One sfiuufd also renounce tfie study
of the Vedas. One should never aitack w
Urahiiianii by words nr deeds. All these
ufiences are rqijal to Bidhiiidiiicide.

Yadhishtlura aaid

32. Wiiat kind of Rratimanas should
be considered .rs good 7 Wiiu are liinse
Uralniianas by making presents to wiinil
one in*) win greal merit 7 Wliat kind of
Brahmanas are they wiioni one siioufd
feed 7 fell me all tins, O grandfather.

Bhialima said

33 Those Brahmanas who are freed
from anger, ivito are clevoieJ lo acts of
virtue, who are firm in Iruiii, and who
practise self.controf, are convnlered as
gO'd. By making gifts to them oii« dC-
quires great ineiii.

34 One acquires merit by making
I presents to such Bralimaiias ds are Ires
I from pride, capable of bearing everything,

firm III ihe piirsnit of ilreir objecis, gifted
with masiery over their senses, devoted lu
the helroof of afi creatures, and disposed to
be liiendly towards all.

3$ One acquires great merit by making
[gills tv such Braliinaiias as a> e free from
avarice, as are pure v( lieart and cunduct.
gifted wnh learnmg and modesty, truliifiii
Ml speech, and observant »l their own duties
as Sanctioned 111 llie soiplures.

36 T lie Rislus have declared that Brah-
mana to be a deserving oi^eci of gifts wlio
Studies the four Vedsa with all tlirir auxi-
liaries and i< devuied to the six wefi-known
duties One acquires^reat itreru by inak-
' mg gifts to Braiiiiidrias einiued wilii such
. quahricationSi

37. The man who makes gifts 10
' a woritiy Brahmana iiiiillipfies Ins

I merit a thousand fold. A single pious
Brafimana gifted will, wisdom and Vedic
hire, observaiil uf tl>e duties laid down in
the scriptures, and marked onl by purity
uf emiOuct is capable tu resoue a whole
{•tnily.

38, One shouid tnake gifts of icine and
hoises and riches and fund and oti er kinds
of arlicfes (o a Brahmana wlin is gifted with
such qualifications. By inaking such gifts


72


MAflARtlARATA.


to Slid* psrso;is one acquires great tiappi*
ness III ilie nest world

39 As 1 liave already toM joil eVen
one sncli Hiahmana C-in save Itie cniirr
family t ■> wliic'i the giver belongs Wliat
need 1 say, therefore, O dear son, of the
merit of making gifts ti many Orabmaitas
of siicli qiialiflcaiioiis ? In making giftSi
therefore, one should always select tlic ob*
Ject lo wiiom the gift Is lobe made.

40. Hearing of a Rrahmana gifted with
proper qiiahficatians and respected by all
good people, one should Invite him evert If
lie lives at a distance and welc»miiig linn
when he arrives, one should adore him by
all means in Ins power.


CBAprfiR xxm. I

(ANUSHASANIKA PAUVA).
CoKfinixd.

YudhUWliii'a aald

I. I wish yon, O grandfather, to (ell me
what (be ordinances about the rites tor the
denies and the departed manes on occasions
of Sbraddlias.

Bliislima said —

3 Having purified oneself and then
performed the well known auspicious rites,
one should carefully perform all acts rela-
ting to the Puns in itie^fternuon,

3 What IS given to men should be given
in the midday with fove and regard that
gift wlitcli IS ma 3 e‘”uiilnnely*ls taken by
Kdkshasas

4, Gifts of articles that have been leapt
over by any one, or been licked or sucked,
or Sre not given peacefully, or have been
seen by women who arc impure for being In
their season do not produce any ment
Such gifts are considered as (he portions of
Rakshasas

Gifts of articles that have been an-
nounced before many people or from which
a part has been eaten by a Slmdra, or that
have been seen or licked by a dog form
portions of Rakshasas

6 Food which IS muted with hair or
' in which iheie are worms or which has
been spoiled wiili spittle or sahva or winch
has been looked at by a dog or into which
(ear-drops have fallen or which has been
trodden upon, should be known as forming
the part of Rakshasas.

7. Food that has been eaten by a person
ificvmpeteni lo utter the S) liable 0»i, or


that his heed eaten by 1 person bearmcf
arms. O Bharata, or that fias been eaten by
x wicked person, should be known as due to
Kakshasas. /

8. I be foo’d that Is eaten by a person
from which a part has already been eaten
by another, or wlncii is eaten wiiliont a part
(hereof having beeh oflered to gods and
guests and children, 1$ appropriated by
Kakshasas Such impure food, if oflered tn
the deities and Pitris is never accept-
ed by them but is appropriated by Uak-
shasas.

9 I lie food that Is ofTered by the three
(wice-borii classes m Sbraddbas iii winch
Mantras are either not uttered or uttered
incorrectly and in winch the ordinances laid
diwnintfie scriptures are not duly per-
fonued. i> given to guests and oihet people,
ts appropiiaied by Uakshasas.

to Ihe food that Is given to guests
withont having been previously dedicated
to the denies or the Pilris with the help m
libations on the sacred fire, of which ha*
been sullied on account of a part inereof
having been eaten by a person wlio «
wicked or of irreligious conduct, should bs
known as being due to Uakshasas.

It I have described to you the dues of
the Rakshasas Listen now lo me as I pul
down tlie rules (or deteriwiniitg the
brahmana who is worthy of gifts.

13 All Brahmanas tliat have been out*
casted, as also Brahmanas who aie idiot*
mid insane, do not deserve to be inriied to
Shraddhas in which offerings are made to
either the denies or the departed manes.

13 That BrahmaUas who is affliCte I
with leucoderma, or he who is sh >ru of
generative power, or he who has got leprosy,
or he who lias got phthisis, or he who suffers 1
from epilepsy, or he who is blind, should
not, O king, be invited.

14 Those Bralimanas who practise a*
physicians, those wlio get regular pay for
adoring t< e images of gods established by
the rich, or live upon tlie service of the
gods, those who observe vows from pnd*
or other false motives, and those who self
Soma wine, do not deserve to be invited.

ig Those Brahmana* who are, by pro-
fession, vocalists, or dancers or player* or
instrumental musicians, or reciters of sacrrd
bioks, or warriors, and athletes, should iioc,
O king, be invited

16 1 hose Brahmanas who pour liba*

tions on the sacred fire for Shudrns, or who
are preceptors of Shudra*. or wlio arc
servant of bhudra masters, should not be
invited.


AKUSIMSANA PAftVA.


73


tj. Tlist Br^hnisna wbo »s paid for hW
Sttvices as a preceptor, or wbo aiienda as a
pupil upon O'e lectures of some preceptor
tor an affowaiice paid to turn, does not de«
serve to be invited, for both of them are
considered as sellers of Vedic learning.

i 3 I hat Brahmsna who has beett once
Induced to accept the gift of food in aShrad*
dha at the very begiuniug, as also he who
has married a bhiidra >vif«, even if gifted
with every sort of knowledge, should not be
invited.

IQ rimse Brahnanas who have no do*
mesuc fire, and liiey who attend upon
corp-,es. they who are fliieves, and theyivlm
iMve otherwise degraded themselves, do not
O king, deserve to be invited.

20. 1 hose Bralimanas wliose antecedents
are not known orare vile, and tfiey who are
rutrua ptiiras, should not, O king, be in.
viled on occ>tsions of Shraddhas.

3 T. That Br-ihmana who gives loans of
money, or he who lives upon the interest of
the loins given by him, or he who lives by
ilie sale of living creatures, should not, O
king, be invited

32 . Persons who are henpecked or they
who live by becoming the paramnnrs of
uichssie women, or they who do not pec*
form iheir morning and eytiung prayers,
thoiiUl not, O king, be invited to bhrad*
dims.

23 Listen now to me as t say who
tlie Drahinana is who has been vrd-sined
for nciv done III honor of the gods and the
dep-^rled ataiies. Indeed, i elmll t«ll >011
wli.it those merits arc on account oi which
one may become a giver or a recipient of
gifts in bhraddhas.

34. Those Urahmanas who perform the
rues and ceremonies Lid down m the
scriptures, or ll>ey who are possessed of
tneiu, or they who know well the Gayatti,
or Ifiey who perforin the Ordinary duties of
BralimaiiMS, even if ihey happen to lake to
■ Ritculture for a living, are capable, O
'Mtig.xfi ‘tArrerg Vt. 'yma^yriws.

25. ff a Brahmana happens in be well-
born, he simiilil be itiviied to Stiradtfhas
noiwilhjlaruhng Ins liking up arms for
figlning the hatlles oi oilers. that Brail-

i mana, however, O son, who happens to
drive a trade for a Iirtrig should be
discarded.

26. Ihat nrahmani oho ponri hbajiorre
i everyday On tl e sacred hie, or who lives
t in a liked habitallon, who w not a thief and
I who peifotins the dnlles of hospnahtjr to
) giiSMs arrived at h<s I ensr, shculd, O
t kmg, be inviud to Shraddhas.

10


I ay, Thai Brahmana, O chief cf Bha-
I rate's race, who reciien the Saviiii morning,

; i>Oon, and night, or who lives upon clmriiy
flagging as inucfi as is nrcess.iry, who is
observant 0/ Die rites end crenionief laid
down III the scriptures for persons of Ins
order, should, O king, be invited tn
Shraddhas.

28. Ifiat Drahmsna who having ac-
quired riches in ilie morning becomes
poor III the nfiernoon, or who poor in the
morning becomes rich in the evening,
of wfiois sfiorn of tnafice, or is sisined liy
a minor fault, should, O king, be invited Ca
bhcaddhas.

2Q. lhat Brahmana who Is shorn of
priUe or Sin, who is not given to dry
disputation, or who lives upon alms got in
ins rounds of meiulicency from 'I iaksf* tu
house, 'should, O king, be invited tu
saciificcs.

30. One who does wot observe vows,
or who IS given to uilruth, who is a ihief,
or who lives by (Ik* sale uf living ereeiiifr*
or by trade in i>enrrHf, shouid be inviieii
to hhraddhvs, O kmc, if he happen to
subsequently dunk Soiiu lit a sacrifice,

3t. lhat man wlio having acquired
riches by foul or cruel means siibsequenily
spends It in worshipping the gods and
periorming the duties ul hospuality, be*
comes wurtiiy, O king, of being invitetl to
bbraddk^s.

3?. The ricliei lhat one has aeqinred by
the sale oi Vedic learning, or which h*s
been acquired liy a woman, or winch has
been iraincd by meanness, should never be
given 10 Bralinianas or spent in making
offerings to il>e departed manes,

3}. ’lhat Brahmana O clnef ol Dha-
laiVs race, wlio upon the completion of n
Shraddha lhat is performed witli bis help,
refuses to utter the woids yuklt, comniiis
the sm of swearing falsely in a suit lor
land.

34- The ti'me for criebraimg the Shrad-
dh*. O yiNllnsthira, is that when r>n« gels
n good Ucatiinana and curcis and clarifieil
butter and lI'S sacred day of the new moot,
•nd (he meat of wild animals such as deer
and others.

35, Upon the termination of n Shraddhs
peatorined by a Brahmans lie wm.t
dwadhw should be ultcfe J. "'If pvtlocmcf
by a'^?tJi»iriya ihe vvord* il.ar slould b<s
niicred »re--l.«i your depaited manes

be pleased,

315— tS- Upon ife cflmpleitsn of a
SlrarM»a perJormed by a Va»«l«yjr, O
ntiacata. (he words that sho ild be uiiered
are,— Let tver}llnng become cndletsl^


74


bfAtlABMARATA


l-'kewise »ipon llie completion qI a Shraddlia
pel formed b> a Sliudra, llie word ihal
should be utteied is —As regards

a liraliinana the Piinyalidiit declaralion
should be •tcconipaitied nitli (he utterance
of the S) liable Um In the case of a
Ksliatri>a such d^l^atton should be with
oiinlie utierance of the sellable Ou In
tl e acts peifoiined by a Varsh^a the words,
instead of the sellable Om should be—
^ be plea sed Listen now to me

as iTeTTyoii n e rTi^r ibal should be per-
formed, 'one after aiiollier, as giviit in the
ordinances


39 All the rites consequent upon birlb,

0 Uharata, arc necessary in the case of
all the thiee castes All these rites O
Yudhi^luliira in the case of both Ora

1 manas and Ksliatnyas as aUo in that of
Vaisliyas are to be performed with the
help uf Mantras


40 1 he girdle of Brahmana should be
made ol Munj* grass 1 hat of a Ksl atrtyi
should be a bowsliing the Vaishya s
budle should be made of the Valwaji gtass
ihis has been laid down m the sctipluies

41 Listen now to me as I explain to
}ou what forms the merits and demerits
of boiti iitvers and recipients of gifts.

42 A Brahmana violates I is duty bt
utterii g an untrutli Such an act on his

IS sinlul A Kshatriya perpetrates
fold and a Vaisliya eight'fold tie sin
that a Bralimana incurs by utleime an
untrutli


r.


43 A Brahmana shculd not eat else*
fiaving been previously invited b>
I Utahmana U) eating at tlie house ol
be person by whom he has been invited
■ Iterwards, lie becomes inlerior and even
ncurs the sin ol the slaughter of an ai nnal
>11 occasions other than those of sacrifices


4t. So also, if he eats etsewhere afle
avmg been invited by a KsUaiiiya or s
Vaishja, he falls away from » is post
lion and incurs half the sm of the slaugl te.
3t an ai imal on occasion, other than thosi
if saciifices.


4a Tl at Brahmans, O king, who eats
>n wcasions of such acts as are perlorme J
in I oiior r1 il.e j.ods or tiie dejaited


cmg petformed I
■ T of uileim^ ,


46 That Brahma
511 r-ccasuns ol simiU.
icrsons betuhi^mg to ih


O king, who eats
performed by
higher castes,
wnen lie is impure on account ©I
bitili or a death a njng Ins cog-


nates, and UnovMiig lliat he is impure Of
through temptation, commits tlie same siu

47 He who lives upon riches acqiired
Under false pretences like that ol sojjurns
to sacred places or who begs the giver
for Itches pretending that he would spend
It to religious acts commits, O kmgi

sin of uttering an untrutli.

48 I hat person, helonginc; to any of
the three higher c^istee. O Vudhishthirir,
who at Shraddhas and on other oucasuins
distributes food with the help of Minir.«s,
to such Braliman.s as do not stud) the
Vedas or who do not observe vows or wlio
have not purified their ^cunducl, forsooth,
commits sill.


yudhishthira said —

49 1 wish, O grandfather, to know who

those persons are by giving to who n the
things dedicated to the gods and the de-
paited.*ntanes, one may acquire sufHcicnt
lewatds.


Bhishma said

S© Do >011 O Yndl ifhihira, feed those
Brahm-inas wfiose wives respectfully «*'*
fur the residue of the duties of their hus«
bands like lilleis ol tlie soil waiting tet*
pectiully for liniely, showers of ram

5t By malting gifts to those Drah-
manas who are always, of pure conduct,
O king, who are liberated by absiainii'?
from ail luxuries and even full meals, who
are given to the observance of such vows
as lead to the emactaiion of the body, ai^f
who approach givers with the object of
getting gifts, one acquires great meric.

5* By making gifts to Bralimanas who
considers conduct in the light of food, wl 0
considers conduct in the light of wives and
children. wl,o considers conduct n bie
ligit of strength who considers conduct
m llie light of their refuge for crossing this
world and acq III ing^ihHppmes in the next,

and who beg for riches only when wealth

Is absululely needed, one accuires great
merit.

53 By making gifts to those persons,
U Yudlushthira who liatiug lost everything
through theives or oppressors, approach
the giver, one gams great merit.

5* By making gifts to sucli Bralimanas
as beg food from the hands of even a poof
person of Uheir caste who has jiul R°'
samething from others, on. acci lues gieat
menu


55 By mtking gifts to sucli Brahmana*
as have lust everything m times ol universal
distress and as have been deprived of thelf
(viveaonsu.h occasions, and as come to


A.Ml)SliASANA PAK


75


pivers salidlations for alms, ijne

acquires great merit.

56 By miking Rifts to sucti Brahmanas
as observe voi\s, anil as place tlieinselves
Voluntarily under painful rules and regiila*
tions, according to tl<e Vedic (nitjnctiuiis.
and as come to s licit nclies for spending
it upon tlie rites necessary to compitte their
vows and other observances, cue acquires
great merit.

57 By making gifts io sncIi Brabmanas
as live at a great distance from the ptac*
tices followed by the suifiil and (he vcicited,
as are sliorn of sCrenglti for want of ude«
quale support, and as are very poor in
earthly possessions, one acquires great

5S. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as liave been deprived of all Iheir posses-
sions by powerful men but as are pr-rfecily
innocent, and as desire to fill (heir scomaclis
with any and every sort of food, one ac-
quires great merit.

I 50 making gifts (o such Brahmanas
as beg fill belialf of oti ers p«i forming pm-
ances and devoted <0 (hern, and us ate
saiisfled with even tmsii g<f(S| one acquires
great rnefiti

60. You have now, O foremost of Ohi*
rate's race, hesid what liie scriptural de*
cleiaiions are about (he acquisiiion of great
ntent by (he making of sKis Hear from
me now of (hose acts that lead (o hell or
heaven.

\ fit. They, O Yurlluslithira, that speak
an uiiiruili on oeca»iuiis oiher itian (hose
when such untriilh <1 necessary (or serving
the purpose of the prrcepior or lor C*‘""K '
the assurance of safely to a person »i lear ,
of his life, sink III hell, ^

dl. They who ’ravish other people’s |
wives, or have sexual intercourse withdrefn, |
or assist atisucli sinlul acis, sink in hell, ,
dV They who rob others of tlieir riches |
or destroy the riches and prupertics ofwihvr 1
people, or triMipet the sliurtcoiiim|;t of 1
other people, sink n> hell ,

r>4 they who spoil tanks used by

cattle foe falisljirtg llnrst, •vlui injiire
iiiiildingi Hied l«r public tiieeniie*, •ho
bleak dawn bruiers und c-iusewa^s, and
whnputi down dnclling-l ouses, have to sink
In hell.

65. They who lead astray and cheat
l)eJ| less •omen, or guls, or aged damrs,
or such wnmen as have been (iighttned,
liave to sink in hell.

M Tley who destroy the means of
ether people's subsistence, ihey wha root i
cut the haluuiwrii of clher people, iliey 1


who rob others of their wives, they who
sow dissensions among friends, and ifiey
who destroy llie hopes of otJier people, sink

in hell.

67. Iheywho trumpet forth the faults
ofoftiers, tliey who bre^k down biidges
or causeways, they who live by folkiwing
other people’s culling and they ivlio are uii-
fcratefti] to friends for services received,
have to sink in hell

63 Ihev who have no faith in the
Vedas and show no respect for them, (hey
who break the vows made by themselves or
ro.>((e others to break (hem, mihI (hey wl>a
fail away from their status through sin, sink
in fiett. I

69 They who (ollfiiv improper conduct !
they wIiQ t^ke exorbitant rales of inierest, j
and they who m^ke unduly large profits on
sales, have to sink in hell.

70. They who are given (0 gambling,
(hey who unliesiiaiingly perform wicked
acts, and (hey who are given to killing
living Creatures, have to sink tn hell.

71. they who make the masters dismlst
the servants ll>at are hoping (or rewards or
are in the enjoyment of wages or salaries or
w.<i(uig lor returns in respect of valuable
services already done, have to sink in hell.

72 Ihey who themselves eat without
I oflenng poitions ihereol to their wives or
, (heir sacred hies or their servants or their

guests, and they who do iini perforin the
, tites laid down in the ecnptnies lor honour-
ing the depni led manes and dvities, have
(0 sink in hell

73 Ihey who sell the Vedas, they w!io\
fino (luU with the Vedai, andithey who I
rrd ice the Vedas into willing, have all •
(usiuk 111 hell.

J4 1 hey who are out of the limit of (he
luiir well-known modes ol life, tliry who
MI0W (o practices inierdicied by ll>e
bhrutis and (he scripiiirea, and they wiio
peifuTiit wicked nr sinful deeds or wl o
ilu lint beloi'i; to (heir order of tilth, have
to sink tn tiell.

73 Key who live by sellinR hair, (hey /
wtiu five by selling p usoiis, and ihey witj/
live by sebing ends, have to sink i ■ hell. /

76, I hey who put iinpediinenis in (ha
path of Ural nianas wild hiiie and maidens,

U Vudhestithira, have (o snx in hell.

77 Jhey who sell weanons, (hey who
forge weapons, itiey who m.ke arrows, and
(hey who make bows, have to sink in hell.

' 7S They who obi'ruct pjih* and roads
•lib Slones and ibotnj and boles hare IO
sink >u iiclt.


76


MAIIABIIAHArA.


79. Tlipv wlio renounce preceptors and
•‘ervaiit^ and l^yal followers witfioiil any
ofT-'nce, O foremost of UUarata's race, liave
to sink in lidl.

80. 'I Uey who set bullocks to work when
the animaU have not come of age, they who
bore the noses of bullocks and other ani«
mils for controlling them the better while
engaged in work, and they who keep ani-
mals always tetliered, have to sin It in hell.

81. *1 hose kings who do not protect
their subjects while forcibly collect from
them a sixth share of the produce of their
fields, and they who, though able and
possessed of resources, abstaii from ntak-
mg gifts, have to sink in fiell,

82 Ihey who renounce persons gifted
with forgiveness, self control and wisdom,
or those with whom they have .issociaied
for many years when these are no loii^’er
«i( service to them, Irave W *ii\k «v hell.

83 '1 hose men who ihemselveseat with-
out giving parts of the food to children.

• aged men and servants, have to sink in

l.eir

84. All these men numbered above have
to go to hell Listen now to me, O fore-
most of Bharata’s race, as I tel) you who
those men are whu ascend to heaven.

85 Die man who transgresses against a
IJralimana by obstructing the adoration of
gods, suffer from the loss ol all Ins childten
and anunais.

86 Ihose men, O Vudhishthira, svho
perform the duties laid down in ti>e scrip-
tures for them, practising the virtues of
Lharit), self control .md truthfulness, go to
the celestial region.

S7 1 hose men who having acquired
knuwledge by rnakliig obedient services to
iheif preceptors and perforining austere
penances are nnwillmg to accept gifts,
succeed in ascending to heaven.

88 Those men who sive people from
fear and sin and who remove the obstacles
V)V«{; •».wj 1/. •Wr.fT, 'Ait.'j ’wefo Vt,

accomplish and poserty and the sufferings
ol disease, succeed in ascending to heaven.

89 Dose men svho are gifted tviih a
forgiving disposition, who are endued with
patience, who are ready to perform all
rnriileons iiles and who are of pure con-
duct, succeed lu ascending to heaven

90 Tliose tuen who aslain from honey
nitd m'ai. who ahstxn fc« m sexual 1, Her-
cours- with llie wives of other people, and

liquors, sutceej in ascending 10 heaven.

qi . I hose men who help m llte e*tablis)t-
nent of asyluiiiiis for ascetics, wliu be-


come founders of families, O Rhirata. who
open up new coiintiies for purposes of
dwelling and tmpUnt towns <(nd cities,
succeed lit ascending to heaven.

92, T hose men who distribute cloths
and ornainenis as also food and drink, and
who help in marrying oil ets, succeed m
ascending to heaven.

93 Ihost men who have abstained from
ail sort* of injury or harm to all creatures,
wtio caw endure everylUiug, and who have
made iheniselves the refuge of all creatures
succeed in ascending 10 lieaven.

Those men who wait humbly upon
tlietr parents, who have controlled their
sense*, and who are affectionate towards
their brothers, succeed m ascendii g to
heaven.

95 Those men v»h<> master their senses
though they are rich iit worldly possessions,

endued vmili robust constuuiMii and gihtd
with youthful vigour, succeed in ascending
lu lieaven.

96 Those men who are kind even to*
wards the cfTeiiders who are of rildds*
position, who have an affection (or all who
are of mild behaviour, and who contribute
to the happiness of others by rendering
them every kind of service in huinilityi
succeed m ascending to heaven.

97. I hose men who protect thousands
ol people, who make gifts to tliotisaiiils of
people. ,«nd \v)>o rescue iliousands of people
troin distress, succeed in ascending to
heaven.

98 Those men who make gifts of gold
and of knie, O foremost of Bliaraia'x race,
as also ol conveyances and animals, suc-
ceed in ascending to heaven

99 Those men who give away such
articles »s are necessary in marriages, as
also servants aud mmits and tlotlvs and
robes succeed m ascending to heaven

too. I hose men who make public
pleasure-houses, gardens, wells resting-
’ bouses, auct huitdings Tor public meetings,
and tanks for enabline callle and men to
satisfy their thirst, and hetds for riiUiva-
tion, O Bliarata, succeed in ascending to
heaven.

loi. Those nien who give houses and
fields and populated villages to persons
that want them, succeed in ascending to

heaven

io2 Those men who having themselves
maniifactiired drinks of sweet taste and
seeds and paddy or rice, give them to
etheis, succeed in ascending to heaven

jt>3 T hose men who Inving been born
in iaotihes high or low beget hundicda of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


d ildren and live long lives, practising
mercy and keeping anger under complete
control, succeed in ascending to heaven,
104. 1 liave llius explained to you. O

liliatata, \v 1 iat llie rues are in liOnor of
tlie deities and the departed manes which
are petlormed b) people for the sake of
llie Ollier world, wiiat the ordinances are
about making gifts, and what the views
rire of the Hislns of former times about
both the articles of gift and the manner ot
giving them.


CHAPICR XXIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PAUVA).—

Ceiiftuued,

Yudhishthira said

i. O descendant of Bliarata's race, you
ahoiild answer this question of mine truly
and in detail Wliat are those circum*
stances under which a person nuy become
gnitiy of Braliinanicide without actually
hilling a Brahinana.

Bliia'hma said:—

3 [•‘onnerly, O king, ] had one day
req tested Vy^sa to explain to me tins very
sui>|(Ct i shdll now describe to you wiuit
Vyasa told me on that occasion. l>ayou
listen to It with rapt atiention,

3 Going to Vyasa, I addressed him
sajiiig,— You, O great ascetic, are the
ioinlh III descent from Vaisliisiitha * Do
you explain to me this What are those
cuciimsiances under winch one becomes
guilty of BrahiiMiiicide wiiliout actuafiy
Uilhng a Urahinaiu T

4 thus addressed by me, the own*
begotieii son of Parashara, O king, an
adept in the science of moraluy, gave me
the tollowing answer at once excellent and
fiduglii with certainty.

5 You should know that rnan as guilty
of 8ralmi,inicide who having of his own
accord invited a Uralimana of pious con.-
duct to Ins house for giving linn nlins then
refuses 10 give aiiyilniig on the pretence of
lliere being nothing in the house.

6 Yon should O Bharala, know that
mail as guilty of Brabmanicide who des-
troys the means of living of a Bralimana
weft read in ll>e Vedas, and all Iheir
branches, and who is shorn of attachments
to worldly creaiuies and goods.

7. You should, O king, know that man

to be guilty of Draliinanicide who puts iin>


77

pediments in the way of thirsty kine while
engaged m satisfying thut tlnrst.

8 Voii should take that man as guilty
of Brahmanlcide who, without studymg
them, finds fault with the bhrutis that have
come down from preceptor to piipd for
ages and ages together, or with those
scriptures tliai have been composed by the
Rishis

9 You should know that rnan as guilty
of Brahinamcide who dues not confer upon
a suitable bridegroom his daughter endued
Willi beauty and other excellent qualities.

10 You should know that foolish and
sinful wighioughi to be guilty of Brahmam-
cide who pains the Brabmanasto the very
core 0/ (herr hearts.

II. You should know (Jiat man to be
guilty of Brahinamcide who robs the blind,
the tame, and idiots,

14 You should know that man to be
guilty of Bralimanieide who sets lire to t<>e
hermitages of ascetics or to forests er to
a village or a town.


CHAPTER XXV.
(ANUSHAbANlKA PARVA),—

YudhUhtbira said:—

t. It has been xaid that sojourns to
sacred waters 1$ full of merit , tliat abhi.
tions >n such waters is meritorious, and
that hsienutg to the excellence of such
watere is also meritorious. I wuh to I ear
you expatiate on this subject, O grand*
father

2 You should, O chief of Bliarata's
race, mention fo me (he sacred tracer#
existing on this Earth. 1 wish, O you of
great power, to hear jou describe to me
this subject.

Bbisbma said : —

3. O you of great splendour, Angiras
tlius enumerated the sacred waters on the
Earth. Blessed be yen, you shuiild listen
to It, for you will then acquire great merit.

4—5 Once on a (nne approaching the
great and learned Risln Angiras giiied wnti
tranqiiilhtv of soul, while he was living in
I a forest. Gautama of rigid vows qurstioned
him, saying, — O illustrious one, 1 have
some doubts regarding the merits of sacred

waters and shrines I wish to hear you

describe that subject Du you. therefore,
O ascetic, describe it la me.


MAilARIt/lRATA.


6 What merit< tri* tfnnlrp«l by i
person rckjarthni; the »'csl worlil, W hnlb-
tiiK ii> the sscrcil wilrrs on the I irth, O
,o,iol On>o.i .»|>Uin lo

me this inily and according to the ordi-


Angiras said

7. A person by bathmc for seven days
successively m the ClnndrabhiRs or the
Vnasta svhose waters are always seenlo
dance in waves, JastinR all the while, is
sure to become piirRed ol all his sins and
endued with the mem ot an ascetic.

8. There are many rivers m the country
called Kashmirrr. All these <aU »nto the
creat river called Smdhii (Indus). Dy
bathing in these rivers one »s sure to
become Rilted wilh good character and
to ascend to heaven alter leaving this
world.


5* By bathing in Piishkara, Prabhass,
and Naimisha, and the ocean, and UevtKa,
and Indramarga, and Swamavindu. one is
sure to ascend where, seated on a celestial
car, one IS sine be filled with ]oy on being
worshipped by the Apsaras.


10 By bathing in the waters of Hira*
ryavindu with a concentrated mind and
respecting that sacred river, and bathing
next at Kuslieshaya and Oevanla, one be*
comes purged ol all one's sins

tt. Going to Indratoya near the Mown*
tains of Gmdhamadana and next to Kara*
(oyattn the country called Kuranga. one
should fast for three days and then bathe
m those sacred waters with a concentrated
heart and pure body. By domi: this, one
IS sure to acquire the merit of a Horse*
sacrifice.


13 Bathing Jn Gangadwara and Ku*
shavarta and Vilwaka in tlie Blue moun*
tains, as also in Kanakhala, one is sure to
become purged of all one’s sms and then
ascend to heaven.


13 If one becomes a Brahmachann and
control Ins anger, devotes one self to irulli
and practises mercy towards all creatures,
and then bathes in tl e Lake of Waters one
IS sure to acquire the merit of a Horse-
sacrifice.


14 That part where Bliagiralhi Ganga
flows norlliwards is known as tlie union of
heaven. Earth, and the nether re(.iuns
Tasting tor one monili and batting in
itiat sacred firtha which is acceptable
to Maheshwara, one can see the deities


15 One who gives oblations of water to
his departed manes at Saptaganga and
Tiiganga _and Indramarga, obtains atn-


brosix for food if one hat thil to go through
re*birth.

ifi Ihe msn who in a pure state of
body and ininil perforins his daily Agni*
lintrs mid fasts for niie month and tl>eri
listlies in .M ilisshrsma. is sure (o acquire
success 111 one moiitli.

17 By bsihiiig, sfier n fast ol lliree days
and purifying the mind of all evil propen-
sities, in the firge hke situate Ml Blirtgu*
innga. one becomes purged of even the sin
ol Brnhininicide.

l3 By bslhing in Kanyakupt and per-
forming one's ahhitlons in Valaka, one
wins great fame among even the celeitials
And shines m glory.

19 Bithing III Devika and the lake
known by the name of bundsrika as also
in the riitha called Asliwmi, 'one acquires,
in next life, great personal beiiity,

30. By fasting for a fortnight and bath-
ing in hishaganga and Krntikangaraka,
one becomes purged of all his sms and
ascends to heaven.

31. Bstl ing in Vatmanika and Kinki-
ciiks, one acquires the power of going
everywhere at will and becomes an object
ol great respect m the celestial region ol the
Apsaras.

33 (fa person, eenirotliiig Ins anger,
and observing tlie vow of Brrfhmscharyya
for three days, bathes in the river Vipasa
at the herinitsge c-illed Kahka, he is aure
to get over rc*b)fth.

33 D4ihing m the asylum tliat is sacred
to the Kniiikas and offenng oblations of
water to the depmted manes, and then
pleasing Mahadeva, one becomes pure m
body and mind and ascends to heaven.

34 If one, fasiing tor three days with a
pufified body and mind, bitlies 111 Main*
pura one becomes freed from the fear of
all mobile and immobile anim4ls as also ot
ail two feeted animdis.

33 By bathing 111 the Devadaru forest
and oCFeriug oblations of wiier to the de-
parted manes and living iliere for seven
nights with a pure body and mmd, one
acquires the region of the CtItiSluls on de-
pauing from this world

26 Bathing in the waterfalls at Sharas-
tainva and Kusliasiamva and DronasI ar-
map^da, one is sure to acquire the region of
the Apsaras wliere one is dutifully served
by those super-human beings

27 If one, fasting bathes at Cl iiralcuta
and Janaslliana and the waters of Mauda*
kini, one is sure to be gifted with regal
prosperity.


ANU3HA5AMA PAKVA


^9


sS By poiiig to llip relreat o! SJ>)ama
and living tliere {ut a fo(li<ik:l>l and batliing
11 Jl e bHCitd waler lies tiierft, one

acquiies llie power of disappearing at will

29 Going to tlie Intlia KausUilci and
living tliere witfi a pure heart and abstain-
ing from all food and dunk for three dajs,
uue acquires llie power of living u) the
happy region of (he Gandharvao

30 bathing in the charming tirtha
Gaiidh^larrika and living there for one
rnoiKfi. absianiing afl (he.uhile from food
and drink, one acquires the power of dis-
appearing at pleasure and, (hen in Iweniy-
one days of ascending to heaven,

31—32. He who bathes in the late Ma-
tanga is sure to acquire success ni one night.
He wlio bathes in Analamva or the eternal,
Andhaka, or m Naimisha, or the lirtlia
called Sivarga, and offers obUtioiis of
water to the departed manes, coiucoihng
ilia senses all the while, acquires (he merti
of a human sacrifice.

33. Bathing in Gant'a''*’*''* •'**

lirtha Gtplavana and daily offering obU-
lions of water there (or & (all nionih to (lie
departed maiies, one acquires (fie merit of a
Horse-saciifice,

34 Bathing in the coiif^jence of the
Ganga and the Yamuna as also at (he
tiriiia in llie Kalaiqara mountains and
onertng every day ohUtions of water to (he
departed rnanes for a full rnoiitfi, one ac
qmres llie merit of ten Horse. sacrifices.

35—3(1 Drilling m tlie Shashihs lake
one acquires eicrii much greater tliaii >vhal
appertains lo tlie gift of food, ten thou-
sand tnrlias and thirty millions of other
tirlhas come to Pra)agH, O chief of Bha-
rala’s race, in llie inonlli of Magha He
who bathes III Bra^aga, with a comrrslled
mind and observing iigid vows all the while,
the iiioiiih of Magha, becomes purged of
all Ins sins, O chief of Uliaraia's lace,
and attains to lieaveit.

37. Baihing HI llie tiriha tliat >s sacred
to the Maiiiis, as also in ilial which is
situate in the retreat of the departed manes,
111 and also ui that winch is known by ll e
name of Vaivaswaia, one becumes porved ;
ol all one’s sms and as pure and sanciilted
as a tirilia. |

33 Guiog to Brahmasaras as to (Ire
Bhagirathi and balhing there and oiler-
mg oblations to (he depailed manes every
day for a full month, abslHiiniig lioin food
fall the while, one is suie to go to the
legion of boma.

39 Daihmg m Uipitaka and lien in
Avlitavakra and offei |ig ob annus of water
to ihe depatted manes e.cry day for Ucive


days successively, nbstatiijng all Ifie whife
from food, niie acqjircs the ineiits ol a
Horse-sacrifice.

40^ Bathing iti Ashmaprishiha and
Niravtnda m luntains and Krauiichapadf,
— aff three 111 Gaya— me becomes purged
of the sin of Bi ahmaiiicide. A bath in the
first place purifies one of a single Bralima-
tiicide , a bath in Die second cleanses one
of two similar offences , and a bath in the
third cleanses one of three such ofTeiices.

4t. Bathing III Kalavinga, one gets a
large quantity of water. A man, by bathing
III tile City of Agui, acquires sucti ineiit 39
entitles hull to live at Ins next iulli m the
Lit) of Agnt's daughter.

42 Dalhing in Vishafa m Karavlrapiira
and offering oblations ol waters to his
departed manes and performing his ablu-
tions >r> Devalnada too, vne becomes at one
with Oralima and shines in glory as siiclr,

43 Bathing in Punaravarta-NaiiJa as
also Mahananda, a rnau of conirolfed
senses and unirersal mercy goes to the
celesiiai garden of Nandana and served
there by (he, various lubes of Apsaias.

44 Bathing wiih concentrated sniil iiy
(he iiitha of Urvaslii which is situate in (he
river Lohitya. on (lie day of fullniouirof
(he monih of Kailika, one acquites the
metus of Puiidaiika sacrifice-

45. Bathing in Uamahrada md ofTerv
•lie oblaiions u( water to the depsited'
manes in the river Vipavha (Qeas). and
lasting fur twelve days, one becomes purged
of all sins

46* Baihing Ilf the tiiiha called Maha-
lirada vvithla puiified heart and alter favtirrg
for one luonlh, one is sure to acquire the
status of the sage Jamadagnr.

47 By exposing oneself to heal in the
tirtiia called Vindliya, a persuii given to
(ruth and endued with cump-issiun fur all
creatures sftouJd then practise austere
penances, acluaied by hiimihiy. By so
dwLve, I'eAsaurem «'9-urc asceJJC fisccess
in course of a single iiionill

43 Bething III the Narmada as also the
tiitia framed burparaka. fasting (for a
full (o<tini,hl, one is sure iu become in one’s
liexlbiitha prince of ru>ai bloud

49 If one proceeds with conirotJed senses
and a conceiiirated soul to tlie tirilia known
as Jamvowiarga, one is sure to acquire
success in the course of a- tingle day arid

riiglit.

SO. By |Of)'g to Chandalikashrama and
bathing 111 the iiiiha called Kokainukl a,
itaving bvid fur suintnme on potlieibs
ftloue ,eiid iwin tags fui idimetiis one is


So


MAlUDilAnATA.


sure 10 cet ten beautiful maideni as his
Mives.

51, One who lives by lie side «l the
tiilha known by ihe mine of K«u\s1>r»tls
lias iieser to visit the roRions ot Yam*
Siitli a person is sure to ascend to the re*
gioiis of happiness belonging lo the
celestials.

52 One who bathes with cenlrollrd
senses on the day of the nexv moon in the
ththa Unovsn by the name of Prabliasa, is
sure, O >011 of mighty arms, of acquiring
success and tmmoriahiy sun jltaneously*

53. Dathing in the lirtha krtonn by the
name of Ujpnaka whicli is situate in ibe
retreat of Arsllisena’s s m, and ni-xt in
Ihe tiriha svhicb IS situate in the reireat of
Pings, one is sure to be purged of all
ins sms

3{ rasiing for three da^s and bathing
in ilie tilths kiio«n as Knija *tnd reciting
llie sacred Mantras of Aghamaishana, one
acquires the merit of a Hers«*saccifice.

55 Pasiing for one nnjfit and bathing
in Pmdaraka, one becomes pufifi*<l on the
next day and acq iires tlie merit of an
Agnishioma sacrifice.

36 One who goes to nrahmasara winch
iseadorned by tie w >o<js called Ol.arma*
ranya cae becomes purged of all one's sms
and nrqmtes the merit ot the Pund4rik%
Saciilice

57 Bathing in the waters of the Mainaka
moiioiain and reciuni; morning and evening
praters tl ere and living at the spoi for a
mor III controlling drsire, one acquires ti>e
merit of aft the sacitfices,

53 blarling for f\-i]odaka and Nandi*
kunda and Utiara m-masn, and teaching
a «pnt that is a I undred Yn|3nas remote
from any of ifiem, one becomes purged of
ttie sin of focticida

59 One wl 0 succeeds in seeing the
Image of Naiidishwara, becomes purged
of all sms Balling m the tirlha called
Swargatnarga one is sure to proceed to
the regions of Braliman

60 ihe Celebrated flimavat is sacred
'that king of mnuiuains is the father in Uw
ot Sliankar.1 tie is s mine of ..U jewels and
gems and IS the resort ot (he SiiJdhas and I
Charanas.

di— 62 That tw ce born person wl o is
as master cf llie Vedas and wh?., consider-
ing this life 10 be txcerdiii{.Iy unslabte,
reiionnces I is hody on it o«e mountains,
abslainii g from nil food and dunk accord*
lug to tl e riles laid down m the scriptures,
nflei having wersi ipped ll e gods and beat
I IS head in worship of tl e ascetics, is sure


tn acquire success nn>! proceeil to *
eternal regions of flratimin.

63 I here is nothing wl ich one cannot
get wlin lives in a lirths, restriining Inst
aiirt coritrolliiig nitger Oil account of such
residence,

64 r ir ihe purpose rtf go ng to ell lha
tiftliasiri the wjihi one shnilit mentally
lliink of those nmongst them winch arrt
nhnost insccessibte or aniourns to whtcli are
Aiiendcd with great difTKiitties,

65 Sojourns to tirthas j leldt the merits
of sacriftces. Ihej nre competent to purify
e/erybudy of sin. [ raugl t with great j.ood,
they are capable of leiding in heaven.
Ihesiifiject IS truly a great nijsiery Ihe
very g»ds should bathe in luilias. lb
iheiit also they are sin.purifyiiig.

61S I h s discourse on iirthas should be
delivered lo llrahmanas, and to such honest
or pions persons as are bent upon gaining
what IS lor their own behoof It shoiil i
also be rrcited in tl e lieanng of one’s
well.wisbers and friends and of one's obe*
dient and devoieQ disciples.

6 j. Angiras enlhied with great asceitC
merit, had ilehveied tl is discourse is
Gautama Angli is himself hid got it
from Iheihe highly intelligent Kashyapa.

63 Ihe grot Risins consider this rfis*
course as deserving ol constant repelilio r.
ll IS (fie foremost of all our if j mg things K
one recites it regiiUrly every rfay, he H
sure to become purged of every sin and
alter this life to pioeeed to heaven.

69 One who listens to this discourse
recited in Ins hearing,— tins discourse, rie >
of Angiras, which is regaidetl as a
mystery— IS sure to attain m one’s next
life to birth m a good family and, what is
moie one would have the memory of t!ie
pristine existence.


CBAPTER XXVI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PA'RVA).

Conliii titii.

VaiBhampiyaua said : —

I — 2 Lqual to Vrihaspati in intrlh'
geiice and I3r-hmin hm st'f in f< rgivtness,
teseinblnig bliakri in prov ess and tl e Sun
in cncig), Bliiilurid the son of Gangs, of
luRime ling! t had I cen defeated in battle
by A>j Ilia Accompanied by his bioihers
and many otUer people Ling Yudliishlhira
asked him these questions


anusmasana parva


8l


3 TI'P old hero w»< on a
».>tftMedhy hfroes, ni expectation *»f Hiat
sacred monient wlieii lie cow'd lake leave
ol Ins liody Many ureal Uisliis li»d come
iliere for seeing Itiat foremast One of
Bluraia's race

4—6 Amongst them were Alci
Vas'iislit'ia B'lriun, Pulasiya PuUfia, and
Kratn 1 here ivere »ho Aiigiras C-ttitm*,
Atfastya, Siimali of welUrestraiiied soul,
Visliwamitra, Slliufashiras Samvarta, Pra*
mail and Daina. *1 here were aUn Vnhas-
t'aii U!,liaiias, Vyasa Clij avaiia, Kasliyapa,
D'lrnva, Dvirvasas, Jamadagiii, Marlcan*
di-ya Galava Bliaradwaja, Uatbhya Yava*
Urita and 1 rita.

7. there Were Sthu'akslia, Shavafafcslia,
Kaiiwa Medhalilln Krisha Narada, Par-
vaU, Swdiianwan, Elraia and Uwita.

B I liere were also Nii^mbhu, Bhuvana.
tilMumja, Siiatananda, Akntavrrna, Kama
the ton of Jamadagnt and Kac'ia.

9 —10 All t'lete great Kislus came
t'lere tor seeing B'ltshma I) mg on tiis bed
of arrows. Vndliislitinra with Ins brothers
(Inly adored I'lose ureai Kishis wUo had
tome iliete one alter another m proper
order Kecefvirtg (hat adoration, those
(nteiuosl ot Kis' is sac I'lemselves down
and began to converse wjili one another.

It their conversation related to
lilifslima, and was Inghiv sweet and agree-
'•'lie (team g tfiHt talk of ifieira about
tifiiiself, Hfiishma b«c.<ine filled with joy
and considered hiinseli to be already in
heaven

12. ttaving obtained the’' leave of
Hhishnm and ol tlie Pandava princes, those
Itis'iis ilieii disappeared before (lie very
r si^lit of all (lie beholders

n I he Paiidavas bowed again and
auaiii and offered (heir adorations 10 those
Inghty blessed Kishis even after they had
made tlieinselves invisible

kVrwj sVn.v. “H-vAti v/pw.

llie son of Ganga even as Brat manas
versed m Mantras wait with respect upon
the rising him.

15, I he Pandavas saw that llie points
ol (lie compass shining on accnunc of the
energy of their penances, and became filled
will) wonder at tlie spectacle.

16 Miinkiiig of the high blessedness
and power ol lliose Itis'ns, the I’andava
piinres began to discomse on the subject
wuh iheir grandfather Bliishina.

VaisIiampayanA said —

}7 Ahcr {fiat coiiversaiion was


the pious Yiidfiishiliira, Itie son of Pandu,
touched Biiisfiina's feet with Ins liead and
then resumed Ins qxie:>tions About inorAlily
and virtue. m

Yudhislithtra said.—

18 Wlnc'i countries, winch provinces,
which herrnttaues, whicli in<iit'i(ains and
wlijch rivers, O grAiid/Aiher, Ate the fore-
most III sanctity.

Bhiabma said' —

19 Kegardmg it is cited the old convex-*
satiou between a Brahinsna in the obser-
vance of the Shila and I'le Unci ha vows tj
Vudliisiithira. and a Uislii crowned with
ascetic meiiit.

20—21. Once on a lime, a foremost per-’
son. having travelled over tins entire Barili
adorned with niouiitains, anived at last in
the liouse ol a foremosi person living like
A householder in acofrdance with the Shila
vow. IheJaiter welcom-d hjs truest ivi(h
due rites. Keceived with such hospitalit),
llte happy Kishi passed the iiigiit happily
! in the house ol Ins host.

22 the next morning the Brahmans m
the observance of tlie SInIa vow, having,
finished all his morning acts and rites aiid^
puiified Inmsell duly, gUdly appmaclied
Ins guest crowned with ascetic success.

23 Afeetmg with each atlier and sealed
at their ease, t'le two began to take 011
aeroo-*ble subjects of the Vedas and (li«
Upanishade

24 Towards tite conclusion of the dis-
course, the Bra'iitmna in ihe observance
of Ihe .Siiila vniv r<>ipec<fi(lly aJdress<d ihe
KisUi crowned with success Gifted with
mteihgence, he p it this very quest ion wliikfi
you, U Yudhishtlnra have put to me.

The poor Brahmana said ; —

25 What arc those cnniilries. what are
those provinces, wlial ihovr henniiace*,
wliAt those moiinlaiin, wild wtiat these

‘1 Ttvers, \Via\ -JrrwfjA Vrt wrfivirstA ■h-, s',.e
* loreinost m sanctity 7 Do you describe tins
‘ 10 me-

The Rishi eatd; —

36 Itmse countries, those provinces,
those retreats and those nioniitains,
sitould be consideiej s the hveiiiost iit
sanctity thioiiuh which or tiy Itie si,tr of
which tliat forMiiost uf all rivers, vie , ‘

Dkiagiratbi, flows.

2f The end which a creainre ea» at,
tan* by pei**ne«s, by B>a) ni^cliary va, by
sacrifices or by prnciisiiii:; Kenunciation,
out la StllC to wlUili by only living by (|,e


over.


82


MAItABItARATA.


siJe of llie Bliagiratlii and battling in iti •
sacred waters.

i aS 1 liQ^ creatures whose bodies have '
been spriiifned with llie sacred waters «f
Bhagiraltii or whose bones have been laid i
in that sacred stream, have not to fall
anai from heaven at anj lime

29 Tliose men, O learned Brahmana,
who use the waters of nhagirslhi in all
their acts surely go to heaven after death,
t 30. Even those men who, liaving com-
I tnnled various sinful deeds tn llie first pan
rol ttieir lives, live in after jears by the
fside of Ganga, succeed in attaining 10
> a very superior end.

3]. Hundreds of sacrifices cannot yield
that merit whicli men of controlled souls
are capable of acquiring by bathing m the
sacred waters of Ganga.

32. A person »s respected and adored
in the celestial region*for as long a period
as las bones he in the channel of Ganga
33 Even as the Sun, when lie rises at
the dawn of day, si ines, having removed
the darkness of night, hlcewise the person
who has bathed in the waters of Ganga is
seen to shine, purged of all his sms
S' 34 llie countries and the points of the
compass which are destitute oi the sacred
waters of Ganga are like nights without
the moon or trees without fljwers.

33 Indeed, a world withom Ganga is
like the different castes and modes of hfe
when they are shorn of virtue or hke sacri
(ices without Soma.

36 Forsooth, countries and points of the
compass which are without Ganga are hke
the sky willioul the Sun, or the Earth with-
out mountains, or the eiherial region with-
out air.

37. All the creatures in the three worlds
if served with the sacred waters ol Ganga,
derive a pleasure the hke of winch they
cannot derive from any other source.

3S He who drinks Ganga water which
has been heated by ibe Sun’s rays, derives
inerii much greater than that which belongs
to the vow of living upon the wheat or
grams oi other corn picked up from cow-

39 It cannot be said whether, he who
peitoTnis a thousand Chandrayana rues
for purifying his body and he who drinks
the water oi Ganga, are equal

40 It cannot be said whether one
who stands for a thousand years on one
foot and one who lives for only A month by
the side of Gdiiga are equal.

41. One who lives permanently by the


side of Crarga is ‘uperior In merit to oM
who lives for ten thousand cycles with head
hanging downwards.

42. As cotton, when it comes into con-
tact with fire, 15 blunt oil wiihont a reSKhie,
so the sins ol the person tl at has bathed in
Ganga become perfectly consumed

43 J here is no end superior to Gang*

' for those creatures who, with hearts a 111 cied

by sorrow, seek to attain to ends winch
may remove that sorrow of theirs.

44 As snakes become sliorn of lhe“’
poison as soon as they see Garuda, so one
becomes purged of all his sins as soon as he
sees the sacred river Ganga.

45 They who do not enjoy fame for
viilue and they who are addicted to deeds
ol sinfulness, have Ganga for llieir fame,
their protection, their means of safety, iheic
refuge or cover.

46. Many wretched men who commit
various sins of a heinous nature, when the!
are a bout to sink into hell, are rescued b)
Ganga in the next world.

47. lliey, O foremost of intelligei'J
men. who plunge every day in the sacred
waters ol Ganga, bicome the equals ol
great Mums and the very deities headed b]
Indra.

48 Those wretched men who are destl

tute of humility or modesty of behaviou
and who are greatly sinful, become righte
ons and good, O Drahmana, by living by
the side of Ganga. ‘

49 As ambrosia is to the deities, a
Snradha is to the Pitns, as Sudha

the Nagas, so la Ganga-water to humar
beings.

go. As children strreken with hunger,
solicit their motfiers lor food, similarly n®
people desirous ol llieir highest good see*'
Ganga.

51. As llie region ol the aelf-creat«
Brahman is said to be the foremost 01 a*'
places, so is Ganga said to be foremost ol
alt rivers lor those who desire to batl>e.

52 As the Earth and the cow are
to be the chief sustenance of the cefesliafs
so IS Ganga the duel «ustenance of a'
living creatures

! 53 As the celestials support themselves

! upon the ambrosia Ifiai is m il« Sun »no
the Moon and that is offered m various
sacrifices, so do human beings s»PP®^‘
themselves upon Ganga-water.

54 One besmeared with the sand
from the shores of Gangs considers onesen
as an mhabnane of heaven, adorned win’
celestial unguents.


ANUSIIASANA PARVA.


55, He who bears on Ills head the mud
taken from (he banks of Ganga looks
rfl ilcent like the Sun himself bent on
TtmoviDg llie surronnding'darkiiess

56 When the wind which is moistened
W nil (he particles of Gaiiga'Waler touches
one’s body, it cleanses him immediately of
every sin.

57 A person afUicled by calamities and
about to sink under Uietr pressures, finds all
Ins calamities removed by , the joy which
on^iiiates in his heart on seeing uiat sacred
river.

58 By the sweet notes of the swans and
Kokas and oilier aqintic fowl (hat play on
fier breast, Ganga ch.i|l«ii^ea, llie very
Gandharvas and by I er high banks the
very mountains on (lie Earth,

59 Seeing her surface (ecming with
swans and various other aquatic fowl, and
having banks adorned with pasture lands
with kme grazing on them, the celestial
region herself loses her pride

6> Ihe high happiness which one
enjiys by living on the banks of Ganga,
can never be his who is living even m the
celesiMl region,

6t, I have no doubt in this thet the
person who is afflicted witfi sms perpetrated
III words and tliou<kt and act, becomes
cleansed on seeing Gangs

dz By seeing (hat sacred rtvee. (oucti*
lag It, Hiid ba'tiiiig 111 ns waters, one res*
rues Ins ancestors to tlie seventh degree,
and his descendants (0 the seventh degree,
as also other ancestors and descendants

63 By hearing of Ganga, by wishing to
go to that river, by drinking its waters, by
touching iliose waters, and by bathing in
them, a person rescu-s both his paternal
ai d maternal famifies

64 By seeing, touching, and drinking
the vvaters of Ganga, or by praising Kiem.
hundreds and thousands of sinful men be*
come purged of all their sms

65 They who wish to make their birth,
h(e, and learning, successful, should go to
Ganga and please ihe departed manes and
the celestials by offering (hem oblations of
water,

65 The merit that one acquires by
bathing in Ganga 1$ such that the like of ii
IS incapable of being acquired through the
acquisiiion of sons or riches or the per-
formance of meritorious acts.

67. Those who allhoiiBh physically
able do not seek to <ee (he sacred Ganga
are, forsooth, comparable lo persons sufler-
ing from cungeniial blindness or those wlio


are dead or those who are benumbed
through palsy or lameness.

63 What man is there who would not
respect lf»« sacred river (bat is adored by
great Rishis knowing the Present, the Past,
and the Future, as also by Oie very gods
beaded by Indra 7

69 Wfiat man is there who would not
seek the protection of Gauga whose pro-
tectioii IS sought by hermits and house-
holders. by Yatis and Brahmacharius
alike T

■JO The virtuous man with controlled
mind, thinks of Ganga at tfie lime when his
vtt.<I ^les are about to leave bis body, suc-
ceeds III acq tiring the liighest end

71. Tliat man who lives by the side of
Ganga up to the time of bis dealFi, wor-
shipping lier reverentially, becomes freed
from all fear of siii and of kirrgs.

ji. When Itial highly sacred river
dropped from the sky. Maheshwara liel 1 iC
on Ills head It is that very river whicli is
worshipped in heaven.

73 1 he three regions, are beautiful hy
(be (hree eotines el this sacred river 1 lie
man who uses tlie wafers of llul river be*
comes certainly successful.

74 As the sofar ray is to the gods irt
the cefesiial regi iii, as the moon is to the
dep4rted mines as the king is to human
beings, so is Ganga to alt rivers

75 One who becomes bereaved of
motlier or Uther or sons ur wives or riches
does not (eel that grief which one (eels
when he becomes bereaved of Ganga

j 6 One does not get that \oy through
acts (hat lead to the region of brahman, ur
through sucfi sacriFices an I rites that lead
to I eaveii, or ihrough children or riches,
which one get from seeing Ganga

77 1 he pleasure that men derive from

seeing Ganga ts (antarnnuiiC to what (hey
derive from seeing the full moon,

jS i*ilat' mam becomes ofcar tO ijaiiga
who worship fier with deep devotion, wiili
mind wholly fixed upon her, wiiti a respect
that refuses lo take m any other object
within Its sphere with a feeling that there
ts nothing else in the u iiverse woriliy i,f
similar adoration and with a steadiness
that knows no decrease.

79 Creaiiires who live on Farlli in the
sky Of in it e ctlestial region —1 ideed, even
beings who ate very supurior —should
I always batlie 1 I Ganga Indeed tins is the
[ foremost of all duties of the rigfueous

S> Ihcfaixe of Ganga for sanctity has
spread over the entire universe, since she


84


MAttAfiftARATA.


carriffl ail tiie srtrvs of Sa(;ara, who had
hren rediited to ashes, from here to tlit
cclesttal region.

Si. Men wlio are »\aslied by the bright,
brAiitifiii, and rapidly tnnviiii; vr^ses,

raised h> the unid, of Ganga, become
purged of all their sins and resendde m
splendour the bun with his thousand rajs.

52 'ihose men of tranqui] souls who
have rennnnced tlietr bodies in the waters of
Ganga whose sanctit) i-. as great as ibat of
ihe bniter and other liquids puired in sac*
iibces and which are capable of giving
merits equal to those of the greatest of sac-
rifices, Imsc certainly allained to a slaiitfii
equal to that of the very gods

53 Indeed, Gauga, having fame and \asl
c'ctent and at one With tlie eiilire iiniveise
and respected by the deities beaded by
Indra, the Mnnia, and tnmtan beings is
competent 10 grant the friiitum'of all Ihrir
M ishes to 0 ern who are blind, to them who
are idiots, and to them who are destitute of
all things.

84. They who seek refuge with Ganga,
that protectress of all the universe, that
flows in three currents, that is filled wnh
water at once highly sacred and sweet as
honey and productive of every son of good,
have succeeded in dcquii mg the beamude
of Heaven.

85 that mortal who live by Ihe side of
Ganga and sees her eveiy day. becomes
pnnfied by her sight and touch lo him
the gods give every sort of happiness here
and a high end hereafter.

86 Ganga is regarded as compsient lo

rescue every creature from sin and lead
liim to the happiness of Heaven. She is
held lo be at one wnh Piishiu ibe mother of
Vishnu She is identical with the Word
or Speech She is very (emote and can not
be easily attained She is the embodiment
of auspiCmusness, and proiperiiy. She is
capable granting the six well known alt<i
bntes be|.iiiniug with lordship or power
5il*e 3il»i?.ys bwt Ives Rswce

She is the dtsplayer of alt things in the
unuerse^ and she IS the great resort of all
creaiure«. those wrtio seek her protection
in this life have surely acquired heaven.

87 The fame of Ganga has spread all .
over ll e siry and Heaven, and Earth, and
all the points cardinal and subsidiary, of
the compass By using llie maters of that
ioreinoslof rivers mortal creatures always
become crowned with high success

88. I hat person who. himsGf seeing
Oiiiga, points her out lo olhris finds that

Ganea rescues him from re birth anrl con-
fers I iher-ltou .III I im ' t.ai.ga I.eM Giiha.

He lommandei -III duel ol lie (.clestlal


army >« I'ef womh She bexra ihe-tno'f

precious of all metals, vte , g >ld, in

that womb of hers lliey wlia bathe I'l
her waters every day in the morniig,
succeed m obtaining the Uiree-ful I •’h-
J.-CIS tr«, Virtiieand Worldy Profit »n >
Pleasure. 1 hose waters are, again eq mI
in point ol sanctity to the butter th-i i»
poured witb Mantras on the sacrifical fire
Capable of purging one from every s"’.
she lias descended from Uie celestial reg'ot
and ber current is held in high regard by


89 G>nga IS the daughter of Himavat,

the wife of Hara, and the ornament of h'""
Heaven and I^rih bhe is the beslower
ol everything aiispiLioiis and is compeie"V
10 Rise the SIX wrell-kiiown attribiil'S begi'M
ning witli loidsliip or power Indeed, O
king. Ganga IS Ihe one object of «rr«
saiiCHly in the three wotlds and confers
ineril upon all

0-> Irnly, O king. Ganga is Virtue i«
liquefied form She is energy ftialq"“
form over ihe Earth. She is gifted with I «
splendour or power itial belongs to I'®
hmter that is poured wiih Manilas o” I’ *
sacrifical fite She is always adoinrdwil'i
large waves as aUo with Urahmaiias wl i>
may at all tunes he seen making
ahliiiinns in her waters Falling fio'"
Heaven, she was held by Shiva on hi» head
I he very mother ol the heavei s, »he 1**»
originated from the highest inoinilain for
running over Ihe plains and conlerriiig
most valuable benefits on all creatures of
ihe Earth,


91. She IS the highest cause of »!'
tilings, she IS perlecll) pure She is a*
subtile as Brahma She «s the he't he 1
lor ibe dying She takes creainres *pee b*
fy (o tlie celeslisl region She carries a
large volume ol water Slie rnnfers
lame on alt She is the priuectress of the
universe. Slie is at one with every /of.
She IS very much coveted hi per«ons cri.wn
ed with success Indeed, Ganga is the pads
lo that celestial region of those who I are
bathed in her water


92. The Brahmsms consider Ganga *»

being equal lo the Carlli in forgivei'cs'.
and in the protection and iipfloldmC '*
tho'e who live by her , further as equaling
Tire and the Sun m energy and'splendour .
and. lastly, as always eqiialhni: Guhahi"’*
self in the mailer of showing favours lo t' *
true-born class.


9 i 1 hose men who. in this life, even m
llieir ninids seek that sacred river wl ich ''
lauded bv tlie Kishi-. whicli has come o >t
of the feel of Vislnui, wliicli is very aiicim'


MtJISKASANA PAnVA.


85


anrJ wIjicIi W h)a5 h wfre/l, siiccetd in go*
JO llie tenioxn o\ brahman.

94 Fully convinced fliat clnWren amf
0(tier bclont'ii'K^. as abo regions possessed
of cvrry kind of happiness, are transitory
or frail, men of subdued souls, s»)w are
desirous of acquiring that evei lasting station
uhii.t) IS at one svilli Brahma, always pay
their adorations to Ganga with that respect
and love winch are due from a son to a
mother.

95 The man of purified soul who is
dcMrous of arqiiiring success slioiild seek
the protection of Gariga who is like a cow
that gives ambrosia instead of ordinary
milk, wlio IS prosperity’s self, who is en-
dued witli omniscience, who exists for all
creatures, svlio is the source of all sorts of
food, who IS the mother of all mountains,
who IS tlie refuge nf all pious persons, wtio
IS immeasui able in power and energy, and
who cliarms the lieari of Brali’man hunseff.

96 iiaviiig, with austere penances,
p’eased all the gods with tlie Supreme Lord
(Visliitii) bliauiratha btouglil Ganga down
oil the Barth Going (o her, men always
succeed m freeing (firmselves from every
sort of fear bodi here and hereafter.

97 Observing wiifi the fietp of iniel*
huence t have inenttoiied to you only a
small pitman of the nierics of utnga Afy
piwer, liowever, is inadequate to speak of
all the mefiis of the sacred river, or, indeed,
to nieasuie her power and sanctity

9S One may, displaying Ins best powers,
eouui the stones of ilie mouut-tin ^lera or
iiteasiire ilie waters of the ocean. But one
cannot count all the merits of the waters of ,

99 (fence, having listened to these 1
particular merits nf Gang* which ( have ■
uttered witli great devoiiort, one should, in 1
llioiiglit, word, and deed, respect them wiiii |
faith and devoliou. ^

too. On account nf your having listen* '
erf to li’iose merits wi’iich ( Save rccoufiferf,
you are sure to fill all (he three regions
with fame and acquire • measure of
success ilMt IS very large and that 1$ difS*
cult of being won by any other person In-
deed, you will, soon alter that, sport in joy
III inanv a region of great happiness creat-
ed by Giiiga herself lor those that respect
her.

tot. Gangs alwiys extends her favour
to those who are devoted to her in humbte-
ness o( heart She unites those who are so
devoted to her with every kind of happiness
) pray that the lughly-blessed Gauga may
alw.4>s inspire your heart and mine with
the atinbuie:, ui virtue.


Bhisliraa said

lOJ The learned ascelfc gifted with
high Soul and great slendnur, and crowned
stilh SfHjcess, having tn this manner des-
cribed to that poor Brahmana observing
(lieSbda vow, on the subject of tlie mfi'ule
mcrtls of Giinga, then ascended the sky.

•oj. the poor Brahmana observing
(he dbila vow, awakened by the words of
(hat ascetic crowned with success, duly
soifirbt refuge with Gsnga and acquired
great success.

104 On thnii also, O son of Kunti, seek
Gaiiga with great devotion, for yon will
(hen, (he reward thereof, acquire great
and exceffeiit sricces*.

Vftiflhampayana said r—

(05 Hearing (his dis'oitrse from Bhishms
of tl*e praise of Gaiiga, Viid)»sl>(hira
wrfJr his brothers becdfne filled with gre^e
joy.

106 I hat person who recnes or hears
recited this sacred topic of the praise of
Cauga. becomes purged of every sin,

rjiAPTEn x'ivn.

(ANUSHASANIKA PAllVA).—
Conltiuitd,

Yudhishthjra saidi— -

I You, O grandUlber, are endued with
wisdom and knowledge nf the scriptures,
with conduct and betiavioiir, with venous
kinds of excellent attributes, and also with
years.

3. Von are superior to Others in Sntef*
tigenc^ wisdom and penances f stiall,
llierefore, O you liie foremost of all ngliie.
oMs men, wish to ask you questions about

3-4 There is not another man, O king,
nr aiYfi'»e wori'ak, wrto rs wanriViCT" in' Aeirrg
aconstvd ori such topics. O best of kings,
J»ow way one, >f he happens to be a
Kslialri>a or a Vaishya or a Sluidra,
succeed in acgiiuiiig the dignity of a Brah-
, inaiia t You should tell me the means. Is
»t by (he most austere penances or by
religions acts, or by knowledge of tl>e
scri^ures, tliat a person belonging to any
of the three inferior castes succeeds m ac-
quiriftff (},« dignity of a Brahmana? Do
tell me tins, O grandfather,

Bhiehma said —

S rtie dignity of a Brahmans, O Yu-
dhishtbira, cannot be acquired by a person


S6


ma«awim»ata.


belonging la any nf Ihe lliree oilier caMes i tell me at) llus fully, from begiiinlug 10
Ihai dignity is llie liigbest will, respect to end.


all creatures

i 6 Passing llirough numberless orders
tl existence by undergoing repeated btiUrS,
one at last, in some hirih, becomes bom as
a Brabtnsna.

7 Regarding It IS cited an old history.

O lYwdliishihira, o( a conversatiQu between
Matanga and a slie>ass,

8 Once on a lime a Brahmana abutn-
ed a son who, though procerated by a
person belonging to a diflerent caste, bad,
however, the rues of infancy and youth
performed according to the ordinances laid
down for Brahntanas. llie child passed
by the name of Matanga and was endued
with every accomphshaieiiU

Q His father, wishing to celebrate ft sac*
tifice, ordered hitn, O destroyer of enemies,
to collect the articles icquired for (he act
Haviiig received the cuiiuttand of hi$ father,
lie started for the purpose, riding ««» a
quick'COursiiig car, drawn by an ass.

10 It so happened that (he ass yoked to
that car was very young Instead, there^
lore «l being reined, the animal bore away
tlie car near its dam. vie the stie.ass that
had brought it forili. Ma(a*i|(a. dissa(is>
Tird will) this, began to strike the animal
with hts goad on its nose.

ti Seeing those marks of violence on
her child's nose, the she*ass, full of aff«c>
non for him s,iid.— Uo not grieve, O child,
for this ireaintetit ' A Chandala is driving
you

12. There is no harshness in a Brah«
mana IheBrahmana is said to be the
friend of all creatures He is the teacher
aho of all creatures and llieir ruler. Can!
he punish any cieatuie so cruelly,

13 Ills fellow, however, is of smfol
deeds. He has no mercy to sliow to even
such a young creature. He is simply
proving the order ol Ins birth by beliaviug
thus, llie nature which he has derived
from Ins father forbids the grown, of the
teniimenis of pity and kindness which are
natural to the Urahmana,


The she-as3 said : —

17 You were begotten upon a Brail*
mana woman worked up with desire, by a
Shiidrft following the calling of a barber.
You are, therefore, a Cliandala by birth.
Yon Itave not Uie dignity of a Brahmana.

Bhisbma said

18—19 llnis addressed by the she ass
M-naiiga returned home. Seeing hun
return, his father said,— I had engaged you
in the difficult task of gathering (lie req n*
sites of my intended sacrifice ' Why fiave
you returned without having accomplished
your charge ? Is it that you are not all
right t

Matanga said ■—

20 How c-in he who belongs to no deft*
nite order of birth, or to low caste be re-
garded as all right and happy T How, O
father, can tliat person be happy whose
mother is impure.

3t. O father, this she«ass who seems to
be more than a human being, tells ms that
I liave been begotten upon a Brahman
woman by a Shudra. I shall, for this
reason, practise the severest penances.

12 Uavmg said these words to his
father, and firinly retolved upon what he
had said, he went to the great forest and
beacan to practise the aiisterest of penances.

*3 Beginning those penances for the
piiipose ol happily acquiring the dignity of
» Brahmana, Matanga began to scorch
the very gods by the severity of hisasce*
deism

24 The king of the celestials, tis ,
Indra, appeared to him thus practising pen-
ances and said,— Why, O Matanga, do you
pass your time in such grief, abstaining
trom all sorts of human enjoyments

OS I shall give you boons Da you
name the boons Do not delay, but tell
me what Is in your miid Even if »l be
unattainable, I shall yet bestow it on you.


14. Hearing these harsh words tif the
ti.e.ass, Matanga speedily came down from

, the car and addressing the al e ass, said —
'fell me, O blessed dame, by what fault' is
^my mother Stained T

15. How do you Inow that I am a
ChandaU t Do you answer me f orthwnb.


Id Mow indeed, do ye
amaOiandala* How hai
liny ol a Uraliinaii? O you


u V««vw that I
'e I lo»t thedig.
of E>eai wtsdoiii


Miittiijga said:— ■

*6 Desirous of acquiring the dignity of
a Urahmana 1 have begun to practise these
penances. After having obtamel il, I
shall qo home. Even ihu « the boon I
pray for.

Bhisbma said t—

27* Hearing these words of his, Pnrao*
daraaaiiiobim— Ihediginiy cl a Brah.
I mana, O Matanga, wl itb you wi>li 10
I acquire, cannot be won b> > ou.


AtJUSHASAtU PARVA,


S7


28. ll i< tnt'*, >'*<• afq"irr iCiXtt

tlien il cannot t>e won persmi* of |fnp*tre
SitiiU O ^oii of (oo 1 i«li ilnder^tA'ulinj;.
jon are sure to meet wiUi H'sinict'Ort »f you
persist Ki this pursuit. Desist, ihetcfore*
from l)iis vaii> Attempt fonliwitli.

2p. '1 Ids object of jour desire, fi* , the
dignity of a Uraimtana, wliieii is tUe fore*
most of ever) t lint c. cannot be even acquired
by penances, 1 lierefore. by coveimi; that
foremost dignity, you will surely meet svfili
destruction.

30. One born as a Chandala can never
scqiiire that dieinty wlncli is considered as
tile most sacred*ainnii|r the celestuls and
Asuras and human beings.


cuAPinft xxviti. I

(ANUSUASANIKA PAUVA) —
Co'tftrturd.

Bluslima SAid :~

I. Ihus addressed by Indra, MaUnga
el restrained vows and wrlbconlroUed
suul, stood for A century of years on one
fool, O you of unfading glory,

*. H'gfify iIliMtrious Sbakra once more
appeared before him and addressing turn.
SAi<l,~>lhe dtcnity of a OrAhmsna.O child,
is unattainable. Afliiouch jou covet ri. rt
is impossible lor you to obtain it.

3. O Matanga, by coveting that very
great dignity you are sure (0 meet wiilt
destruction. Do not. O snn, betray such
rashness. This is not * tlghtcous path for
) ou to follow.

4. O you of (oT'lish understanding, it I«
(mpnssibfe for you to obtain it fn this svnild.
Vrrilj, b> covfllng that uhich is uuatUiu*
able, ynu aie sure to meet willi destruction
(ocihwith.

5. I am repestedly forbidding jo'i.
Ily tiyme. lowcver, to ailain that high
d'Ri iiy by the lelp of jour pcriauces.
dr»p»le tny irpcaird adt»oi>iti«ii», you are
sure to meet wiiri destruction.


S, Passing » period of one ihonsaud
years f« that order, one rs neicf bor»i as a
Shiidra. In the Shiidra order, again, one
has to wander (or a long lime.

9 After thirty thonsAud years one is
horn AS A Vaishya (here, in that order,
one has to pass a very long time.

10, After a time that is sixty limes
longer tfian what lias been stated as the
period of Sluidra birth, one becomes a
Ksliairiya In the Kshatriya order one lias
to pass a very long tune,

(I. After a time that is measnrerd by
multiplying the period last referred to by
sixty, one IS born as a fallen Bralimana.

' In tins order one has to wander for a long
I period.

J 5 . After 1 time meanired by rnnJli*
pt)ing the period last named by two
ll■■u•irrd, one isbiini in the race of siicb a
Hrshina'ta at lives by the profession of
arms Ihere. in that order, one has to
wonder for a long period,

13 Alter a time measured by multiply*
mg (he period last named by (liree hun*
dred, one is born In the race of a Drah*
man« that is given to the recitation of (lie
Gayatri and other sacred Mantras.

14. Ihere, in (hat order, one his to
wander for a long period. After a time
measured by m>iU>plying the period last
named by four linndred, one it born In the
race of such a Bralimana who knows (he
entire V'edas and the sciiplnrcs. Ihere,
In tliat orifer, one his to wander lor a very
long period.

t^. WJiile wandering In thtt existence,
j'ly and grief, desire nod hatred, vaniiy
and evil speech, seek to ctitcr into him and
makea wretch ol him.

16 If he succeeds in siit>(‘'gatirig (hose
foes, lie tlien nci] ii>es a high end II, on
the other hand, those eurmirs succeed in
euhjugalnig him, he falls down from that
higts pns lion like a peisou lalhng down on
the ground (rum the high top o( a palmyra
tree.

ty. Knowing (Ms for ce»(ain, O
Matanga, that t say 10 you, do yon rame
snme other boon, (nr the status el a Hta*
limana it incapable of being acquiied by
JOJ.


88


AfAffAUliARATA.


CHAPir.R XXI\.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Continued,

Bhislima said

J. Iliiis addressed by Indra, Maianea
refused lo bear wliai be was cunmaiided.
Un the olfier band, wiifi re(;iiUied vows
-nd puiified soul, I.e practised aiisterer
penances by standing on one fool lira
ll.ou,a„J ,e>ri, deeply cy.ged ,n

\oga inediialion. ^

^ ® lliousand jears bad passed

nvva), bliakra once more came lo see liim
Indeed, ilie destroyer of V-U and Vtiira
Said lo him Ihe same words.

Ilatanga said :~

3 I liawe passed these thousand years,
standing on one foot, wiih soul engaged
til meditaiion, and in die observance of
the vow of celibacy. Why is it that 1
have not yet succeeded m acquiring the
dignity of a Bralimana I '*8

Shakra saids—

4-S One born as a Cbandala cannot,
ly any means, acquire the digimy of a
iraliinatia Do >ou. Kierefore. name some
liber boon so that all this labour of yours
nay not prove (utile < I bus addressed by
Jie king of the celestials Matanga became

vf "" .r siicii

Voga which was extremely difficult to bear
he hecame very much emneuted and I is
L.'i!!'* It '’'"’s became swollen and
'fdneed to only skii. and

'-'■■..'"I

>o .i»t .poi .„d i.iw h,™ /I.;'’"''"''
Shakra said —

® It seems O hlatan^a in... «i. j

case, It IS beet with many dangers ^

9 A person by adorme a n„»
ncquires l.aonm^c. .i ■ “'ahmana
bom sue'; wo ' hf ’ abstanimg

"•»e'y Ibe Braliman'a ifTs .*"{*
‘^<«to.es,il,e giver of wbat lbe7i;i“r|


covet'nnd the protector of what they a(«
ready have.

lo. It IS through the Urahmanas that
the departed manes and the denies become
pleased I he Brahinana, O Maianga, is
said lo be the (oreinost of all created Beings,
llie Urahmana grants all objects which
aie desired and in tlie way they are desired.

tl. Passing through numberless orders
of Being and undergoing repeated re-birihs,
one succeeds in some subsequent birth iit
acquiring the dignity ol a Orahmarfa.

12 Ibat dignity is really incapable o(
being obtained by persons of impure souls
Do you, therefore, relinquish the idea’
Du you name some other boon. 1 he parti-
cular boon wlncfi you seek is incapable of
being granted to you,

Matanga said:—

13 bttickcn as I am with grief, why,
O bhakra. do you afTlict me fiiriher T Vou
are striking one tliai is already dead, by
this conduct I do not pity ton wlio
haying acquired the dignity ol 4 Bralimana
iail to ret4in u,

14 if. O yon of a hundred sacrifices,
Ihe dignity of a Brahmsna be really iiii-
attainable by any of ihe three other castes,
alas men do n .t adhere to it who I ave
succeeded m acq nrmg that high status?

15 Ihosewl.o having won the dignity
of a Bf4lim..iu, that, hire wealth, is so diffi-'
cult to acquire, do not seek to keep it up,
niust be considered as the most wretched

iiuuSiJ;:?"”' •"

16 Fo^ooih, the dignity of a Brah-
bemw **,*”«’''/ difficult to attain, and
hemg attamed. IS difficult to maintain

r..l every sort of

l.ricl Alas, having got it nipn rf-i not
always seek ta keep u up. '

H.'il 'Xl'"! persea, are consi-

w "''r ll.all.wl.a

diXna a’! PP""® "* oppesites who am

d .soc..ied 1,0m all „

am obsee,.,,, ^

all creatures a.rd .f self-control of comliict,

d^lfyr' ""tll'J ol Ikat

now unfortunate I am. O Purandara,

been reriueed to tfns pt,|.f„. aUfmoof, 1 am
not m.„,bteous my conduct I *■

brIL D'>'my ft mcapable of

D iitg warded off or conquered by individual
exertion, since. O lord. I am u.i«Ue lo
acquire, despite these persistent ^iieinpts


ANUSMASANA PARVA


89


of fntftc, tJie object for llhs acquisitjon ©f
which I am trying

20 When such i* the case, O nghieous
one, you should grant me some other boon
if indeed, 1 have become worthy oi your
favour or if 1 have a little of merit 1

Bhishma said —

31 . The destroyer of Vafa and Vritra
then said to him, — Do you name the boon*
T hus urged by the great Indra, Matanga
said the following words —

Matanga said ~

32 . Gifted with the power of assuming
any form at will, let me be able to journey
ihfoughi the shies and let me enjoy what-
ever pleasures 1 may wish for And let
me also have the willing worship of both
Brahmanas and i^shatnyas

23 J bow to you by bending my bead.
O god * Vou should do that also by
which fame, O Purandra, may live
eternally in the world 1

filiakra said —

H. You will be celebrated as the deity
of 8 particular measure of verst and jyou
will get the worship of all women Your
fame, O son, shad become peerless in the
three worlds

35 Having granted him these boons,
Vasava disappeared there and then hla-
isnga alto, renouncing his hfe*breaihs, ac-
quired a high place

36 You may thus see, O nharata, that
the dignity of a Drahinana n Very 1 igh
That mgniiy is incapable of being acquired
here as said by the great Indra himself.


CHAPTER XXX.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Tadhishthira said’ —

I. f have heard this great description.
O perpeiuamr of Kuru s race You, O
foremost of eloquent men have Said that
the dignity of a Brahmana is greatly dif 5
cult of acquisition.

2 It is heard however, that in former
limes the di,(nity of a Brahmana had been
acquired by Vithwamtira You, however,
O best of men, tell us that that digmiy ts
incapable of being woo

3. 1 hare also heard that formerly
king Vi’ahavja had succeeded in acquiring


the dignity of a Drahmana O powerful
one. 1 wish to hear, O son of Ganga, the
story of king Vitahavya's promotion.

4 By what acts did that best of kings
succeed m acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mans T Was It through some boon or was
It through the virtue of penances? You
should left me everything.

Bhishma said —

5 Hear, O king, bow the highly iIJus-
Irious royal sage Vitahavya succeeded for-
merly in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mana that IS so difficult to attain and
that is held in such high esteem by all the
world.

6 While the great Manu in days
yore was employed m ruling righteously his
subjects, he obtained a son of righteous
sou) who become celebrated under the name
of Sharyati

7 In Sharyati’a family, O monarch, two
kings were born, vit , Haihaya and Tala-
jangha Both of them were sons of Vatsa.
O foremost of victorious kings

8 Haihaya, O monarch, had ten wives-
Upon them he begat, O Bharata, hundred
sons all of whom were heroes who never
returned from the battle Reid.

9 All of them resembled one another in
features and prowess All of them were
gifted with great strength and alt of them
were possessed of great skill m battle.
They all studied the Vedas and the science
of weapons thorouglily.

to In Kashi also, O monarch, there
was a king who was the grandfather of
Divodasa The foremost of victorious
men, be passed by the name [of Haryya-
shwa.

II The sons of king Haihaya, O chief
of men, invaded the kingdom of Kashi, and
advancing Co the country that lies between
lbe rrvers Ganga and Yamuna, fought a
battle with king H aryyashwa and killed him
in It.

13 Having killed king Haiyyashwa
thus, the sons of Haihaya, those great car-
wamms, fearlessly returned to their own
charming city in the country 0/ the
Vatsas,

Ij Meanwhile Haryyashwa's son Su-
deva, who looked hbe a celestial tn splen-
dour and who was a second god of virtue;
was installed on the throne of Kashi as its
king.

14 The delighter of Kashi, the righte-
ous souled prince ruled his kingdom for
come time when the hundred sons ct Viii-
havya once more attacked Ins icrrilortev
and defeated him in battle.


90


MAflABKARATA


15 Kaving defeated king Sudeva thusi
ike victors returned to llieir ov»» ctty
After this, Divodasa, the son of Sudeva,
became installed on the throne of Kashi as
Its king,

16 Understanding the prowess of those
great princes, vts , the sons of Vt(ihav\a
king Divodasa, gifted With great energy,
rebuilt and fotified the city of Baranasi at
ihe command of Indra.

17~i 8 The territories of Divodasa were
full of Brahmtnas Kshalriyas, Vaishyas
and Sliudras And tliey teemed with all
sorts of articles and provision^, and were
with prosperous shops and marts
riiose territories, O best of kings extended
nortlwards from llie banks of Ganga to
the southern Banks of Goman and re-
sembled a second Amaravati (the citv of
India) ■'

Jg The Haihajas once again, O Bha-
rat* attacked that foremost of kings as he
ruled Ins kingdom

ao The powerful lung Divodasa gifted
with great splendour, issuing out of lm
capital, gave them battle Ihe engage-
went between tlie two parties terrible I ke
the eneeunter in days of old between Ihe
celestials and the Asuras

Divodasa fought the enemy
lor a thousand days at the end of which
having lost a large number of followers and
animsis, he became greatly distressed.

ai King Divodasa, O king having lost
Ills army and seemir his treasury exhausted
left his cspiial and fled away.

‘J* charming hermitage of

ti c w.„ Dharadwaja. the king, O ehartiSer

.h?R?slirpr^t«t.;r‘‘’

Bharadwap of excellent conduct who was

e monarcli's priest, said to him — WhaT ,s
le reason of your coming here! Tell me

agreeable to you, without any scruple.

The king^ said -•

I'iV iille*! ''“"‘“R 4*^?


Bbi sbma saftl

28 Bharadwaja of great energy said t<?
him who pleaded so piteously— Do roc
fear' Do not fear' O son of Sudeva, let
your fears be gone

29 I shall perform a saenfiee, O
monarch in order that you may have a son
through whom you will be able to smite
thousands upon thousands of Vitahavyas
party.

3» After this, the Rislu perform'd a
sacrifice with the object of bestowing a son
oil Divodasa As the result thereof, to
Divodasa was born a son named Pratard-
dana


31. As soon as he was born he grew
Into a diild of full three and ten years and
quickly mastered the entire Vedas and the
wliole science of arms.


32 Helped by Ins Yoga powers, the
highly intelligent Bharadwaja had entered
into the prince Indeed, collecting alt ihe
wergy of ilie objects of the universe,
Bharadwajy caused it to enter the body of
prince Praiarddana

Casing his person in shining mail
and armed with the bow, Pratarddana, I 1*
praises lauded by bards and the celestial
Uisliis, shone resplendent like the Sun

34 Mounted err hn car and with the
scimitar lied to his belt, he shone like a
burimig fire With scimitar andsineld and
whirling his shield, as he went, he proceed*
ed to the presence of his father,

35 Seeing the prince, the son of Sudevs,
vie , king Divodasa, become filled with joy.
Indeed, the old king thought the sons of
his enemy Vitaliavya as already killed


JO wivoaasa then installed his son
rratardoana as the heir-apparent, and
considering himself crowned with success
became highly happy.

,.37 After this the old king commanded
that chastiser of foes.v-j* prince Pradard-
dana to march against tlie sons of Vita-
havya and kill them in battle

3S Gifted with great prowess, Pratard-
*“hiupalor of hostile eiiiee.
speedily crossed Ganga on his car ai d
hl^M “ agamsi the city of the Viia-


ov •scaling me clatter of the wheels 01
bis ear. the sons of Vitahavya, riding on
I h- fortified
»="P*hIe of destroy-
ing hostile vehicles, issued out of their city.

Coming out of their espitat. those
foremost of men, v,e the sons of Vila-
vya, who were alt skilful warriors cased


92


MAHABIIARATA


66 It \\as thus, O foremost of mo«
narchs, that king VUahavya, though a
Kshatnya by the order of his biilh, ac-
quired the dignity of a Brahmana, O
chief of Kshalnyas, through the grace of
Bhrigu,

67 I have also told you the genealogy of
the race that originated from his son Grit*
samada What else would you ask 7


CHAPTER XXXI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
ConUnued,

'^udhishtbira said

I. What men, O chief of Bhara(a*s
race, are worthy of homage m tlie three
worlds? Tell me this in detail, ! am
never satiated with hearing you describe
these topics.

Bbisbma said •—

a. Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between Narada and Vasudeva.

3^4 Seeing Narada on one occasion
adoiing many foremost of Brahmanas with
joined hands, Keshava addressed him,
saying,— Whom do you worship? Whom
amongst these Brahmanas, O holy one, do
^ou worship with so great respect? If it
IS capable of being heard by me, I wish
then to hear it Do, O foremost of righte-
ous men, tell me this,

Narada said —

54 Hear, O Govinda, as to who those
are whom 1 am adoring, O grinder «l
enemies What other person is there in
the world who is worthier than you to hear '
this? ' I

6 I adore them, O powerful one, who
constantly worship Varuna and Vayu and
Adit) a, and Prajanya and the deity of Fire
and Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi and
Vishnu, and the Brahmanas, and the lord of
speech and the Moon, and the Waters, and
the Earth, and the goddess Saraswaii
8. O foremost of Vrishni'a race, I
alwa)-s adore those Brahmanas who are
endued wiih penances, who are conversant
with the Vedas, who are always given to
Vedic study, and who are possessed of
great worth

\ 9 O powerful one, 1 bow down my

I head to those persons who are freed from
t boastfulness who refforn\jinih_jin empty
I stomach, the riiei'm honor of the deities,


who are always contended with what t^iey
have, and who are giUed with forgiveness
10 I adore them, O Yadava, who .are
performers of sacrifices, who are forgiving
in nature, and seU^controlled who are
masters of their own senses, who worship
truth and virtue, and who give away land
and kine to good Brahmanas

ti 1 bow to them, O Yadava, who are
devoted to the observance of penances, who
live in forests, who live upon fruits and roots
who never store anything for.the morrow,
and who perform all the acts and riles laid
down in the scriptures.

13 . I bow to them, O Yadava, who feed
and cherish their servants who are always
hospitable to guests, and who eat only the
residue of what is offered to the deities
13 1 worship them who have become

irresistible by studying the Vedas, who are
eloquent in discoursing on the scriptures,
who are observant of the vow of Brahma*
charyya, and who are always devoted to the
duties of officiating at the sacrifices of Others
and of teaching disciples
i 14 1 adore them that ars endued «'t*’

I mercy towards all creatures and who study
I the Vedas till their backs are heated by the
Sun


15 I bow to them, O Yadava, who If?
to acquire the grace of their preceptors>
who labour in the acquisition of tlieir vtou
who are firm in the observance of vows
who wait, with dutiful obedience, upon tho^
preceptors and seniors, and who are nte
from mnhee and envy.

16 I bow to them, O Yadava, who are

observant of excellent vows, who pract'*®
silence, who have knowledge of Brahma,
who are firm in truth, who are givers 0
libations til clarified butler and oblation’
of meat

I7» I bow to them, O Yadava, 'who
upon eleemosynary alms who are emaciate
for want of adequate food and drink,
have lived in the houses ol their preceptors,
who ore averse to and destitute of all enjoy*
ments, and who are poor in Earthly P°*'
sessions


18 I bow to them, O Yadava, *ho bar
no affection for things of this Earth,

not quarrel with others, who do not olott’
themselves, who have no wants, who hav*
become irresistibfe through the acquisitio"
Uie Vedas, eloquent in the exposition 0
virtue, and that are utierers of Brahma

19 I bow to them who are given to
practice of the duty of mercy towards ^
creatures, who are firm 111 the observant
of truth, who are self controlled, and who
ate peaceful in their conduct


ANU5HASAHA PARVA.


93


20 I bow to them. O Yadava, who ftre |
devoted to the worship of gods and j
guests, who are observant of the domestic !
mode of life, and that follow the practice of ,
pigeons about collecting their food, |

3t> 1 always bow to those persons, who I
while doing all their works have an eye on |
the ihree'fold objects of life, and who are
observant of truth and righteous behaviour.

33. 1 bow to them, O Keshava, who are
conversant with Brahma, who are gifted
with knowledge of the Vedas, who are at* ,
tentivs to the three«fold objects of Me,
who are free from cupidity, and who are
righteous in thetr behaviour.

33. 1 bow to them, O Madhava, who
live upon water only, or upon air alone, or
upon tlie residue of the food that is offered
to deities and guests, and who practise all
sorts of excellent vows.

24 ) always adore them ' ho have no !

wives, who have wives and tl domestic .
lire, who are tlie refuge of the Y&UdS, and
who are the refuge of all creatures in the
universe.

35 I always bow to these Rishis, O
Krishnsi who are the creators of the
universe, who are the elders oi the universe,
who are the eldest members of the race
or the family, who are dttpellers of the
darknes of ignorance, and who are the best
of alt persons in the universe.

36 For these reasons, do you efso, O
scion of Vrishni’s race, adore every day
those (wiee*born persons of whom 1 speak
Worthy as they are of reverent worship,
they wiK, when adored, confer hap^ness on
you, O sinless one.

37. Those persons of whom 1 speak are
always givers of happiness in this world as
well as m ihe next Respected by alt, they
move about in this world, and, if adored
by you, are sure to grant you happiness.

33. They who are hospitable to all
pw'tfUiw wiVGr camyr Ohnir .nv guirsw, mk / i
who are always devoted to Brahmanas and I
kme as also to truth, succeed in crossing j
all calamities and impediments. »

29 They who are’^always devoted to !
peacefulness of conduct, as also they who !
are shorn of malice and envy, and they who
are always attentive to the study of the
Vedas, succeed in crossing all calamilies
and impediments. ' ’ »**

jo'^'Ifiey who bow to all the deities,
they who (ollawone Veda as (heir refuge,
they who are possessed of faith and are
self controlled, succeed in crossing alt cafa*
mities and impediments.


3t. They who adore the foremost of
Bralimanas with reverence and are firm m
the observance of excellent vows and
practise the virtue of chanty, succeed ii>
crossing all calamities and impediments

33 They who are engaged in the practice
of penances, they who are always observant
of the vow of celibacy, and they whose
souls have been purified by penances, sue*
cecd in crossing all calamiues and im«
pediments.

33 The who are devoted to the worship
of the gods snd guests and dependa/its
as also of the departed manes, and they
who eat the residue of the food (hat is offer-
ed to deities, departed manes, guests and
dependants succeed in crossing all cala-
mities and Impediments,

34, They who, having lighted the domes-
tic hre, duly keep it burning and adore it
with reverence, and they who have duly
poured libations m Soma>sacriRces, suc-
ceed in crossing all calamities and im-
pediments

35 They who behave properly towards
their methers and fathers and preceptors
and other elders even as you, O foremost
of the Vttihnis, do behave, (succeed in
crossing all calamities and impediments ’)—
Having said these words, the celestial Rishi
ceased speaking.

BliisTiina continued —

3d For these reasons, do ^ou also, O
son of Kunti, alwaysadore with reverence
(he deities, ihe departed manes, the Orah-
itnanas, and guests arrived at your palace,
and as the outcome of such conduct you
are sure to actjuire a desirable end ’


CHAPTER XXXir.

(ANUSHASANfKA PARVA
Confiitued.

TndliisTitMra said;—

t O grandfather, O you of great
Wisdom, O you who are conversant wiih
all branches of knowledge, 1 wish to hear
you discourse on topics connected with
duty and Virtue,

» Tell me truly, O chief of Bharata's
race, what the merits are of those persons
who grant protection to living creatures, of
the four castes when these pray for pro-
tection.

Bhisliiaa said —

3 O Dharma's son of great wisdom


94


MAflADtIARATA.


and wide spread fame, listen to this old
liistor) rej^arding the great merit of grant*
•ng protection to others when protection is
numbly sought.

4 Once on a time, a beautiful pigeon,
pursued by a hawk, dropped down from
l^tie skies and sought the protection ol the
highly.blessed king Vnshadarbha.

5 The pure-souled, king beholding the

pigeon take refuge m his lap from fear,
cornforted him, saying,— Be comforted, O
bird! You have no fear! ’

such great

fright? What and Where have you done
It in consequence of which you have lost

ahve?^"”*

7 Your cotar, O beautiful bird
«sembles that of afresh-blown blue lotus
Your eyes are of the hue of the pomegra-
nate or the Ashoka flower' Do Mt fear
I command you, be comforted '

»,«® t"y protec.

tion. know that no one will have the courage
to even think of catching you, wiio have
such a protector to take care of your body.

9 I shall, for your sake, give up lo.dav
the very kingdom of the Kashis and. ^
necessary my life tool Be comforied
therefore, do no fear, O pigeon^, w'n«o«eo.


The hawk said —

ba‘ mv ‘"v ordained to

be my food You should not. O king
^rom me! I have pursued ihfs
bird and have got him Indeed with great
exertion have 1 got at him at last. ®

ilissis

is=a5l

fny wing, and tabn*. Look" fe.Tr’H
lias become very weak v **' u breath
O kmg, p„t„t I, TO ho!!, ’’’"“'‘I

I’™" -i-'d.

eompeleni to interfere m r. indeed,

bei'iRS when sought to^be
human beings But vm. i by

over a sky ranomc power

Ihirst, ® ® ^'r*^ stricken with


15 Your power may extend over jour
enemies, your servants, your relatives the
disputes (hat take place between J your
subjects. Indeed, it may extend over every
part of your dominions and over also jour
own senses Your power, however, does
not extend over the sky.

16 Displaying your prowess over such

enemies as act against your wishes, you
may establish your rule over them Your
rule, however, does not extend over the
sky-ranging birds. Indeed, if you have
been desirous of acquiring merit {by pro-
tecting ihis pigeon), u is your duty to look
at me also ' ■'

Bhishma said —

.*7 Hearing these words of the hawk,
e royal sage became stricken with
wonder. Without disregarding these words
o his. the king, desirous ol attending to

.0110^^;";^,"-'"“ •“

The kv/j said'—
iS. Let a bovine bull or boar or deer or
buRlao be dressed to day for your sake*
»a"»fyyour hunger on such food

>9 Never to leave one who has sought
my protection is my firm vow. See. O bird,
this bird does not leave my Up I

The hawk said

O eat the flesh
of the boar or the ox or of any of the
varwuj kinds of fowl What need have I
of food of this or that kind ? My business
IS with that food which has been eternally
ordainedfor beings of my order? Hawks
teed on pigeons,— this is the eternal ordi-
nance.

Ushinara, if you feel such
affertion for this pigeon, do you then give
body, of weight

*^“«„to^hat of this pigeon. ^

The king said •—

JOu show me

do *P«hing to me thus Yes. I shall

p“*“. '.-in. "ti.

piece Utier*?* hearing what was taking
ume'aiit “^‘^’^mations of woe and

came out. stricken with grief.

L*S”S“"°F'


ANOsttASANA PAHVA.


95


been very clear became covered wiih thick
clouds on aft sides

27 — 28 The Earth began to tremble, a»
the consequence o( that act of truth which
the monarcfi did The king began la cut
oH the flesh from his sides, from his arms,
and from his thighs, and quickly fill one of
the scales for weigfiing it against the pigeon
For all that, the pigeon continued to weigh
heavier.

29 When at last the king became a
skeleton of bones, without any flesh, and
covered with blood, he wished to give up
his whole body and, iherefare, ascended
the scale in which he had placed the flesh
that he had previously cut off. I

30. At that lime, the three worlds, '
headed by Indra, came to that spot for
seeing him. Celestial kettle-drums and I
various other drums were struck and played
upon by invisible beings belonging to the
sky.

31. King Vrishadarbha was bathed tn a
shower ol nectar that was poured upon him
Garlands of eelesiial flowers, of sweet fra*
urance and touch, were also showeiod upon
him copiously again and again.

32 The deities and Gandharras and
Apsaras in Urge bands began to smg and
dance around him even as they sing and
dance around the Grandfather Brahman

33 The king then ascended a celestial
car that excelled a mansion made entirely
of gold, that had arches made ol gold and
gems, and that was adorned with columns
made of lapis lazuli.

34. Through the merit of Ins act. the
royal sage Shivi proceeded (0 eteriral
Heaven. Do you also. O Yndhishihira,
act thus towards those who seek your pro*
tection.

35 He who protects those who are
devoted to him, those who are attached to
him from love and affection, and those who
depend ’□pon him, and who has mercy fox
all creatures succeeds in acquiring great
^happiness hereafter.

36 That king who js of righteous con-
duct and who is observant of honesty and .
integrity, succeeds by his acts of sincenty
in acquiring every valuable reward. |

37. The royM sage Shivi, of pure soul I
and gifted with great wisdom and unbaflled '
prowess that king of the Kashis, became
celebrated over the three worlds for his vir*
tuous deeds.

38. Anybody who would protect in the
same way a seeker for protection, would
certainly acquire llie same happy end, O
best of the Bliaratas.


39 He who recites this history of the
royal sage Vrishadarbha IS sure to become
purged of every Sin, and the person who
hears this history recited by another is sure
to acquire the same result.


CHAPTER XXXni.

<ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued,

TodhUMhira said.—

t. Which act, O grandfather, is tho
foremost ol all those that iiave been laid
down for a king 7 What is that act by
doing which a king succeeds in enjoymg^
both this world and the next.

BhUhina said —

2 Even this, via , the worship of the
Brahmanas, is the foremost of all those
deeds, O Dharata, which have been laid
down for a king duly insialfed on thetiirone,
tf, indeed, he is desirous of acquiring great
happiness

3 Even this IS what the lofcmost ol all
kings should do Know this well, O chief

I of Bharata’s race 1 he king should always
I adore with reverence all righteous Qrali*

I manas possessed ol Vedie learning.

. 4 The king should, with bows, sweet

I speeches and gifls of all articles of
en)oyroent, adore alt Brahmanas endued
with great learning who may live in his
city or provinces.

5 This IS the foremost of all acts laid
down for the king. Indeed, the king
should always keep his eyes fixed on this.
He should protect and cherish these even
as he protects lus own self or hi$ own
children.

6 The king should adore with greater
tewrenee those amongst the Brahmanas
who may be worthy ol it When such men
are freed from all anxiety, the whole king*
dom shines in beauty.

7 Such individuals are worthy of ado-
ration. The king should bow Ins head 10
such individuals Indeed, they should be
honored, even as one honors Ins father
and grandfather. I he course of conduct
follow^ by men, depends upon them as
the existence of all creatures depends upon
Vasava.

8 Having prowess incapable of being
baflfed and gifted with great energy, such
men, if enraged are capable of reducing
the entire kingdom to ashes by only their


96


MAIIABlIARAtA.


will, or by acts of incantalion, or by other
means.

9 I do not see anything that can
destroy them Iheir power seems to be
uncontrolled, being capable of reaching to
the last end of the universe When angry,
their looks fall upon men and things like
a burning flame of Are upon a forest.

10 The most courageous men arestruck
with fear at their name 1 heir virtues and
powers are extraordinary and immeasur-
able Some amongst them are like wells
and pus with mouths covered by grass and
creepers, white others resemble the sky
shorn of clouds and darkness.

II. Some amonest them are of dreadful
dispositions. Some are as mild and soft
in disposition as cotton. Some amongst
them are very cunning Some amongst
them are given to the practice of penances.

I? Some amongst them are employed
in agricultural pursuits Some amongst
them are engaged in the keep of kine
Same amongst them live upon eleemosynary
alms Some amongst them are even
tlieives Some amongst them are fond of
creating quarrels and disputes Seme,
again, amongst them are actors and
dancers.

13 Some amongst them are competent
to perform all feats ordinary and extra-
ordinary Ihe Br.hmanas, O chief of
Qharata's race, are of various aspects and
conduct. i

14. One should always sing the praises
of the Brahmanaa who are conversant with
all duties, who are righteous of conduct,
who are given to various kinds of acts,
and who arc seen to derive their sustenance
from various callings.

ts The Brahmanas, O king, who are
highly blessed, are older in respect of
their origin than the departed manes, the
deities, human beings, the Snakes, and the
Uakshasas

16 These twice born persons ate in-
capable of being defeated by the denies or
the departed manes, or the Gandharvas
or the Uakshasas or the Asuras or the
Fishachas.

17 The Drahmanas are competent to
tnake him a god, that is not a god 'Ihey
can, again, divest one who ts a deity of
his status as such He becomes a king,
whom they wish to make a king He, on
the other hand, is crushed whom tliey do
not love or like.

18 I tell you truly, O king, that those
foolish persons forsooth, meet with des-
truction wlio calumniate the Urahinanas
and utter their dupraise.


19 Expert m praise and dispraise, snS
theniselves the origin or cause of oth«
people’s fame and ignominy, the
manas, O king, always become angry with
those who seek to injure others,

2 o. That man whom the Brahmanas
praise succeeds in becoming prosperous
rhat man who is censured and renounced
by the Brahmanas soon meets with discom-
fiture.

31 . It IS on account of the absenceof
Brahmanas from amon^ them that me
Sliakas, the Yavanas, the Kamvojas and
other Kshatnya tribes have become fallen
and degraded into Shudras.

32—23 Dravidas, the ICalingas,

the Piilindas, the Ushtnaras the Kolisarpas,
the Mahishakas, and other Kshatnyas,
have, on account of the absence of Brah*
manas from among their midst, become
degraded into Shudras. Defeat from them
rs preferable to victory, O foremost of vic-
torious persons.

24 One killing alt other living creatures
In this world does not commit a am so
heinous as that of killing a single Br&h>
mana The great Rishis have said that
Brahmanicide is a heinous sin.

35 One should never utter the dispraise
or calumny of the Brahmanas Where
the dispraise of Brahmanas is uttered, one
should sit with lace hanging down or leave
that place.

36 That man has not as yet been born

tn tins world or will not take birth here
who has been or will be able to pa**
life happily after quarreling with me
Brahmanas. t <

27 One catmot seize the wind with h'* :
hands One cannot touch the moo" *‘|!' 1
his hand. One cannot support the Earm ,
on his arms Similarly. O king, one is 1
able to defeat the Brahmanas m
world.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
Centtnued,

Bhislima tald ^

I. One should always offer the mo’^l
respectful adoration to the Dr»hmane»»|
They have Soma for their king, and
tt IS who confer happiness and misery uP®"
others.


ANUSItASAHA PAKVA


97


2 Tl'»y. O king slionld always be 13 The Brafimana is conversenl with
cJercsheJ and praiecleil as one cheTi'b« lhat which has taken place and that which
and protects his .own (ather and ^rand« will take place, 'The Biahmana is the fore
alher and should be adnred with bows and most of rfll (wn legged beings Ihe
•ills of food and ornaments and other Urahmana, O chief of the Bharatas, is
irlictes of enjoyment as also with such fully conversant with those duites whicli
hin^s as (hey'msy wisli for The peace and liave been laid down for his order.


liappmess of the kingdom origin


Those persons who follow the


such respect shown to the Oralimanas even Oralimanas are never defeated Ihey never
as ihe peace and happiness of all living meet with destruction even after death,
creatures come from Vasava the fcuig of indeed, victory 1$ ahvays tlieirs.


the gods.

3 Let Brahmanas of pure conduct and


IS Those great persons,— indeed, those
persons tvho have subdued there soul#,—


Brahma effulgence be born in a kingdom, accept the words that fall from the

Kshairiyas also who are splendid car- |,p, of the Brahmanas, are never defeated,
warriors and that are capable of defeating Victory always becomes theirs


all enemies, should be desired


. . 16 The energy and power of those

4 This was said to me by Narada. K,,,atr.yas who scorch everything with
There is nothing higher, O king, than this, energy and might, when they en-

*ie , the act of making a Brahmana ol jl,g Brahmanas, become iieu*

good birth, having a knowledge of morality j^^lised

and tighleoiisness and steadfast m the I

observance of excellent vows live in (us *7 The Bhngus conqjered He Tala- l
mansion Such an act yields every soil of Ihe sons of Angiras conquered

fn* Nfpas Bliarauwaia conq lered the
J r ! ft . Vitahavyas as also the Atlas, Ochtelof*

5 The sacnficial offerings given to Bhaiata’s face.

Bfahmanas reach the very gods who ac- . . ,. . .

erptthem Brahmanas are the (athecs of Alihough all these Kshafriysi were

all ereatorei Ihere u Jiothmg higher o' uung various arms, yet the

Ilian a Brahmana Brahmanas named owning only black deer-

.L n.._ .L ««» j *kins for their emhJemt, succeeded JO con*
® quering them eflectually Bestowing the

lb, W, ,r, ll„ E>ab, „ $l<v, .ndlb, u, „,d illum.n.l.

""P"’ o'"’? r '"I! '-•'b I' • “o'lJ* bjllh, br,ll„„c, of ,u,li

of lb, Ur.bmaoa and uk, wfi.t lb. Blab. ^ „„

/inana cats. sucecd ii> acquiwii ll>- end

7 In that house where Brahmanas do of all things
not eat, the departed manes refuse to eat


S He 'gods also never eat m the
house ol the wretch who hales the Brah-
m-iias Wien the Brahmanas are pleased,
ttie departed ma, «s ate also pleased.


19 Like fire concealed witl in wood,
everything that is sai f or heard or read 111
this world, lies m the Urahmana

30 Regarding it is cited the old I istpry


9 Ihe deities also become pleased of the conversation between Vasudvva and
f wireii He Bral minss are pleased there is the Earth O chief of Uharaia’s race,
j no diuht in His Ihey who give away .» a j

[ the Sacrificial Havi ifs the Uralimaiias be- VasndCVA 8410

' come themselves pleased 31 L) muihcr, ol all creatures O auspi-

i 10— 1 1 Such men never meet with cious goddess I wish to ask you for a solo-
destmciiou Indeed, H ey s succeed »n ** ofmne! By what act

a.qiitng j.,eal «i ds Hose particular does a man liyn g like a I oiise holder sue-
cneimgs in saerifires with which one eeed tn deal sing all I is sinsT
ptea-es It e Itia) m*nas. go to please bruh rri - r- tr j
till* depaiied manes and H e deities Ihe Earth said *

Ural ni«ris ts tie cause of that 'sacrifice a* One si ould sei


whence all created ihiMga hrtve onginaied 1 his c

.. .leikt All ih e

The 11 al amaiia Is acqnairted with man v
tf'ai from wtich ihis UMvc.se has origi- t.sncci
HMcd .. d le,. ,0,. *, en apparently *

drsiiry.d n reiuiiis Indeed, the Brail 33 F
*’?*’• ki>o»s Hfg' (aih Hat leads to tiae rraw tl


Une si nuld serve (he BrahmsHas,
: nriict is punlying and excetirni,
e inpiitiues are destroyed ol that
wl o selves the Bral maiias with


33 Fforn this (conduct) arises prosperiiv.


n at»a fcikonj tlig'tath Hat feeds to <(•« rruirr tl is ar ue* lame From {) is < rig» «<ev
S' '*11“ Dfanil i>>e other path which mUtl ^.e. ce or knowledge of the soul. A
t-dt to ihcjr^,.., . Kalatnya, by this conduct, becomes a


98


MAtlABlIARAl'A.


powerful car-warrior and a deslrojer of
foes and succeeds in winning great fame.

I 24 Even tins 19 what NaradasaJdto
I me, tig , that one should always respect a
{ Brat mana tli«t is well born, of rigid vows,

I and conversant wnh the scriptures, 1! one
1 wisTiea every kind of prosperity

25 "f hat man really grows in prosperity
who IS praised by the Brahmanas who are
higher than those who are regarded suoe*
nor to all men high or low.

26 That man who speaks ill of the ,
Brahmanas soon meets wuh discomfiture. I
even as a clod of unbaked earth, meets
with destruction when thrown into the


27. Similarly, all acts that are hurtful to
the Brahmanas are sure to bring about dis-
<!>'» spoi.

ocean waters of the

been marked all over with a thousand sea
marks It was through the power of the
Brahmanas that those marks were mela*
morphosed into as mafi/Teyes'**'*'''~’'

things took place Desiring fame and
prosperity and various regions of beatitude

Sbishma said *—

Fi^h goddess

«rth. the destroyer of Madhu. O sou of
«'d.— Excellent. Excellent!—
and honoured the goddess m doe form

' -f "


CHAPTER XXXV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

CfntinutJ.

Shisbma satil

«I«n. ^'**”‘* ‘“"g. a Brahmans, by biril
alone, becomes an object of worship witt
all creatures and entuled. as guesis.*to cai
the first portion of all cooked food.

»«fts in the unirtrse. They are again the


mouths of all the gods (for food poured mid
their mouilis is eaten by the deities)
Adored Wuh reSpect, they wish us prospeniy
by utl'nng words frajght with auspici*
ousness


3. Disregarded bj our enemies letlHeid
be engaged wuh these, arid let them
wish evil to those detractors of theirs, I®*
precating them with severe Cilrses

4 * About It, persons conversant sll*
ancient history repeat the following verse*
sung of old respecting how m ancient li«eS
the Creator, after having cfeated l*'®
Brahmanas, laid down their duties.

5 A Brahmana should never do any*
thing else than what has been laid down w
him. Protected, they should protect others.
By acting thus, they are sure to acqu>r®
what IS for their behoof

6 By doing those acts that are
down for then they are sure to acqu'®
Brahma prosperity, Ye shall become th®
exemplars 01 all creatures, and reins W®
controlling them.

I 7 A Brahmana endued with learniiH
should never do that which is laid down fW
theShiidras By doing such acts, a Br*"
mana loses liis merit.

8 By Vedic study he is sure lo
prosperity, inielfigence energy and po**^
competeni to scorch all things, as a1iogl'»T^
of the most superior kind,

9 By offering oblations of claf'fi^
butter to the deities, the Brahmanas »«•
q lire high blessedness, become word J ®‘
taking ihe precedence of even children '
the matter of all kinds of cooked food,
gifted tvith Brahma prosperity.

10 Endued with faith that rs frss!*'*
with mercy towards all creatures,
devoted to self control and the study of I"*.
Vedas you shall acquire the fruition of •
your desires.

It. Whatever thrrrgs exist m the w"'*^
of men, whatever lliinirs exist in the reRKn]
of the celestials, can all be achieved
acquired with the help of penances nn®
knowledge and the observance of vows *na
restra mis.


1* 1 have thus recited to you, O s>nl^*

one the verses that were sung by Ora«'
mana himself G.fied wuh supreme inteH'*
gence and wisdom, the Creator h'n**®’*
ordained this, iluough mercy lor the Drab*
mana*. ** '


w The power of those amsngst the®*
Who are devoted 10 penances 1* eq lal to t"*
power of king, They are indeed irresiH'*
We fierce fleet like hghtn.or. and exC#«J*
•ngly quick in what they do.


ANUbltASAMA PARVA.


99


14 There are amonjisi Uiem'those who

are possessed of ihe miKlil of lions and those
who are possessed of Ifie might of t'K***

Some of tliem are Rifled Willi the might of

boars, some of the deer and some of croco-
df/cs.

1 5 Some there are amongst them whose
toucfi resembles <hi*t of snakes of dreadful
poison, and some whose bttc resembles itiat
of sharks. Some amongst them are cap*
able of bringing about by words only the
destruction of those that are opposed to
tfiem : and some are competertt to destroy
by a look only of their eyes.

id Some amongst (hem, as already aatd,
are like snakes of dreadful poison, and some
(hat are gifted with very mild dispositions.
'Ihe di'posiiions, O Yudhislitl ira, of (he
Brahmaiias, are of vanous kinds

17. The Mekalas, the Oravidas, the
i.atlias, the Paundras, the Knowashiras,
(he Sh^iundikas, the Oaradas (he Parvat,
(he Chauras. Shavaras, the Varvaras, the
Kiratas the Yavaiias and numerous other
(nlies of Kshalriyas, have degenerated into
the status of Shudrat (lifough the anger of
(he Brahmenas.

IQ On account 'of Jiheir ltaving**disre*
carded (he Drahman^s, (he Arurathave
been obliged to {take refuge m the, depths o(
(lie ocean Ihrough tl<e favour of the
Braf manas, (lie celestials fisve become
deiniens of Ihe Jiappy regions of Meaven.

30 The clement {of other tisV.mcapable
f being (ouclied. Ihe flimavat mountains
ira incapable of ben»g moved from ilieir
oot 1 he current of, Gaiiga is incapable
il bring resisted by a dvin the Urah*
nanas are incapable of being governed.

3|. ICshatrijas are incapable of ruling
he Eaitli witliout .securing the good will
)f (he Ural manas the Drahmaii S are
:reat. Ihey ate the denies of (lie very
leities.

33. Do you always adore lliem wllligi/ls
end obedient services, if, indeed, you desire
la enjoy the soveteii,nly of the whole Carlh
encircled by seas.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),-*
Co/itinued,

Bhjshma said:—

I. Regarding It u cited the old history
»f tfie discourse between Shakra and
ShamvMra. Do you listen to it, O Vudhish*
thira.

3. Once upon a time Shakra, assuming
the guise of an ascetic with matted locks
on his head and body covered with ashes
alt over, rode on an ugly car and went to
the Asura Shamvara.

Shakra said:—

3. Hirough what conduct, O Shamvara,
you have been able to become the head of
your lamilyT Wliy do all people consider
you as superioi T uo you tell me this truly
and (ully.

Shamvara saidt—

4 1 never entertain any ill feelings to- c
wards the Bralimanas. Whatever inslrue*
(ions they give I accept with uuquahRed
reverence. When (lie Brahmanas are eri*
gaged in explainiug the scriptures, I listen
to (hem with great happiness.

5 Having heard their interpretations
I never disregard them. Nor do I ever
offend against the Dralimanas in any way,

1 alwajs adore intelligent firahmanas I
always seek information from them. 1
always adore their feet.

6 Approaching me with confidince,
they always address me Willi affeciiori and
enquire alier my well being If ihey ever
happen to be careless, 1 am always careful.

It (hey happen ,to sleep, I always remain
awake.

7 Like beesldrenching the cells of the
comb wiih honey, the Brahmanas, who are
my (ns(ruc(ors and rulers, always drench,
me W11I1 the neclar of knowledge^who am
always develed to Ihe path pointed out by
Ihe sciipiures, who am devoted |io the
Bralunanas. and who am perfectly shorn of
malice or evil passion.


33 The energy and power 'oQBrali.
rnawas, O sioless one, become abated
by the acceptance ol gifts You should
protect your iamily, O king, from those
It desire to accept


8. i always accept with cheerful hearts
whatever they „y, Jfefped by memory .
and under! and, Mg. I am always careful
my own (auh m them and I always ihinx
of my own inlenor ity to them. ^

en2‘«rli,****^* nectar that haj

Wd of rteir tongue, and « is for this r„»on


100


MAtlABMARATA.


10 The scriplural inlerpretations which
fall from ihe lips of ihe Brahmanas and
listening to winch every wise man aWs »n
Ihe world, form nectar on Eirlhandmay,
also be lilcened to most excellent.

It. Seeing the battle between the celes.
lials and Ihe Asuras indays of old, and wn-
deistanding the power of the insiruciions
that fell from the Brahmanas, my father
became Hlled with deliglii and wander.

U Seeing the power of great Brah*
manas, my father asked the Moon iihe
question, — How do the Brahmrnas acquire
success 7

Soma, said:—

13 Ihe Brahmanas become crowned
with success by virtue of their penances
'I heir strength consists in speecli Ihe
power of Kslialiiyas is in their anas 1 he
Brahmanas, however, have words for their
weapons. I

14. Undergoing the discomforts of a
residence in Xhe lionse of his preceptor,
lha BtahmAna slieuld study the Vedas or
at least the Pranava. hreemg hnnseli of
anger and renouncing earthly aiiachnieiits.
he should become a Yati, regarding all
things and all creatures with equal eyes

ig If remaining in the house of Ins father
he masters all the Vedas and acquiring
great knowledge acquires a positon that
should command respect, people snll coii
damn him as untravelled or home keeping.

16 Like a snake swallowing mice. Ihe
Earth swallows up these two, vts , a king
that IS unwilling to fight and a Urahmana
who is reluctant to leave home for ac>
qunmg knowledge.

17. Pride destroys the prosperity of
persons of little wit. A maiden, if she
conceives, becomes stained A Urahmana
incurs reproach by cemaming at home.

ffiis IS what my father fiearcf from
the revered Soma. My failier, on account of
tins, began to adure ^nd respect the Urah*
manas Like him, t also worship and
adore all Brahmanas oi high vowsl

> Bbishma said

19 Hearing these words thai fell from
the mouth of ih-t prince of Danavas. Siiakta
Vit-pan to adore the Brahmanas, and as a
lesuli thereof he succeeded in acquiring the
kmath'p of the celestials.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

( ANUSH ASANIKA PAUVA).—

^ Conft/tued,

Yndhishthira said:— ' .

Winch sRumgst these three persons,^

0 grandfather should be regarded as Uie

best for making gifts, vit , one who 1$ a
through stranger, or one who 1$ living wall
and known to the giver for a long time, or
one who comes to the giver, Itom a long*
distance? ^

Bhisbma said*—

i All these are equal The fitness ol
some consists in their soliciting alms for
celebrating sacrifices or for pajmg ll'«
preceptor's fee or for maintaining tlie'r
' wives and children. ‘Ihe fitness of some
for receiving gifts, consists m their follow*
ing the vow of wandering over tl e EanK
never soliciting anything but receiving wben
given. We should also give to one wh*'
one seeks. ,

3 We should, however, make gifts with*
out afTliciing ihose {who depend upon us
I his IS what we have heard. By amictmif
one's dependants, one efilicis Ins own self.

4 1 he stranger,— one, that is, who h**
come lor the first time, — should becoiui
dered as a proper object of gifts He w''®
IS familiar and welUkiiown and has uee<*
living with the giver, should also be consi*
dered in tlie same light. 1 he learned know
that he loo who comes from a distant pl»t*
should be considered in an equal light ,

Tudhisbthira said

5 U IS true that we should make yifts
to others without afHiciing any on® *”1
without going against the ordinances *
scriptures One should, however, correcUy
determine who the person is that should be
considered as a proper obiect for making

1 gifts He should be such that the ^
I iiseir, when made over to him, n’^y

I grieve.

Bbishma said *—

6 !f the Ritwi], the Purohita, the
preceptor, the Acharya, the disciple the
relative (by marriage), and Inosmen
happen to De endued with learnintf anJ
free from malice, then stiould lliey be con*
sidcred worthy oi respect and adoration.

7 * Ihose persons who do not posses*
such qii.tlificaiioiis cannot be considered a*
wotthyol gifts or liospilahty. Hence, one
should wiili deliberation .examine petsd'*
, wlium one i.tccis.


,„ »l,om J should b« co»«-

s-rp-p‘^,.d. such.pu—

descrvesllionors


anusuasawa parva


CHAPTER KXXVni.
(ANUSllASANIKA PARVA).-

Continued,


Whollitr ■>'« P'™" ’''“Lhohss

lUiy ol honors and hospnahiy.


brings about bn own ruin.

VcdM. or who IS given U^O e

useless disputation. . tn as-

"3;K‘rt ..p,w„,xr.5


Tndhishthirasaid —

, o best ol Ibo “

lliey are all considered as highly Iran.

Panchachuda

, Once in ancient nmcs. the ce'«si|sl

'of aU I R«h.

Sitortooiy, h»..0S hor ■«.d.n=o m
the region oJ Brahman


S.tio5 ll" Ap>*r. .very |'7'> of
.boso^/y - lot

S'.'. 1 d™!-' I" ">

Do you explain it t—


is; ■' ..

'’"i’.r.„t o. »bo !. b.iu. ol •p.'Ol'. •I''™''* ly »y 'b*' ■’ ‘b "’>
be known in be a* balelul a* a dog. Harnda said —

A. adogmeet. o.l.e...b>.k,nglb' ^ O amiable one, 1 .ball nol ee^.Umly

,|,ne .n,l .eek.ng W b.«. -“b » ,„ .,k yon let an, .a


«pkinie to bite, suen a v^.wn '* 1 ?' Vny task ihst is beyond your

tor he spr"*** r*«i| 1 DOwer. O you ol beaiildullace 1 wish to

».,d I.... la de.uoy Ibo aolbo'd/ »’ *" | jiu ol the diipo.ilion ol women,

the scupturcs.


•OU 01 Deasiiiiui eovw

u ol the disposition ol women.

,b n. 0 .e peaetieo 'b*^’“S’|'’°to?'3S 1 ^^'’'’luLng Here word, ol Ibe cetelial
Ihe done, ol .,oJ, „tf,.boold 1 R,^h.\h,t f^temo.t ol Ap.ara. replied to

Il'itSd "o'. A' pi~3 tb.” ...... «: 1 S™. u,mg.-i


r.-ndmg lo tb«. became. pt..p..«» '»

l,<x>d


tm.saymg,— 1 am
, woman, to speak ill of women.


8 You know what women arc and
, .ft Bv sal.stymR the debt one *j,ai nature they are gifted You

’ Sen.” bj^tloeming .bo«M not, O celetti.l Ri.'n, set me to .oeh


mouve‘"anr ?«p«ly"


a. To her the cele'tial Rishi said — U is
very true, O you ol slender waist ' One
commits sm by speaking what is untrue.
In saying, however, what is true, there can
be no sin.


JO. Thus addressed by him, the Apsari
Panchachuda of sweet smiles consented to
answer Narad I's r^iesimn. She then ad-
dressed herself to mention what the true
and eternal shortcomings arc ol women.


MAHABHaRATA.


102

Panchachttda said —

II Even if hi^h born and gifted with
beAUiy and possessed of proiectors, wotnew
wish 10 tMnsgress the restraints assigned
to them Lhis fault tiuly attaches themi
O Narada. f

13 Inhere is nothing ^fte that iS more
sinful than women Verily, woinen are
the root of all evils lhat is certainly
known to you, O Narada.

13 Women, even when having hus-
bands of 'fame and wealth, of handsome
features and Completely obedient to them,
are prepared to disregard them if they get
the opportunity,

t4 I his, O powerful one, is a sinful dis-
position with us women, casting cf! modesty,
we seek the companionship of men of sinfuf
habits and intentions

15 Women show a hkmg (or those men
who court tliem, who approacli their pre-
sence, and who respectfully serve (hem to
even a sligfit extent,

16, Through want of soficitatron by
persons of the other sex. or fear of relatives,
women, who are naturally impatient of all
control, do not transgress those ciiat have
been ordained for iliem, and remain by the
side of their husbands.

17. There is none whom they cannot
admit to tUeir favours lh«y never con*
sider about the age of the person they are
prepared to favour. Ugly or handsome,
if only the person happens to belong to the
Opposite sex, women are ready to enjoy h>s
companionship

tS That women-iemam faithful to these
husbands is due not to their fear of sin,
t\or to mercy, nor to riches not to the affec-
tion that oriKinates 111 their liearls (or kins-
men and cl ildien.

Ip Women living in the respectable
(amihes envy the condition ol iliose mem-
bers of ther sex who are young and well-
adorned with jewels anti gems and that
Uad. a. (ws, Ufr.,

30 'Even those women who are loved
by their husbands and treated with Rrcal
respect, are seen to confer Iheir favours
upon men who are liump backed who are
blind, wlio are idiots, or who are dwarfs.

21 Women may be seen to like the
companionship of even (hose m«o who are
inert or (hose men who are ugly to look at,
O Kteal Rislii, there is no man ns this
\ world whom women may consider as unfit
for companionship 1

Through inabihiy to obtam perr
sons of the oppMiie sex, or (ear ol rela-
^ tucs, or fear of death and impiisonment.


women remain, of *llieniselves, under
control

*4 They are highly Rckle, for they
always hanker after new companioits On
account of tlieir n-«ture being unintelligible,
they are incapable of being kept m obe<
dieitce by loving irealineut Iheir nature
ts such tliat they are incapable of being
controlled when bent upon transgression
Indeed, women are like the words uttere<
by tlie wise.

*5 Fire is never satiated with fur ’
Occ.an can never be filled with the water
lhat the rivers bring to him 1 he Des
troyer u never satiated with killing evci
all living creatures Likewise, wo~>en arc
never satiated with men ^

36 This O celestial Rishi, is another
mystery about women As soon as (hey
see a man of beautiful and charming
features, unfailing signs of desire appear
on their body.

ay They never show sufficient regard
for even such I usbaitds as satisfy all their
wishes, as always do what li agreeable to
them, and as protect them from want and
dangtr

ad Women never price even profuse
articles ol enyoymeni or ornaments or other
deligl tful things, so much as they do the
companionship ol persms.of llie opposite
: sex.

39. The destroyer, the god of wind,

' death, (he nether regions, llie equine mouth
that roves through the ocean, vomiting
I ceaseless (lames ol 5 re, the sharpness o>
the razor, dreadful poison, the snake and
Fire, — all these exist in a, state of union in
woman,

30 Indeed from that eternal Brahma
whence the Rve great elements have origi-
nated whence the Qreator Brahman hath
ordained the universe, and whence, indeed,
men have sprung, have women sprung into
existence At lhat lime, again, O Narada,
when women were crAited, these fautis
(hat T “have described were planted m
lliem.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

(ANUSUASANA PARVA)—
Coultnued,

TudbisHthira said —

I. Overcome by the illusion of the divine
Being, all men, U king m tins world,
arc seen to attadi themselves to woinen.


ANUSI 1 A 5 ANA PARVA


prescribed by I..-

%nv one before o ir lime did Really succeed-
ed^n so controlling tberti.


You sboiitd tell me, O d lef of

. »ii .1..C «en ,v...u’s Thee, wbelber womei are truly cap-

aliacl. ttiemselves lo men All ll»« ^ governed witlun tlie limils

UU.ne place «very«»iere m ibe «orlcl. b il.e scrlpiures or wl ether

liave a doubt on this subject P •’ ■> -

r Why. O dehghter of the Kurus, do

r “"’Ifn"-?;. '.'ir"..’.

highly ="11 •"

they wilh tvhom they are displeased ,

4 Vou should, O duel of men, explam
,0 me how men are capable of protecting
women ?

e While men take pleasure In wofMn
and sport 'htm, nromth, it stam.,

:"rn?“irv

women like new men one after another.

*' 6 Tl.e women have in them the sum toul

of that Illusion which the Asura Shamvara

oossessed. Ithat illusion which the Asura
?J«muchi possessed, that illusion which
Vah or Kumbhmasi had.

e ' If man laughs, women laugh. II

hrJ; p.. •"■y tX”.””',',’:

requires they receive the man wii^o is ois
agreeable to them with sweet words

8 That scienceof policy which the pre-

ceptor of the Asuras hnew that setence of
poUy which the ‘i’,* d*!*erof

via , Vrihaspati, knew, is not a«f«f
mote subtile*^ than wliat '"Si

gence. Indeed, how can women, therefore,


o They make a he appear as truth,
an^a truth appear as a he I i«y who
tan do this -1 ask. O hefo.-Uow can
they be governed by persons of the opposite

10. It appears to me that Vnhaspatl
and other great
enemies, evolved the science of
observation ol the understandings of
Women ^

11 W1 ether treated by men, with res-
pect or wil'i hatred, women “J

turn the heads and agnate the hearts ol


la. Living creatures, O you ol mighty
arms, are virtuous Even tl is is what we
have heard I sealed with love and
pect or otherwise, women are seen to de-
serve censure lor their conduct towards
men.

13 Tl IS great doubt fills my mind, of#
when their conduct is ‘ucm, what roan ,
Here tl at can reslrai i tl em wtibin the
limits oljvirlue t Do you explain this to
O highly blessed scioihol Kuru's race.


CHAPTER XL.

(ANUSH ASA VIKA PARVA) —
ConiirtufJ ,

Bhiftlibla said'—

his true what you say. O you of
mighty arms There is nothing untrue in
all this (that you say, O you of Kurus
race, ors the subject of women, O mon-
arch I

About It I shall recitO to you the old
history «l how in days of yore the greit
Vipula had succeeded in restrsinlng womeh
within the limits laid down for them.

. shall also tell you O king, how
women were created by the Grandfather
Brahman and the object for which they
were created by Him.

4. There is no creature more sinful, O
son, than woman Woman is a burning
fire. She is the illusion, O king, that the
Daitya Maya created. She is the sharp
edge ol the rasor. She is poison She is
a snake She is fire. She is, verily, all
these m a body.

We have heard that alt human beings
characieiised by righteousness and
that they, in course of natural progress
and improvement, attain to the dignity
of god lilts circumstance alarmed the
celestials.

They, therefore, O chastiser of foes,
assembled together and went to the Grand-
father Informing Him ol what was In
their minds they stood silent before him
with downcast eyes

7. Having learnt what was in the hearts
ol the celestials (lie powerful GrandUlher
created women with the help ol an Athar-


8 In a former creation, O son of Kunli,
women were all virtuous Ihose, however,
that sprang from this creation (by Brahman
with the help of an illusion, became Sinful,
the Grandfather bestowed upon them the
desire ol enjoying all kinds of carnal plea-
sure.

9 Tempted by the desire of| enjoyment,
thejr began to pursue persons of the other


MAilABMARArA.


10 \

sex llie powerful lord of lli* deities
created A«s«r ss dve c mpamoti of Ltisu
lo. Persons of the male sex, yielding to
the power of Lust and Anger, sought the
compintonship of women. Women have
no especial acts laid down for them. lh»s
IS the ordinance that was Uid down.

1 1 — 12 '1 he Shruti declares that women
are gifted with the most powerful senses
that they have no scriptures to follow, and
that they are living lies. Beds, seats,
ornaments, food and drink and the
absence of all that is respectable
and righteous, indulgence in disagreeable
words, and love ol »exu-tl companionship.—
these were bestowed by Brahman upon
women. Men are quite unable to restrain
Ibein within limits ,

13 riie Creator himselF is incapable

of keeping them within proper Innus, what
need then be said of men 1 j

14 This. O chief of men. I heard in
former days, vib , how Viputa had sue*
ceeded m ptolecuwg Iws precepWt’s wile
in ancient times.

15. I here was in deys of yore a liiKhty
blessed Rishi of the name of Devasharman
of great fame He had a wife, ol name
Buchi, who was peeilers on Earth in
beauty,

16 Her loveliness intoxicated every one
among tlie celestials and Gandhatvas and
naiiawas. I he chastiser of Paka. «t«,
Indra the destroyer of Vrnra, O kmg, was
in particular enamoured of her and coveted
her body,

17. 1 he great ascetic Devasharman fully

knew the disposition ol wnnen. He, there*
fore, to the best ol his power and energy,
protected her.

t8 Ihe Rislii knew (hat Indra had no
scruples in seeking the coinpamonslup of
other people's wives It was, therefore, (hat
hr used to protect his wife, putting forth
all Ins power.

<w, i O

became desirous of celcbiaimg a sacrifice
He began 10 tiiiiik of how (during Ins tiwn
absence from home) his wife could be pro-
tected.

20 Gifted with high ascetic merit he
at last Ini upon the course he should ar'opl.
Summoning Ins favoiinte disciple whose
name was Vipula and who was of Blirigu's
family, be said as follows.

Devasharman said.—

21. I shall leave home in order to cete-
braie a saciifice I he king of ihe celestials
always covets tins Uuctii of mine. Ooyou,


during my absence, protect her, displaying
all your power.

2j Von shall pass your time carefully
in view of Pnrandari. O foremost one of
Bhrigu's race, that Indra assumes various
forms.

Bhishma said

23 — 24 1 hus addressed by his pre-
ceptor, (he ascetic Vipula, with senses
restrained, always engaged In severe pe-
nances, possessed of the splendour, O king,
of fire or the sun,* conversant with all the
duties of virtue, and ever Iruthlul m speech,
answered liim, saying,— So be it ! — Once
tnoce. UowcveCK as his preceptor was about
to start, Vipula asked him iii these words.

Vipala said f—

25 Icll me, O Muni, what forms does
Shakra assume when he comes. Ol what
kind IS his body and what u Ins energy 1
Vou should tell me all tins,

Bhislima said : — ,

26 the illasirious Rishi then truly des>

cubed to the great Vipula all the illusiuiis
of Shakra, O Bliaraia. ,

said —

27 I lie powerful chastiser of Paka, O

regenerate Itishi, is full of illusion. Every
moment he assumes those forms that he
chouses.- ^ ,

28. Sometimes he wears a diadem and
holds the thunder*bolt. bometimes, armed
with the thunder-bolt and wearing a crown
on hfs head, he adorns himself with ear-
rings. tn a moment be changes himself
into the shape and aspect of Cliandala.

.29 Sometimes he appears with coronal
locks on his head ; soon ag-«m, O son, he
shows himself with matted locks, Ins person
being clad in rags, bomeiimes he assumes
a goodly and huge frame. Hie next
moment he changes himself into one of
emaciated limbs, and clad in rags.

JO Soineiimes 'ne ‘Decomes lair, sorTre-
times darkish, someliines dark, of com-
plexitm Sometimes he becomes ugly
sometimes beautilnl Soinetnnes he appears
as young and sometimes as old.

31. Somelimes he appears as a Drab*
mana, somelimes as » Kshainya, some-
times as a Vaishya, and sometimes as a

Shudra Indeed, he of a bundled saeii-
fices appears at times as a person born of
impure caste, that is, as the son ol a

superior father by an inferior mother or of

an inferior father by a superior mother.

32. Sometimes he appears as a parrot
soiQCinnes as a crow, somelimes as a swan


XHUSTlABXtJ^ PARVA


105


’^fih someliiAp^ ^sacael. He assume? ll e
lorms also of.^ tion, a iiger, or an elephant.

33 Sometimes he appears as a C«m 1 .
sometimes as a Daitis, and sometime
he assumes tlie guise ot a hmg Some*
times he appears as fat ana plump,
sometimes as one wliofee limbs have been
broken by the disordered wind m the
system, sometimes as a bird, and sometimes
as one of an exceedingly ugly form

34 Sometimes he appeart as a quad-
Vuped. Capable of assuming any lorm
lie somelunes appears as an idiot shorn of
all mlclligence He assumes also the forms
of flies and gnats.

35. O Vipula, no one can make bim oat
on account of these numberless disguises
that he IS capable of assuming I he very
Creator of the universe is not equal to that
(eat >

36 He makes himself invisible wl»en he
likes. He is incapable ot being seen except
with the eye of knowledge I he Utng of
the Celestials sometimes changes lumSell
into the wii>u<

3; \ chastise" of Paka always

assumes tiSese disguises Do you, there-
fore, O Vip'nU protect this slender-waisled
Wife of miii«> with great care.

■'38 O foV*"'o*‘ Dlingu'e race

do >0* take every care (or seeing that the
king of the jceUsttals may not defile ttns
Wile of minelhke a wretched dog licking the
Hsvi kept nil view oT & sacrifice
- 59 Having said these words the IngUty.
blessed ascmu: v>e , Oevasharman, intent
Upon celebrating a sacrifice started (tom
hts abode, O chief of the Dharaias

40 Hearing these word^ of firs precep-
tor, Vipula began to think shall cer-
tainly protect tins lady in every respect
from the poweifiil king of the celestials.

'•-41 But what should be ll>e meansT
What can 1 do for protecting the wife of
mycreceptor? Ihetting^of the celestials
ff 1 ndued with large poweis of illusion
Gifi ed will) great energy, lie is diffii.wli of
ben g resisted.

4 1 tndra cannot be kept out by en-
closing this retreat of ours or fencing this
yar, I, sincMie ij ^^-pWfvOf.assuni^ini' nui^

oeil[es<=,'ccessfu»y p

f chination of lndra,e |om of the wmd, the
^ 30. Of tranquil* may nssanll the w feof

!"'for his preceptor, V best course, iheiciore,
Jiim and stood befienter the body of tins
« heart. Ve-

st. After hisle my prowess I sliall
"“tawhile and when Itect ihe.Jatiw^for tl


lie*rril by me, IS capable of assuming any
form he likes,

45 I shift, therefore, protect this one
from Indra by my Yoga-poivcr, f'tir saiis-
lying my ob(ect I shall with my body enter
the budy ol^hif lady.

46 If my preceploron return, sees his
Wife defiled, he wilt, forsooth, curse me
ihroiigh anger, for endued witli great
•Scctic merit, he ts gifted with spiritual
vision.

47 lliis lady IS Micapible of bring pro-
tecie I m the way m which other women are
protected by men since jhe king of the
celestials IS gifted with large powers of
ilhision. AUi, the SKuation Is very critical

48 The command of my preceptor
sho ltd certainly be obeyed hy me. IF,
therefore I praiKl Jier by iny Yoga power,
the feat will be considered by all as a won-
derful one,

49 By my Vnga power, Ihereforg, I
shall enter tl e bn ly of my preceptor’s Udy,

I shill Irvewithm her And yet not touch her,
body like a drop of Witter on a loins leaf
winch lies on it yet does not drench u
at all

50— ^1 tl 1 be free from the louch of
p,<ssio<i. 1 cinnot incur any sm by dutng
what t wish 10 rlo As h traveller, in
course of Ins soiourn. lakes i<p his qtiartera
(lor R while) m any empty house he fin K,

I sUhII. simduly live, -this day within ill t
body of iny prrcaclor S Udy Indeed, with
mind rapt up in Vuga, 1 shall live lo day in
this fady’s body,

51— 53 Giving his bes\ consideration m
tlwse points of virtue, tlnnUing uf all the
Vedas and their branches, and witl> eye
directed lo the penances which 1 is precep-
tor lud and which lie himself also wis
possessed of, and hiving settled in I119
mind With a View on[> to prntret tfie lady,
to enter her body by Yoga piwer, Vipula
uf Bhrigii s race look great cite (for ac-
cuiuphshing Ins object Listen now in me,
O king as ( recite to )ou what he did

54 Gifted wiUi great peiiHiiCes VipnU
s,tl hiin*«lf down by the side nf tiis piecep-
toi’s wiU as she of faultless features svas

. Silting miier coiuye Vipula then began
j-Vb irtsciurse to her for bringing her over to
' (he cause of virtue and truth

55 Directing his eyes ihen to 1 ers and
u> I ing the rays of ligiil tiMt came out
from her orgahs «f vision wnh ilnse tl jr
issued from Ins Vipula entered the ladj's
body even as (he element of wind enters
that of ether or space.

56 PenetralioK her eyrs with his eyes
ii..aiid hsrlace with Ins iace, V puU


MAttABIIARAfA.


Miihout moving, witlim her tnvhlbly, like
her shadow.


57 Restraining every pari of the lady's
body. VipuU continued to live within liert
intent on protecting her from Indra. liie
lady herself knew nothing of this.

5$ It was in this way. O king, that
Vipula continued to protect the lady till the
lime of his t.real preceptor’s return after
accomplishing the sacrifice winch he bad'
gone out to perform.


CHAPTER XLl.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Conttnutd,


Bhishma said i—

1. One day the king of (he cefestials
assuming a form of divine beauty, came
to the hermitage of the Rishi, tin iking that
the opporlunily he had been expecimg had
at last come

a. Indeed, O king, haring assumed a
lorm peerlers in beauty and highly lerrpt*
ing to women and highly agreeable to look
at, liidra entered the ascetic's asylum.

3 He beheld the body of Vipula stay*
ingtna tiding posture, immovable as a
slake, and with eyes shorn of vision, like a
picture drawn on the canvas.

4. And he beheld also Ruchi, sealed
there, adorned with eyes whose ends were
highly beautiful possessed of Ml and
round hips, andliavinga deep and swell,
mg bosom. Her eyes were Urge and
expansive like lotus petals and her face
moon** *"‘1 sweet as the lull

5 Seeing Indra come in that guise,
the lady wished to rise op and welcome
him. Her womier having been excited at
the peerlers beauty of form which the
person po>scssed. s)ie very inoch wished
ID ask him as to who he was.

6. Alihoiigh. however, she wished to
me up and weJcorre Innr vet her limbs

.. .UO.J f„„ piacl"‘h


8 Indeed, he va,a r»

*"»' es know il.il I

lor vo..r ..t. ‘rrived here


lor your .iV. r i* 1. '’*■ •"'wd here


by jour thoughts 0 yoU of beaUiifilf
brows, 1 have come to you. lime passes
away.


0 'lliese Words that Indra spoke were
heard by the ascetic Vtpula Remaining
within the body of Itis preceptor’s wife,
lie saw everything that took place.


to The lady of faultless beauty, though
she heard what Indra said, was, however,
unable to rise up for welcoming or honor,
mg the king of the celestials Her senses
restrained by Vipula, site could inakend
reply.


II. Judging from the marks afforded by
the body of his preceptor's wife that slid
was not reloctaiu to receive Indra with
kindness, that scion of Blirtgu's race, of
imghty energy restrained her limbs and
senses all the more effectually, O king, by
Ins Yoga powers.


I2 — 13 With Yoga-fetters he bound op
ail iter senses Seeing her seated wilhont
any mark of agitaUoii on her^body, the
husband of Shachi, abashed ^ ule, once
more addressed that lady who was/,iupifie<J
bylhe Yoga.powcrsof her husband's dw*
ciple, »n these words,*>.Coine,7 come, ^
sweet lady *— 1 hen the lady Irieg to aniw*f
him Vipula, however, restraineS the w«*
that she intended to utter. '


14 The words, therefore, tlfiat actuaff/
dropped from her lips were.^What is
iMson of your coming here 7— Bhese words
adorned wnh grammatical i^fineinenls
came out of her mouth that was is beautiful
like the moon.


rS» Subject to the influence iif another,
she gave vent to these words, but became


Furandara became highly dis'


• 6 Observing that awkward resolt, ,
r.'"®. ® j '* O monarch, havlil

•yes, saw everything with I


thoosand
spiritual eye*.

*? . He then saw the ascetic living


the body of the lady Indeed, the ..
tie remained wulnn the body of 1 is precJ ■0*
tor s wife like an image or reflection
-picror. •unesi


jh'


‘9 VipiiU then gift’


i^e


lerson born of


J*t‘e and returned to hi


f^MUStlASANA PARVA.


107


Vipnla said —

ao. O wicked Purandara. O you o! sm*
ful mind, O wretch who have no control
over your senscsi neither the deities nor
human beines will worship you for any
fen^lli of time.

31. Have you forgotten It, O ShaUra,—
does It not scill dwell in jour remem-
trance, — that Gautama had cursed you on
account of winch your body became dis-
figured with a thousand sex.marks, wlucli
owing to the Risin’s mercy, were after-
words cJianged into so many eyes,

33 I know that you are of an exceed-
ingly foolish understanding, that your soul
IS impure and that youare of an exceeding-
ly fickle mind. O fool, know that this lady
IS being protected by me O sinful wretch,
return whence you came.

S3 U you of foolish soul, { do not
reduce you to day into ashes with my
energy Indeed, I am Riled with mercy for
you. It ts for this that I do not, O Vasava,
wish to burn you

34 My preceptor gifted with gr«at m-
lelhgence, is possessed of terrible power.
WitTi ejes biasing wtih anger, he woutd,
if he saw you, have burnt your sinful self
to day. I

35.^ Vou should not, O Shakra, do*ts
like again. The Brahmaiias slieuld be
respected by you. See (lut you do noi.
witii your sons and counsellors, meet with
destruction, sfHcied by the power of the
Drahinatias.

36 You think that you are an immortal
and that, therefore, are at hberiy to act
thus. Do nor, however, dishonor the
Braficcianas. Know (h^t there is notliiag
unattainable by penance.

Bhislima said —

37 Hearing these words of the great
Vipula, Shakra without saying anything,
and covered with shame, disappeared,

aS A moment after he had gone away
Devasharman of great ascetic merit, having
accomplished the sacrifice he had intended
to perform, returned to his own lieriniiage

29 When his preceptor returned, Vi-
pula, who fiad done a good deed, gave to
him his Wife of faultless beauty whom lie
had successfully protected against the ma-
chination of Indra.

30 Of tranquil soul and full of respect
for his preceptor, Vipula respectfully saliileJ
him and stood before him with a (earless
heart


3t After his
awhile and when


preceptor had rested
he was sealed with tus


wife on the same seat. Vipula told tnm
everything (hat Shakra had done.

53 Hearing these words of Vipula,
that foremost of Mums, gifted with great

f rowess, became highly pleased with liim
>r his conduct and desposition, his pen-
ances, and his observances.

33 Observing Vipula’s conduct towards
himself— 4iis preceptor— and his devotion
also, and marking his steadiness in virtue,
the powerful Devasharman exclaimed,—
Exceifent, excellent,

34. The pious Devasharman receiving
Ins virtuous disciple with a sincere welcome,
honored him wiih a boon,

35 Indeed, Vipula, steady in virtue,
obtained from hts preceptor the boon that
he would never swerve or fall away from
virtue. Dismissed by liis preceptor lie left
Ins house and practised the most severe
I austerities.

36 Devasharman also, of severe pen-
ances. with his wife, began from that day
to live m those solitary woods, perfectly
fearless of him who had killed VaU and
Vritra.


CHAPfBR XUI.


(ANUSHASANfKA PARVAJ —
ContmutJt


Bhishma said ^

I Having satisfied his preceptor's com-
mand. Vipula practised the most severe pen-
aiices Gifted wuli great energy, he ot last
regarded Imnsell as endued with sufficient
ascetic merit.


pnfonmd. I c ».„d,r.a t,.tl.«|y „„1
1... rfly „,tr 11.. e.rih, O

I

»h«f Bhargava Ihougl t

S!l ""q^fed both the worlds by

4 After sometime, O delighter of ih^

P'SkS

he given away m u.
gifted wT gleat

throi^li ihe skies. P“*sing


MAIlABriARATA.


joS


Earlli Tliose ft>wers of celeslul frnemnce
l«ll on a spot nut far from the hermitai;e of
Uuchi's liiisb-md

7 As the flowers lay scattered oi* llie
£roiiiid, they wei e picked up by Kuchi of
beautiful eyes Sum alter invtlaliois
came to Kudu from the eountiy of tite
Angas.

8 llie sister, referred to *l>ove» of
Kudu, named f’rabliavati, was the wife of
Chiiraraiha the king of ilie Angas

9 Riichi, of great beauty, having
attached those (lowers to her fiair, went to
llie palace of the king of the Angas to
answer the invitation she liad tecetv^

to Seeing those flowers orv her liair,
the queen of tlie Ahgas, fiavmg beautiful
eyes, urged her sister to obtain some for
her.

It. Rucln, of beautiful face, speedily
informed tier husband of that request of
her sister. 1 he Rislu accepted the pr<i)er
of his sisier.in Uw.

13. Surnmonhig Vipula into Ins presence,
Devasharman of severe penances com*
nianded Ins disciple to tiring him some
lioivets of the same sort, saying — Go. go

13 Accepting unhesitatmef}' order
of Ins preceptor, the greet ascetic VipiiU
O kmg answered,— bo be«tt— and Iheiv
proceeded to that spot whence the lady
Kudu had picked up llie (lowers that were
wanted by tier sister.

t4 Arrived at that place whete the
flowers had fallen from the sky. Vipula saw
some others still lyli g scattered they
were all as fresh as if lliey had been newly
plucked (ram the plants None of Uienx tiad
»ded Bway

He tnok up those exqnisiiely beauli.
ful celestial flowers Possessed of celestial
fragrance O Bharata, Vipula got them
there as the result of his severe penances

16. The accomphsher of I is preceptor’s
command having obtained them he fell
great deligl t and started quickly for the
city of Champa adorned with lestoonsof
Cliampaka flowers

17 As he went cm he saw on tits way
n human couple moving in a circle hand in
hand.

iS One of them made a rapid step
and thereby destroyed tlie cadence of the
movement 1 lierefore, O king, a dispute
arose between them

19 Indeed one of them chained the
other, saying, — Vou have taken a q iicker
Step'— The other answered — ’No — Indeed,
as each held Ins own opinion obsiiiiatety,


eicli. O king, .tfscrled winf Ihe ’oHief
denied, and denied what th& other asserted.

20. While thus quarrelling with each
other with great assurance, an oath wa*
tiien heard among them. Indeed, each
of them suddenly named Vipula in wliat
they uttered.

21. I heir oath was this — That one
amongst bs two who speaks falsely, shall,
MV the iiest world, meet with the end winch

I will be th« iwice.borii VtpuU's.

22 — 23 lieaniig these words of theirs,
Viptila's face became very sad. Hebegaw
to commune with liimielf,— I have practised
severe penances. I he dispute between this
c Mipto ts liot To me, again, It is painful.
Wliai sill have I committed that both
lliese persons should refer to m> end m'
the next world as the most painful end
among those reserved for all creatures T

24 'lliinking thus, Vipula, 'G best 0^
kings, hung down Ills Iiead, and with a
dispirited mind began to recollect what sio
he had done.

35—26. Proceeding a little way he saw
six other men playing with dice made of
y,old and Sliver Engaged in play, these
Hidividuats seemed to him to be so excited
that the hairs on their, bodies stood erect,
they also were heard by Vipula to take
ihe same oath that he had already
heard the first couple to take Indeed,
their words had reference in the same way
to Vipula

27 He amongst us who, (ed by cupi*
dity, will act III an unfair way, shall
With that end which is reserved for Vipula
III the next world.

28 Hearing these words, however,
Vipula, althou)>h he tried earnestly t®
recollect, coiM not remember any sm of
lus from even his earliest years, O you 0*

I Kuru's race

1 29 Indeed he begarv to burn like a fir*

placed in the midst of another fire Hear*
mg that curse, lus mind burnt with gnef.

30 lit this slate of anxiety a long tint*
was passed At last he recollecied the man-
ner m which he had acted in protecting h's
preceptor's wife from the machinations of
liidra

31. I had entered the body' of that lady,
placing limb witlnii limb face withn* fa**-
Atthougli I had acted m this way, 1 did
not yet tell my preceptor the truth. ,

32 Tl IS was Ihe sm, O you of Kiiru’s
race, whicti Vipula recollecied m Inmsclf.
Indeed, O blessed king, forsooth, that was
thesin whicli he had actudUy committed


ANUSHASANA PARVA


109


35 C<"T>n'g 'o c>fi 0^ h*

Rave liie fi^wcis lo Jiis preceptor Devoted
li* superiors and ‘.etiiocs, Iw adored h»
preceptor m doe lorm "


CHAPiCR xmi. I

(ANUSMASANJKA PARVA)— ,

Conltntieii

Bhislima said —

I Seeuifc fc»s d»<ciple /etorned from hw
mission, DeVrtSlMTinan of kreal energy
addressed him u» words which [ shall
recite to you, O Uith;

Devasliarman said
a Wh»t hal/e you seen, O Vi^ula, in
course Off jour journey Odnerp}^, thfottffii
the great (oreMT Ihen whom yoo have
seen knew you, O VipiU. I, as also my
wife ttiiUii, know how you had acted m the
mHller of protecting Unchi

VipuU said

3 O twice horn Kislu wfio are those
two whom I Hrsi saw 1 Who also are those
other SIX wliom ] saw afierwxrds? All of
them kiiuw me Wlio indeed, are ilwy tv
whom yoiiprcfcr in your speech to me?—

Devashatmai^said —

4 (he first couple, O twice born one,
whim yous-iw arr* D^y and Night Hey
are ceaselessly movii’g hke a circle Both
of them know the sin you liave cominnied


10 Day and Night and the Seasons,
do know all ihc good and the bud deeds>
that are in a man.

ft They spoUe lo you in that way, O
twice born one, because they have full
knowledge of what you had done hut which
you had not llie couraye to inform mo
I of, fearihg you had done wrong.

12 Tor this reason you will vtsit the
regions tliat are reserved for the sinful.
You did not tell me what you had done.

13 You were lully capable, O twice-
born one, of protecting ray wife wl ose
disposiiioii, by nature, is sinful In doing
whai you did, you did not commit any sin.
I was, for tins pleased with you

14 O best of Bral manas if I had
known you to have acted wickedly, 1 would,
without hesilaiion, have cursed you en-
tirely.

15 Women become united with men.
Sucli union, fs very desirable, wilti fnen
Ynit had, however, protected my wife m a
different spirit If )oi had heted ether-
wise, i would have cursed Even tins l»
wlMt i think

t6 You had, O son, proiecfed my wife
I have known the manner iii wliicli you had
done It as if you had yourself informed me
of It 1 have, O sen, become pleased with
you Uelieved of all anxiety, you shall go
lolieaveu

17 Having «aid these words to VipuU,
the itreat Kisin Oevasliarinaii nscended to
Heaven with Ins w fe and ins di.ciple and

began to pass hii time there in greitbappi.
ness


5 It ose oihrr men (six m number)
wlium, U learned Bralirnana, you saw play.
ini> cl eerfully at dice, are U e six Seasons ^
*li ey also are acquainted with your sins '

6 Havii g committed a SIM secretly, no
sinful man should cherish tl e assuring

thoiit'lit that hi* sill IS known <m|y |o I nii-

sclf and not (a any one else

7 When H man commits a sinful deed
m secret, tl e beasuns as also Day and
N 1,1 1 see U always

S Hose reeions rl at are referveid /or
the »ii (ul shall l>e yours Wiat you 1 iad
done, you did • ot tell me that your sm
was not known to any one was your belief,
and tl IS conviction had filled you with joy

9 Yo I did not inform your preceptor ol
tl e whole truth clirioting 10 1 ide from him
a subslvi lUI portion ft e Sets ns and
Day aid ‘Nmll wlom 50.1 have heard
«i.«» n tiu..iit It proper to lemnid you


to in course of conversation, O king,
on a former occasion, the great ascetic
Maikandeya had described to me this
history o 1 ilie banks of G«nga.

19 I. therefore recite Jt Jo yav
Wvm^n should always be protected by
you Amongst them both kinds arc to he
Seen, tiMt is lliose who are virtuous and
those who are not so

n"® . ^*11 women are highly

bessej Diey are the motliers of Hie um.
verse n.e, ,{ o king tl.al k rp op
the Earth with all tier waters and (ore»is.**

«!!,r who are sinful, who

are of wtckrd conduct, wlio are tlie des.

«P'bU* of being as.

'till r

person,

cai able of protecting wo„,e„


no


MAtrAOItAnATA.


0 foremott of kings, protected )n any
other way

* 3 ‘ Women, O king are fierce. They
are gifted with fierce prowess, lliey have
none whom they love or like, so much as
them that have sexual intercourse with
them.

34. Women are like those (Atharvan)
mantrams which destroy life. Even after
lliey have consented to live with one, they
f prepared to leave him lotning others

1 hey are never satisfied wuh one person
of the opposite sex, O son ot Pandu.


35. Men should not love them. Nor
should they clierisli any jealousy on ac*
count of them, O king 1 Only for the sake
of virtue, men sliould enjoy their soaety,
not with enthusiasm and kitachinent but
With unwillingness and absence of attach*
ment.

3<3 By acting otherwise, a man is sure
to meet with destruction, O delighter of
the Kurus. O foremost of kings, reason
IS respected at all times and under all
circumstances.


37 - Only one man, vig , Vipula, had
succeeded m prelectn g woman, there is
none else, O king, m the three worlds who
can protect women.


CHAPTER XLIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CcnlusueJ.

Tudhishthira said:—

I. Tell me of chat, O grandfsilier
which IS the root of all duties, which i'
the root of kinsmen, of home, of tin
departed manes and of guests,

a 1 think (his should be considerec
as the foremost of all duties Uil me
however. O king to what sort of a pecsoi
s! ould one give Ins daughter.

3 Having enquired into the conduci
and nature of the person, his learning anc
acquiremcnis his birth, and Ins acts, eooc
people should then confer their dauvUlei
upon accomplished bridegrooms *

4. All righteous Brahmanas, O Vudla
RraK^"' *® known as thi

Brahma marriage, O Yudliishthira

S Selecting* a befitting bridegroom, ih.
ind,ir*Ifl’K*'^i, 'j'” various presents

iiiduced the biidet.toom to that act Hu


' form bf marrhge, forms the eternal prac*
lice of All good Kshatriyat.

6 When the father of the gtil, without
CORStilting his own wishes, confers his
daughter upon a person whom the
daughter likes and who reciprocates the
Rid s sentiments, the form of marriage, O
Yudliishthira, is called Gandliarva by
those versed in the Vedas
7. The wise have declared, O king, to
be the practice of the Asuias, vtg , marry-
■XR A girl after buying her at a high cost
and after gratifying (he cupidity of her
kinsmen.


8. Killing and chopping off the head*
of weeping kinsmen, the bridegroom some-
times forcibly takes away tlie girl he
marries Such marriage, O son, passes by
the name of Kakshasa,

0. Of these five, (vf# , the Brahma, the
Kshatra, the Gandharva, the Asura, and
the Rakshasa), three are righteous, O
Vudhishthira, and two are unrighteous,
I he Paishacha and tl»e Asura forms should,
never be followed.


to The Brahma, Kshatra, and Gah*
dharva farms are righteous, O prince of
men* Pure or mixed, iliese forms should
iofsoeih be followed.


II. The Brahmana can take three
I Kshatriya can lake two wives.

I Ihe vaishya should take a wife from only
his own easts. 1 he children born of these
wives should all be considered as equal.

I3 Of the three wives of a Brahmana.
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as the foremost Likewise of
the two wives permitted to the Kslialriya,
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as superior. Some say that
persons belonging to the three higher
CA'lcs may take, only for purposes of en-
joyment, wives from the lowest or the Shudra
caste. Others, however, forbid the practice-
13 The righteous condemn the practice
of begeiiing children upon Shudra women.
^ begetimg children upon

a Shudra women, becomes sul ject to the
liability 01 performing an expiation.

. . A person of thirty years of age

sfioidd marry a gul of ten years of age
wearing a single piece of cloih Or, a
of one and twenty years of age
should marry a girl of seven years of age.

>5 That girl who has no broil er nor
•"**w should not be married, O d lef of
Wiarata s race for she may be 1 iteiided for
giving birth to the heir of her laiher.


•6. After puberty
not married; should w


in, the girt (■!
fur three yeara.


ANUSHASANA PAhVA


til


On lift JoUrlh jear, she should look for a
husband hersftU.

17. Tlie cliildren of such a fifl do hok
iose Iheir respectabihty/ I'of does uhlon *rhh
Sucli a Kul become disgcacefuf If, instead
of selecliUg aliUsband fol* liftrseU, she acts
otherwise sfie gels Ihc reproach of rraja*
paii Iierseff,

t8 One should marry lhal gfrlwhoU
hot a Sapiiida of }t!s mother or of the same
family wilh Ins latlier. Ills is the usage
'which Manu has declared

YudWslithtta saidi'-

ig Desirous of marriage some one
actually gives a dower to the girl's kinsmen t
some one, the girl's kinsmen consenting,
prorr ises to give a present t some one says,
— t shall carry away the girl by force f—
some one simply shows Ins riches , some
one. again, actually takes the hand of llie
girt with rites of marrnage task you, O
).raiidlallier, whose wife does the girl ad*
tually become I You are the eye to those
who wish to know the truth,

Bhisbma said i'-

31, 1 he deeds of men approved by the
wise, are seen to yUld good lUlse speech,
however, is always sinful.

ii. Ihe girt herself who becomes wife,
the sons born of her, the nitwiiaa and pre*
cepiots and disciples and Upadhyayas
preseiH at the niarnai;e aU become liable
to expiation if the gut gives tier hand to a
person other than le whom she )aJ
promised to marry home are of opinien
that no eapiation is necessary for such
conduct.

3A< Mahu does not speak highly of the
practice of a girl tiving wnh a person whom I
she does not hke Living as wile With a
person whom stie does not like, produces
disgrace and sni No one commils sni m
any 0/ the following cases
^34 In loTcihly carrying away for mar*
rirfge a ghi tiMt is bestowed upon the ab*
ducior by it e gul s relatives wlili due rites,
as also a girl for whom dower haabeen
paid and accepted, there is no great sin.

05 Upon the girl’s kinsmen having
given iheir consent. Mantras and Homa
should he rtsloied lo. Such Afantras
truly accomplish their purpose Mantras
and Homa recited and performed >n the
case of a girl who has not been given away
by her kmsiiieti, do not accomplish their
purpose

j 6 'll e engagement made by the ieta>
tires of a gul is no doubt, binding and


sacred. Giittliecngftgerriertfthat Is made
by the bride and bride'grooin, with the
Iwlp of Mantras, li very much more 90

37. According to the injunctions nf the
scriptures, the husband should regard fiis
wife as an acq ntilion due |o his own pris*
tine deeds or to what has been ordained
by Ood One, therefore, commits no stii
by accepting lor wife a girl who had beert
promised to another by her kinsmen or for
svltom dower had been accepted by them
from another.


Tudhiehthifa said

28 Wlien after the receipt of dower for
a girl, the girl's father sees a more eligible
bride«gioom — 4ne, who Is endued with the
three>lold objects, does the girl's father
commit sin by rejecting the person from
whom dower had been received tn favor of
him who Is more eligible t

39 In such a case either alternative
appears to be sihful, fot to discard the
person to whom (lie girt has been promised
can never be honorable, while to reject the
person who is more eligible Can never be
good I ask, how shoald the father act so
that he might be said to do that which is
beneilciat? lo us, of all duties this seems
to deserve utmost deliberation.

30 We are desirous of determining the
truth. You, Indeed, are our eyes. Do you
explain this to us I am never satiated
I with listening to you.


Bhisbrnu said —

31 The gift of the dower does not maka

the gni wife Ihis is well known lo Ihe
person paying u He pays il aimpfy as lfi«
price oJ the girl then again the good
never bestow their daughters induced by
the dowers that others may offer.

3*”“33 When the person destrous of
marrying happens to be gifted with such
qualities as do not go down with the virl's
kinsmen, It IS then that ktn„ne., demand
dower tmm him. the p-rsoii h merer, wlm
won ever by another’s accomph.hments,
says —Do you marry my g,rl adornng her
with proper ornaments 0/ gofd and uems —
5'''® d'ls request.

Miinoi be said lu demand dower or grre it
f^such a Iran, action „ not a salef fhe
Smivt * “P®'' ««piance of

SJ'S, - e.r.. ..

sa?Ll "’»fnage, somefathers

and socJi a person, some saV— 1 shall not
besmwmy daugUer «ppn su%h‘a ^ne -
say forcibly— J must bestow
, my daughter upon such an individual.


35 lliese dfdarailans are ndt tAnta* *
tnoiiiU to actiiatmarriage People are seen
to solicit oiie .<nnt)ier for liie ftands of
tnaidetis. III! the hand Is aclUally talcen
\viili due riles, marriage does not happen
We have heard that even tins was the boon
granted to Yiien formerly by the MarUts
oboul maidens.


36 I he Risliis have laid the command
tipon all men that maidens shodid never be
bestowed upon persons unless the father are
eh)>ible 1 he daughter is the root bf desire
and of descendants of Uie collateral line
llns IS what I think. |

37. 1 he practice of sate and purchase of
llie daughter, has been known to human
beini.s for a tong nme On account of swch
familiarity with the practice, iou may be
able, upon careful examinaiiout to find
innumerable faults in it. I he gift or
acceptance of dower alone could nut be
considered as creating the teUiioii of hus-
band and wife. Listen to what I say on
this head

38. t^ormkily, having defeated all the
magadhas, tlie Kashts, and Ihe Koshalas
1 brought away by (otce two inaideus lor
Vichitraviryya.


39 One of those two maidens was
Vnatried with due rues. 1 he other lhaiden
was not formally married on tlie
ground that slie was one for whom dower
had been paid In the shape of chivalry
My uncle of Kuru's race, vit , king
V.«lliika. Said that the rhaideii so brought
awa) and not married with due rues
should be liberated. 1 liat maiden, Ihere-
lore, was recoiiiineiided to Vichltravirsya
for being married by him according to
due rues. ^ j **


40> Doubting my father’s words 1 went
to others for asking their opinion |
thought that my fattier was exceedingly
punctilious in matters of morality

41. I then went to rtly father himself.
U king, and addressed him these words
from desire ol knowing something about
the practices of pious people in respect ol
“isitiage‘-t wish, O sire, to know what
I truth ilio praciices are of


in truth tlio praciices are of ri^hli
people -_J repeatedly expressed my a
Such was my eagerness and ctiiioaiiv


‘IJ—43 Alter 1 had uttered tlmsa wordi
U.at foiemast of pious men, •«. . mt
latter Valhka. answered me. saymg.J
If m jeuf opinion the relation of hus
band and wile belongs to the gift an.
acceptance of dower and «nt to the actiia
lalonif of the msiden’s hand with dui
*s, ti.o father ol ilie ma den would sitov
iinntcli lu be il e fvtiowcr o| a creed otlici


than that Which comes from lliC ordirary
scriptures Ihts is what the accepted
scriptures say.

44. Persons conversant with morality
and duty do Pot hold that their words are
at all authoritative who say |1iai“ the
relation of husband and wile arises troiA
the gift and acceptance of dovVer, and not
from the actual taking of the hand with
due rites. , > 1

45 ”lhe saying is well known that the
relation of Inwband and wife is created
by actual bestowal of the daughter by ihS
father. 1 he relation of wife is not formed
ihroiigh sale and purchase. 1 hey wild
consider Such status to be due to sate and
the gift of dower are persons who ard
certainly unaerluatnted with the scrip-
tures.


46 No one should bestoW his dauglilet
upon such persons In fact, they are not
men sViih whom one may marry his
daughter. A wife should never be pilr-
chased. Nor should d falhej sell hts
oaugUter. I '

47- Only thoseainrul persons who atd
possessed, besides, by cupidity, and wh&
Sell and purchase female SlaVeS for rttakin^
them servants, consider tl e relation of^
wife as capable of originating from ih^
gift and acceptance of dower.

48— 49 On this Subject some people ort
one occasion had asked prince Satyaval
the following question —If the giver of a
dower to the kinsmen of u maiden iiappeny
to die before marriage, can another person
lake the hand of that maiden m marriage t
We have doilbis on this matter. Do >oU
remove these doubts of ours for you am
gifted with great wisdom ahd are honored
by the wise.


S®~*Sf Be jou the eyes to ourselves
who are desirous of learning the truth —
Prince Saiyavat answered, saying,— Ih4
kinsmen of the maiden should bestow her
upon him wh >m they consider proper.
Jliere need be no scruples in this. I he
righteous act thus without caring lor
the giver of the dower even if he be alive I
while, about the giver who is dead, there
IS not the slightest doubt.


irrUge has not
her husband bv


widow —one,

been consummated with
actual sexual intercourse on arcntinc
I IS absence or drail.,— i.nay be alliwedto
unite herself with her husband’s younger
brother or such other relHiioii. lie hus-
band d>mg briore such -consuinmaiinn.
the virs,ui-wid >w may either surrender
hersell to her liushand'i jounger brother
or practise penances.


AHUSllAS^HA PARVA


115


sj In tlie opinion of some, the >ouncer

brother of the husband or «iich other rela-
tion may tfms use the v.rgm wife o'
though others hold that sue p '

Ihoueh It IS frequent, orit:m»te» ‘***''*

lli^tead of be!!,« a

'Ihev who say so arec'eaily of

i e faO.er of a imtideit has the right 10
bestow fier upon any eligible person, dis-
regardmg ihe^ S'ven by

anotlier and accepted by himself

c:* K after the hand of a maiden has ,

b„„ p'”™’"* X

"m bj'c.vfn 10 .1 porso"

10 .bom .1.0 baJ bofi proimioH. Ooly cbc
C,„r oommil. ‘

however, as the relation of wife is concern
cd no injury can occur ihereto.

55 I he Mantras of marriage

pb” Ib.ir ob|.ot ol bPOi'-P
loJiLoloUe union ol

seirenth sieo. Ihc maiden becomes the
wife of him to whom the gdt ts actually
made wiih water.

ert 1 he ctfl «f meiJens thauld be made
in^lhe following way. the wise
Joiiooth. A superior nralimana
marrya maiden who 11 not ^®

befuigs 10 a family equal «o bis
purity or digniyr. and who 1 given »*»> by
I er biothrr. Such a girl should be
111 the presence of fire, with due flies,
causing her. amongst other ‘bmgs. to go
round ilie bridegroom for the usual number
of limes.


CHAPTFR XI.V.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CenhnutJ.

Yodhislitbira said s—

I. If a person, afier having given
dower for a maiden, goes away, howi sioould


Commanded by her lather, the ptin-
cess Savitri had m days of old chosen a
husband and united herself with him. 1 Ins
act of li-rs 15 praised by some , but others,
conversant with the scriptures, condemn i*,
e Others who are ricfiteous have not
acted thus. Others maintain that the con-
duct of the righteous should ever be consi-
dered as the foremost evidence of duty or
morality.

6 Upon this subject. Suhralu, if a
crand son of the great Jauaka, the king
of the Vldeliai, lias deefared the fallowing
opinion.

7. There is the wefi known injunction
of the scriptures that women can enjoy
freedom at any period of their life. If this
were not the path of the viriunus, how could
this scriptural saying exist T As regards II e
pious, iheiefore, how can there be an) ques-
UOA Of doubt about itT How can people
condemn that saying by ctioosiog to con-
duct themselves otherwise!

8 Tile impious violation of eternal
practice is considered as llie practice of
the Asuras. We never hear of such practice
m the conduct of tlie ancients

9 The relaiiontliip of husband end
..lie It very lubtde. It is different from the
natural relationship of male and female
which consists only in the desire for sexual
intercourse. This also was said by the king
of Janaka’s race.

TndbiBbthira eaid —

10. Under what authority is the property
men inherited (by others when they
happen to have daughters)! As for iter
father the daughter should be considered
the same as the son.


e maiden's father or other

in be»t6w her, act 7 L)o
randlait er T


kinsmen who
tell me llis, O


Bbisbma said —

3 Such a maiden, if she be the
daughter of a srudess and itch fall er.
shrnld he maintained by the father, trideed,
it il>e father does not return ihe dower 10
l! c kinsmen el l' e giver, tlie maiden should
(•e eonvidercd as belonging to (he giver
ll c dower.

a S1« may even raise children for the
giver by any ol these means that arc laid
dewn in ilw scriptures. No person, how-
ever, can marry her according to due ntes.


Bbisbma said

I. The son is even at one's own self,
and the daughter ts like the son. How,
therefore, can another lake the riches when
one lives in liis owrself m tl e form of las
daughter T

i. Whatever is the own property of the
mother, is due to the maiden daughter. If
the maternal grandfather happens to die
without leaving sons, the daughter's son
should inh-rit it.

13 The daughlet's son offers funeraf
cakes to hii own father and the father of
lismothcr. Hmee, for the ends of justice,
tiere is no difference between the son and
the daughter s son. >

14. When a person has got only a
daughter and she lias been invested by him
with the poiilion of a son. if he iheis tup.
I bens <0 have a san, such son shares the


114


KtAlIAOirARATA.


intieriiance nilli tlie cJ^tghtcr. When 1
a^^ain, a person hat a dai>(;hter and I
she lias been invested by him xitlli the j
posKion of a son, if he then happens to '
tahe a sen I 5 adoption or purchase, then
the dau^t ter is considered superior to such

15 In the followiner case T do ml see
any reason why the dau(;liler's son si ould
be considered as tie proper heir, the
case IS that of the dauithter who has been
sold by her fatlier 1 he sons born of ar
daugliter who has been sold by her sire for
acis1.1l price, belong exclusively to their
fatlier buch sons c-in never belong, even as
daiightei's sons, to their inaiernal grand*
father on acconnt of Ins having told their
mother for price and fast all his rights tn
or to her by that deed.

16 SucI) sons, again, become full of
malice, impious in conduct, the rnisappro*
priators of other people's riches, and full
of deceit and cunning Having onginaled
from that sinful form of marriage called
Atura, the offspring becomes wicRed in*
conduct.

17 Persons acquainted with ancient
history, conversant with duties, devoted (0
the scriptures and hrm in maintaining the
restrictions tlierein laid down, recite in ihrs
connection some verses sung in da^s of yore
by Yama.

ig Tins is what Yama had sung. That
man wlio acquires riches by selling lus own
.sun, or who bestows his daughter after
acerptingn dower for his own livelihood,
has to sinh in seven dreadiul hells one after
another, known by the name of Kalas.
T here that wretch has to feed upon sweat
and urine and stools during that period.

20 In that form of marriage which is
called Arsha ihe person who marries has
to |,tve a bull and a cow and Ihe father of
tlie maiden accepts the gift Some charac
tense this gift as a dower (or price), vhile
some are of opinion that it should not be
considered in that light Ihe true opinion,
however, is that a gift for such a purpose,
be It of small value or large, should, O
king, be considered as dower or price, and
the bestowal of the daughter under such
circumstances should be considered as a
sale.

21. Despite the fact of Its having been
practised by a few persons it can never be
taken ns the eternal practice Ollier forms
of niairiage are seen, practised by men,
such as marrying girls after carrying them
away by force from amidst their kinsmen.

22 Those persons who have sexual in- '
tercourse with a maiden, by force are con- '


sidered as perpetrators of sm. They havf
to sink III darkest hell.

2J I^ven a human being who is not a
relation of bfood should not be sold What
need then be said of one's own child 7 Witii
the riches tlial IS acquired by doing sinful
deeds no meiitonous deed can be per^
formed.


CflAPFER XLVI.

{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Coiiltiiued,

Btislniia said

1. they who know the ancient history
recite the following vferse of D’aksha ih^
son of Pmclietas, vte , — 1 hat inardert, foC
whom nothing is UWen by her kinsmen I't
Ihe form of dower, cannot be ,said to be
sold.

7 Honor good treatment, and every <
thing else which is agreeable, should all
be given to tlie maiden whose hand is
taken in marriage.

3 Her father end brothers and father*
in-law and husband's brothers should shovT
her every respect and adorn her with orna*
ments, 11 they be desirous of reaping bene*
fils, for aoch conduct on their part always
produces considerable happiness and ad*
vantage.

4 If the wife does not like her husband
or fails to please him, from such dislike and
absence of joy, the husband can neVer
have children for increasing his family.

5 Women, O king, should always be
adored and treated with love. Ihere where
women are treated with honor, the very
gods are said to be propitiated.

6 There where women are not adored,
all acts become fruitless. If the women of
a family, on account of the treatment they
receive, indulge in grief and tears, that
family soon becomes exlinct.

7. Those houses which are cursad by
women meet with destruction and rum a*
if scorched by some Atharvan me. Such
houses lose their splendour. I heir growth
and prosperity cease, O king.

8 Manu, on the eve of his departure
from this world made over women to the
care and protection of men, saying that
they are weak, that they fall an easy prey
lo the seducliou of men, disposed to accept
the love which is offered them, and devoted
to ttulli.


AdUSfUS^NA PAUVA


Thera are olbers among them who

tionor. ,

vaur wills before them

<r The begetling of children, the nur-

«„J’ of cl.iidrcn already born, and ac-
*n.^phshmcnt of all "'f *“^hive

Ibe needs of society, see. all these Have
women for their cause.

T2 By respecting women, ye are sure to

. pn.-c«. oi Ih.'.hou.. <■!

Z o? Ih. V.deh.s, «.nB . v.r.e- H
M this — • .

It Women have no savnfices ordained

,hey .rc cU.il upon 1. P"';'™
not required to oberve any fails to «««
tlietr husbands wish respect and willing
rtedience form their oujy duly. Through
(he salisfaciioii of that duty they succeed in
*onquecuig Heaven.

,1 In childhood. Use father protects
her The husband protects her •■•youth
When she becomes old, her sons protect
her. At no period of her hfe is woman free.

IS Women are denies of prosperity
The person that desires affluence and
prosperity should honor them. By cherish-
ing women. O Bharaia. one chernhes he
goddess of prosperity herself, and hy alHiCt-
ing her, oiic « said to pain Ihe goddess of
prosperity.


JfS

„ desirous of treading along the path of
duty and virtue.

» It has been laid down. O grand-
.h« . Brahm.,,,

Wives, vt* , one who belongs to Ins own
caste, one who is a *

Vaishya, and one who is a Shudra. if the
Brahmaiia wishes to satisfy the desire of
sexual intercourse.

e tell me, O best of the Kurus, which
amongst those sons slioulJ mlierit the
faihcr'a riches one after another.

d Who amongst them O grandfather
shall take what share of the paternal
«cakh T I wish to hear this, vi> , »>0'v
distributioii has been ordained amongst
(hem of the ptiernal property.


CHAPTER XLVH.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

Continued,

Yudhislitliira said I

1 You know fully well itie ordinances
cl all the scriptures Vou are the foremost
of those who are acqiiamied with the
dunes of kings You are celebrated over
the whole world as a great remover of
doubts.

3 I have a doubt, do you wpUin it to
me, O grandfather As regards this doubt
that has originated in my mind I shall not

ask any other person for its solution

3 You should, O you of mighty arms,
expound as to how a man should act who


BhisUmA said

V the Brahmans, the KshaUiya, and
the Vaishya are considered the three twice-
boro castes lo marry m these three castes
has been ordained to be tlie duty of the
Brahmana, O Yudhishilnra
8 Through erroneous | nlgmcnl or cupi-
dity or lust. O destroyer of enemies, *
Brahmana takes a Shudra wife He is not
competent to lake, according to the scrip-
lures, such wife.

g A Brahmana, by knowing a Shudra
wiman enmes by a low end in llie next
world He should, having done such an
act, perform expiation according to the
rites Uid down in tlie scriptures

10 That expiation musk be twice
heavier or severer if on account of such an
1 act, O Yudhishihira, the ;Bra!imana gels
^ children 1 shall now tell you, O Bliaraia,
howihe(paiernal) wealth is to be distributed.

The son born of the Brahmani wife
shall in the first place, appropriate from
his father's wealth a bull of good marks,
and the best car or vehicle.

13 What remains of the Brahmana's
property O Yudlushthira, after tins, should
be divided into ten eq lal pans 1 he son by
tlie Brahmani wife shall take four of such
parts of the paternal property.

13 Tlie son tliat is born of tli^ Ksha-
Iriya wife is, forsooth, possessed of the
status of a Brahmana On account, how-
ever, of the distinction attaching to Ins
mother, he shall take three olthe ten shares
into which the property has been divided.

14 The son who has been born of the
wile belonging to the third caste, vtg , I'le
woman of the Vaishya caste, by the Brah.
mana father, shall take, O Yudliishtliira,
two of the three remaining shares of the
father's property.


MAIIA8IIARATA.


ii6

15 It lias been said that the son who
lias been begotten by tlie Orahmana lather
upon the bUudta should not take any
portion of the father’s property, for be a
not to be considered an heir. A liiife, bo«r-
ever, of the paternal property should be
given to the son of the Shudra wife, hence
tti£ one remaining share sliould be given to
him out of compassion.

16. Even this should be the order of the
ten shares into which the Brahmana's
wealth IS to be distributed. Ail the sons
that aie born of the same mother or of
mothers of tlie same caste, shall share
eqiahy the portion that is theirs,

ly. The son born of the Shudra wife
should not be considered as invested with
the dignity of a Orahmana on account of
ins being unskilled (in the scriptures and
the duties ordained for llie Brahinana)
Only those cliildren who are born of wives
belonging to the three higher castes should
be considered as invested with the dignity
of Brahmanas.

t8. It has been said that there are only
four castes and there IS no fifth. The son
by the Shudra wife shall take the tenth part
of his father’s wealth.

19 That share, however, he is to lake
only when his father has given it to him
tie shall not take it if Ins father does
not give It to him. Sorne oortiott of the
father’s riches shoutd, forsooili, be given, O
Bharaia, to the son of the Shudra wife.

30. Compassion is one of the greatest
virtues. It IS through compassion that
eometlnng is given to the son of ihe Shu-tra
wife. Whatever be the obiect about winch
compassion arises, as a cardinal virtue it is
aliva}s productive of merit.

31. W’heiher (he father happens to have
children (by I is wives belonging (o the
other castes) or to have no children, to
the son by ibe Sliudra wife. O Uharata.
iioibing more than a tenlh part of the
father’s wealth should be given.

32. If a Drahmana happens to have
more riches than what is necessaiy for
maintaining himself and Ins family for three
years, lie should with (Imc riches celebrate
sacnfiees .\ Urahmana should never
Bcqune tidies lor nothing.

33. Tlie I ighest sum (hat'tbe liusbsnd
should give tlie wife Is lliree thousand coins
'tins weallh'that the husband gites to the
wi’e the latter may spend or dispose of as
she likes,

34 Upon tl e death of the childless bus*
ban 1 ttie wi'e stiall enioy all Ins riches
n.<* w !« sho »IJ never lake any portion of
I tf t Jtlaiil s richts.


*5 Whatever riches O Yudliishiliifa,
the Orahmant wife may acq lire by gift bom
bee father, should be taken by tier daughtw,
for the daughter is like the son

26 The daughter, O king, has been
ordained in the scriptures to be equal to
the son, O dehghler of the Kurus thus
has the law of inheritance been ordained, O
foremost of Biiarala’s family. Uemeinber-
iiig these ordinances about the disinbuiion
and disposal of wealth, one should never
acquire riches uselessly,

Tndhislithira said

27 If the son born of a Shiirfra woman
by a Orahmana father lias been made in
the scriptures to be disenUtled to any pro*
perty , by what exception of the rule tlien is
a tcnib part of the paternal property to be
given to him T

3S A son born of a Brahmani wife by a
Brahmana is unquestionably a Brahman*.
One born of a Kshatriya wife or of a
Vaishya wife, by a Brahmana husband, la
likewise a Ocalimana,

29 Why then, O best of kings are
such sons to share tlie palernsl properly
unequally? All of them, you have sail,
are Brahmanas, having been born of
mothers that belong to the three hiijher
castes equally entitled to the name of the
twice^born.

: Bhishma said

30. O destroyer of enemies, all wives 1
this world are called by the name of D<r-<
Abliough that name is applied to al
yet iherc is tins great di^erence to t
observed.

31. If having married three wives be
loii<ing to the tliree other castes, a Orah
tnana takes a Brahmani wife the very U’
ol all, yet shall she be considered as l'*
first III rank among all the wives and •
being woriliy of the greitest respect. In
deed, among all the co wives, she sli >11 b
Ihe foremost.

3*. In her apartments should be kep
all necessaiy aitides lor the husband’
baths personal decorations, washing "
leeih. mj apphcstiju of coll>fiuin lo th
e»e*. lu her apartments should be kept th
Havya and tlie Kavya and all eNe that th*-

lusband may need lor the perf on* »nce ol

ms religious acts.

33 If the Orahmaiii wife is in the bouse,
no other wife it entitled to aileiid lO thei«
needs of the limbtnd. O ily the Rrahm*"!
wi’e. O Vudliitluhira, s'lauli hdp the hJ.*
usiid in these acts.


AMUSKASAKA PARVA.


34 The luuband's food and drmk and i
ga lands and dresses and ornamenia — -all
these should be given by the Brahmam
wife 10 Ibe husband, for she is the fore*
roost in rank among all the wives of the
husband,

35 these are the ordinances of the
scriptures as laid down by Mann, O
delighter of the Kurus' llns, O km^ is
seen to be the course of eternal practice

36 If a Brahmana, O Yudhishthira,
actuated by lust, acts road fferent way. he
shall come to be considered as a Chandata
among Bralimanas.

37. The son born of the Ksbalriya wife
has been said to be equal in dignity to the
son bom of the Brahinani wife For all
tl at, a distinction attaches to tfie son of the
Drahmani wife on account of the superiority
of the Brahmana wife to the Kshauiya wife
in respect of the order of caste.

3d the Kshatiiya wife cannot be con*
sidered as eq lal to (he Brahmana wife
in point of birth Hence, O best of kings,
t> e son born of the Dralimam wife must
be considered as tlie Rrst in rank and
superior to the son born of the Kshatriya
wife


45 The Kshatriya, as tlie king, becomes
the protector or rescuer of all ll e castes,
fleiiCe (he son of the Ksfialnya wife shaff,
forsooth, be held to be superior to him that
IS born of the Vaishya wife the son of
Ksliaifiya wife for this takes a larger share
of the paternal properly than the son of
the VatsHya moifier.

TadhishthirA said —

46 Vou have duly said what the rules
are thatapply to Bralimanas Wnat, how*
ever, are t>ie rules that apply to the others 7

Bhiflhma said —

47 Ihe Kshatriya, O delighter 0! the
Kutuscan take two wives Ihe Kshatriya
may take a third wife from the Shudra
caste Such practice prevails, it is true, but

: >t IS not saiiciioiied by the scriptures
I 48 1 his should be the order, O YudhI*

shihira, of the wives of 3 Kshatriya. Tfie
property of a Kshatriya should, O king,
be divided into eight shares

49 The son of (he Kshatriya wife shaff
I take lour of such shares of Ihe paternal
property, the son of the Vaishya wife
I shall take three of such shares .


39 Because, again, the Kshatriya wife,
IS not equal m point of birdi (o the Brah.
mani wile hence the son oi the Brahmans
wife takes one after another, all the best
things, O Yudliisthira, among liis father's
property

40 Likewise, the Vaishya wife cannot
be considered as the equal o( the Kshatriya
wife in point ef birch Frosperily, kingdom
and treasury, O Yudhisihira, belong to the
Kahalityss

41. All these have been ordained for the
Kshatriya ihe whole Earth O king, en*
circled by seas, Is seen |o belong to him.
By f Hawing the dunes of his own caste,
the Kshatriya acquires immense riches

42, The scrptre 0/ royalty is held by
him Without the Kshatriya, Q king,
there can be no proteclion Ihe 8r«b*
manas are highly blessed, for they are the
gods of the very detiies

43 rollowing the ordinances laid down
by (he Rishis the Kshatriyas should adore
the Brahmanas according to due rites
1 his IS the eternal usage.

44. Coveted by thieves and others, the
properties of all men are protected by
Kstiatriyas following the duties of (heir
order Indeed, riches and wives end e^ry
other possession owned by people would
iiave been forcibly taken away b It for (his
proucuon that (he Ksliatfijas give.


5« Ihe remaining one or the eighth
share shall be taken by the son of the
Shudra wife The son of the Shudra wife,
however, shaff take only when Ihe father
gives but not otherwise
51. The Vaishya can lake only one wife.
He can take a second wife from the Shudra
caste Such is the practice, no doubt, but it
M not sanctioned by the scriptures.

5* If a Vaishya has two wives one of
whom IS a Vaishy* and the otlier a Shudra.
there is a difference between them in res-
pect of position.


..... . OI a V aisnya, u chief of

Biiarata s race, should be divided into five
portion* f shall now speak of the sons of
a Vaishya by a wife of hu own caste and
by one ^longing to the inferior caste, as
, also ut the miimer m which. O kmg. I, is

chiffr^n '* among those


«i..ri< 1 r onrn ot tne Vaish3awife
ahalf take four of such shares of hi* paler*

IhlLifcf skall take when

sl'ould not lake any.
rhe'^snn ? S'-es It to him.

bv oe^n »M* o" a Shudra w,fe

a^lia^h ' 'ifher castes should


MAtfABHAaATA.


56 Tlie Sljudra sliotild take Aniy One
wile from Ins own caste He can, ender no
circumstances, take any other wife Even
if he happens to liave a hundred sons by
this wife all of them share eq tally the
property that he may leave behind
57 As for all the castes, the children
born of the wife taken from the husband’s
own caste shall, 11 has been laid down,
share eq tally llie father’s wealth.

5$ The eldest son's share shall be
pfeaier than that of every other son, { tr he
shall take one share more than each of his
brothers, [comprising the best things of this
father. 1 his is the law of inheritance, O son
of Pritha, as declared by the Scif-create
himself.

59. Amongst childreil all born of th*
wile taken from the husband's own caste*
there is another difference, O king! In
niarrjing, the elder ones should always
precede the younger ones
60 The wives being all equal In respect
of their order of birth, and the children
also I eing all eq lal in respect of ^he posi«
tion of their mothers, (he son that is first*
born shall take one share more than each
of Ins other brothers Ihe son who is next
in point of age shall take a share that is
next in value, white the son who is young*
esi shall lake the share which belongs to
the youngest

6t. Thus among wivesof all castes, the^
who belong to the same caste with the hus-
band are considered as the first. This 1$
what was declared by the great Rishi
Kashjapa the son of Matichi.


CHAPTER XLVHI,


4 The Brahmana may lake four wives,
one from eac'i of the four castes In two
of them, he t-ikrs birth himself Those sons
however, who are begotten by him on the
two other inferior, (vts , Vaisliya and
Sliudra), are inferior, tlieir position being
settled not by that of tlieir father but by
that of their mothers,

5 The spn begotten by a Brahmana
upon a Shudra wife is called Parashava,
meaning one born of a dead body for llie
Sliudra woman's body is as rnauspicious as
a dead body. He should serve the persons
of Ins '(father's) 'race. Indeed, it is not
proper far him to renounce the duty of
setvice that has been faid down for him

6 With all means tn his power, he
should maintain hts family. Even if he
happens to be elder m age, he should still
dutifully serve the other children of his
father, who in age may be younger to him,
and give them wliatever he may succeed w
acquiring

7 A ICshatriya miy take three wives
In two of them, he takes birth himself Hi*
third Wife being of the Slmdra caste, u
considered as very inferior Ihe son that
he begets upon her is called an Ugra,

8 'Ihe Vaishya may take two wives It
^th of them, he takes birth himself. The
Shudra can take only one wife, from In*
own caste 1 he son begotten by liim tipot
her becomes a Shudra.

9 A son who takes birth under circum-
stances other titan tliose mentioned above,
IS considered as a very inferior one If a
persen of a lower caste begets a son upon
a woman of a superior caste, such son is^
regarded as outside the pale of the four
pure castes Indeed, sucli son becomes an
object of derision with the four principal
castes.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
Conftnued.

TndbUhtbira said'—

1. The intermixture of castes is brought
about througli inducemeiils offered by rich-
es, or through mere lust, or through ignor-
ance of the true order of biilh

3 What. O grandfather, are the duties
of persons who are born m ihe mixed
classes and what are the acts laid down foi
them ? Do you describe them to me.

Bbisbma said —

3 In the beginning, the I.ard of all
creMures created the (our castes and laid
awific^" fof the »»ke ol


10 If a Ksliatriya begets a son upon
a Brahmani woman, sucli son, without
being included m any of the four pure
castes comes to be considered as a Suta.
The duties of a Suta consist in reciting
eulogies and encomiums of kings and other
grwat men ihe son begotten by a Vaishys
upon a woman of the Bralimana< order,
IS known as a Vnidehaka Their duties
ronsist In taking charge of bars and boh*
for protecting the privacy of women of
respectable families Such sons have no
purifying rites laid down tor them.

It If a Shudra knows a woman be-
longing to the foremost of the four castes,
the son that « begotten is called a Chan-
daU. Endued with a dreadful disposilion.
he must live in the oiitslcirls of cities and
towns and hn duty is that of the public


ahushasana parva.


no


tJtectiliontr Such sons are always con-
st lered as wretches of Iheir race. Iliest,
O foremost of inltll/f'enl persons, are the
offspring of itiiermixetl Castes.

12. The son beioUen by a Valshya
iipon a Kshitri)a woman becomes a Vandi
Or MagaJbi. Ifis duties are eloquent
recitations of prats*. Ihe son begotten
through transgress}}]!, by a Shui^a upon a
Kshatriya woman, becomes a Nishada and
fits duties consist m tfie catdnng of fish. .

15. 1 / a Sliudra happens to know a
Vaishya woman, the son begotten upon
Iter comes to he Cuffed Ayogava the
duties of such a person are those of a car-
penter. Ihe Urahmana should never
accept gifts from such a person, ihey
are not entitled to possess any kind of
riches.

r 4 . Persons belonging lo (li« mixed
’csstes beget upon wives taken Irorn iheir
iown castes ctiildren invested with their
jposition. When they procreate clnljren in
[women taken from ottier Inferior castes,
fsnch cliiMren become Inferior to their
(fathers, (or they become invested with
the position of their mothers.

15. 1 hus as regards the four pure castes,
persons beget children invested with their
own position upon wives taken from their
own castes as also upon them that are
taken from the castes immedtatrly beUw
(heir own, When, however, offspring is
begotten upon otlier wives, (hey are re-
garded as invested with a eosnion that ts,
principally, outside the pale of Ihe (our
pure castes.

16. When such children beget ions fn
women, taken from (heir own classes, ((>ose
sons lake (he position of their lailtcrs. It is
only when iliey take wives from castes
oti er than their own, that lie children
tliry brgel, become invested with Inferior
posilhil.

rr. At an example of this tc may be
said that a Shudra begets upon a woman
belonging 10 the most superior caste a s*n
Ihst vs outside the pale of the four catirs
1 he ton that is outside tl e pale of the four
Casiff. by uriiing •dli nvnien tefongSng
(« the tour p<incp4] castes brgets ofl.
spitng t)ut IS fuiiher tfegradrd m poitsi of
position.


tS rrom those outside the pale el lie
I ur castrs and those again that ara further
euiside that iunii, children mohipfy <
aceoofM cl the umcis el persena w,ih aromen
elerjs.easuper.jr 10 them own 1 hot, from
resisnsnt pes Lcn classes spimw

‘P atecesitf ffieen umber, are
rq'Jily luw or aid I.acc m d gnity.


19. It It only ffom cexual union wiib
teoanen uf persont who should not have
sdeb Union with them that mi*ed castee
origiifate. Among the classes that are
thus outside (he hnti( of the fuur principal
or pore castes, childien are begotten upon
woinan belonging to the clast called
Sairindhri by men of iJie class called
Magadha.

30. riieoceupaii n of such children is
(he adorenrenc ol (he bodies of kings and
others, they are well acquainted with the
prrparalion of unguents, the making of
garlanrla and .the nianulaclure of articles
used (or the decoration ol the body.
1 (tough free by the position that belongs
, to them by biiih, they should live like
servants Prom the union ol Magadhas of
a (ceriain class with women of the caste
catted Sairindliri, another caste originates,
called Ayogava. fheir business con*
sists in the making of nets. Vatdehas. by
knowing Sairindhri women, beget children
Called Alaireyakay whose business is Aie
manufacture ol wines and spirits.

21. Prom the Nisliadas oilgmate a caste
cilled Madgura t»d another known by (he
name ol Daaas wliose business is plying
boats. Pioin the Chsndatas Oriptinales a
race called Shwap^ka wlioae business lies
in keeping guard over the dead

22 Ihe women of the MagadhS caste,
by union with these {four castes ol wirksd
nature, produce four others who live by
deceitful means I hese are .Maugsa, Swa*
dukara, Kihaudra, and Sougandlia.

23 From the Vaideha originates cruel
end Sinful casie that lives by practising
deception. Frorn the Nithadas again
onguiaies Ihe Madranabha caste srliose
members are seen to nde on cars drawn by
asses

a4- From the ChandaUs cngmales the
caste called Pnlikasa wl ose members are
see* to eat the flesh of asses, horses and
elephants, n.ese arc clad m efothes, pro-
cured by stripping human corpses Kiev
are again seen to eat oH Iroacn earthen.


23 Th»»* three castes of very hv

origin, ye born of women of the Avvava

castes) The caste called Ksl udia ormi.
naief from (le V'aidehala. The caste
wiled Andhra w1 id. live, ,},e eot,k,r {5

NSri«’

te rV K.r.var. From
kwwn by the name of Pandusaupaka


\20


ttMt\Dt!ARATA.


wliose business U (0 m:4ke b-4&ket5 and
other things with cleft bamboos.

ij. From the union of the Nishada with
a woTian of the Vaidehi caste, orii;niates
one who IS called by (he name of Ahindaka.
the Chaitdala begets upon a Saupaka
Women a son wlio does not dilTer from the
Chandala in pasiiion or occupation.

2S A Nishadi woman, by union with a
Chandata, produces a son wlio lives in (he
outskirts of villages and towns. Indeed,
the members of such a caste live in ere*
inatona and are considered by the very
lowest orders as incapable of being classed
among them.

39 Thus do these mixed castes ongi*
nate from improper and sinful union of
fathers and mothers belonging to different
castes Whether they live hidden or open*
ly, they should be known by their occupa*
tions.

30 The duties have been ]«td down in
the scriptures ol only the four principal
castes About olliets, the scriptures are
entirely silent. Among all the castes, the
members of those castes that have no duties
assigned to them by the scriptures, need
entertain no feats as to what they do.

31. Persons unaccustomed to the per*
formanee of sacrifices or for whom sacrihees
have not been Uid down, and who are de*
prived of the company and the mstriietions
of the pious, whether classed among the (our
principal castes or out of tlieir limit, by
uniting themselves wnh women of oilier
castes, led not by considerations of viitne
but by uncontrolled lust, cause numerous
mixed castes to originate whose occupations
and houses depend on the circumstances
connected with the irregular unions from
which they spring.

3J. Having recourse to such places
where four roads meet, or crematoria, or
hills and mountains, or forests and trees,
they build their houses Ihc ornaments
they wear are made of iron.

33 Living in such places, openly, (of*
lowing their own occupations for acquiring
livelihood I hey may be seen to live thus,
adorning their persons with ornaments and
engaged id the work of manufacturing
various domestic and other utensils.


34 Forsooth, by assisting kme and
Brahmanas and practising the virtues of
abstention from cruelty, compassion, truth*
fulness of speech, and forgiveness, and if it
IS necessary, protecting others by sacrificing
their own lives persons ol the mixed castes,
may acquire success. 1 have mo doubt, O
Umg that these virtues become the causes of


36. Hewhois gifted with intelligenc*,

slioufd, taking ever) thing into consideration,
beget children according to the scriptural
Mijurict ions, Upon women that have bern
declared as proper or dl for him A son
begotten upon a woman belonging to a de-
graded caste, instead of rescuing tlie father,
brings him to grief even as a heavy burden
brings to grief a swimmer desirous of cross-
ing a pool of water.

37. Whell er a man is learned orclher-
wise, lust and anger are natural lemJencies :
of humanity in this world Women, thete* j
lore, may always be seen to drag men into 4
the svrong path,

38 Ibe disposition of women is such that
man’s contact with her produces misery
Hence, wise men d) n it all iw themselves to
be excessively attached to women.

Tudhisbthira said —

39. 1 here are men who belong to the

mixed castes, and who are of very impure
birth. Putting respectable appearance,
they are, in sooth, disrespectable On
account ol those external signs we may net
be able to know the truth about their birth
Are there any signs, O grandfather, by
which the truih may be known about tlis
origin of such men 7

Shisbm a said —

to. A person who is born of an Irregular
union shows various features of disposition-
One’s piiriiy of birth, again, fs to be deter-
mined from one's acts which must resemble
the acts of those who are admittedly gee*^
and pious-

41. A disrespectable conduct, acts op-
posed to those laid down in the senplureSi
crookedness and cruelty, and abstention
from sacrifices and other scripliiral ac
that lead to merit, show one's impurity <
birth.

4J A son inherits the disposition
eitlier (he father or the mother. Son}'
limes he inherits the dispositions of botl
A person of impure birth can never succee
in concealing his true nature.

43. As the cub of a tiger resembles il
fattier and dam in form and in stripes e
spots, so a person cannot but show (he cir
cumstande of Ins origin.

44> However secret may one’s birth b«

if that birth happens to be impure, 't
character or nature is sure to show itsel
slightly or largely.

45* A person may for purposes of hi
own, choose to follow an insincere path,
practising such conduct as seems to be
pious. His own nature, however, m the


MAIIaBHAHaTA.


lhe«e kinds of sons eqml ? Whose, •('am,
IS the son to bet Do you tell me this, O
grandlailier.

BhisUma said ,

13 Hi^istliesnn from whose seed he
has sprung it, however, the owner of tlie
seed discards the son born of U. snch son
(hen becomes his npan whose wife he has
been be,>otten. I lie same rule applies to
the son called Adhyii ia Me belongs to
tlie person from whose seed he lias sprung
It however, the owner (if tlie seed f irsakes
him, he becomes tlie son of the husband of
I IS mother. Know this is what the Uw
declares.


Yudliislithira said •

14 We know lhat the son becomes his
from whose seed he has laUn birth
Whence does the husband of the woman
who gives birth to the son derive ^is right
in the laitert Luewise the son called
Adhyuda should be known to be the son
of liim from whose seed he has sprung.
How can t 1 ey be the sons of ottiers on ac>
count of the engscefnent about owning and
rearing them having been broKent

Bhishma said:—

15 Me who, having begotten a son of his
own loins Jforsakes him for some reason or
other, cannot be considered as the father of
such son, for vital seed only osnnot create
seiiship Such son must be lield to belong
to the person who is the master of the
sod

16. Wlien a man, desiring to have a son,
marnrs a girl qinck with child, the son
born of Ins wife must belong to him, for it
IS the fruit of his own soil I he person
fr’um whose vital seed tlie son has sprung,
can have no ngl t to such son,

17 The son wlio is born m one's soil
but not begotten by the owner, O chief of
Bliarata's race bears all the maiksof the
Ulher lliat lias actually begoiceii him Hie
son thus born is incapable of concealing the
^evidences of pi ysiogiioiny. He is at once
known by eyesight.


18 As regards the son made, he is
sometimes considered as the child of the
person who has made him a son and who
brings him up In his case neither the
vual seed of which he has been born nor
the soil in winch he has been born, becomes
ihe cause of sons! ip.


Tadliislithira said —

. 19 What kii d of son is that who is
said lo be a madesonaid whosesonship
origiiutes from the fact of his being taken


and reared, and in wtinse case neither llifl
vita! seed nor the soil nf biitli, U Uliaraiai
IS caused as the cause of sonsliip,

Bhislima said:-^

ao. When one takes up and rears a •oil
who has heeti cast oft on ilie road by Ins
father and mother, and when the person
thus taking and rearing Inm canrioi fi id out
his parents after search, he becomes (he
father of such son and the latter becomes
what }$ called hts made son. ‘ '

tt. Not having anybody to own him he
becomes Jus who 'rears him Such son,
again, comes to be considereil as belonging
to (list castes to whicli his owner or rearer
belongs.

Todhishithra gaids—

22. How should the punfactofy rites of
Slid) a person be performed? In whose
case what sort of rites arc to toe performed 1
With what girl should he be married ?
Jell me all this, O grandfather.

Bhiahma gaidt—

33, The riles of piinfiealion for such *
son stiould be performed according lo tha
usage of (he person himself who rears him,
lor, renounced by his parents, such son gets
lire caste of the person who takes him an<i
rears him.

24 Indeed, O you of unfading glory, tli 6
rea(er‘s!ioiild perform all the purificatory
rues for such son according to the practice#
of his own family and kinsmen A*
cards the girl also, O YudiiiNhdnra, that
should be bestowed in maniage upon such

■ a SOM, she should belong lo the caste of ih#
rearer himself.

25 All this IS lo be done only when the
caste of the son's true mother cannot be
leariu Among sons, he who fs born of a
maiden and he who is born of a mother
who had conceived before her marriage but
brought him forth subseq lent to that act,
are considered as very disgraceful and
degraded.

26—27 Even these two, however, should
receive the same rites of purification tiat
are sanctioned for the sons begotten by th«
father III lawful marriage In respect of the
son wl»o becomes his fathers on account of
Ins birth in the fathers soil, and of those
sons who are called Apsadas, and those
conceived by the wife m her maidenhood
but brought forth after marriage Brah-
maitas and others should apply ilie same
riles of purificBliou lliat are in vogue in theif
own castes lliese are the conclusions tlial
are seen in l!>e scriptures about the different


ANUStlASANA PARVA


123


riot

nii'aV


!S 1 liive 115 lold >ou everjlIiMig of
questiwis. WJjat else do you wish lo


CHAPTER L.

(ANUSHASAVJKA PARVA) —

Co»ti»aeJ4

Tudliislithira said:—

1. WlMt IS the nature of the compassion
or pity lh«i IS felt at seeinif the misery of
another T Wliat is the nature of that com-
passion or s}inpailiy that one feels fOr an*
Ollier on account of his living in the com*
psnionship of llial other? Wliat is the
nature of tie siipieine hlessedness of kmc?
You should, O gr^iidf-ither explain *11 this
to me.

Bhishma said —

a i shall, O }<ni of great ef?iclirer»ce,
recite 10 >011 n> this cuniircion hh *ocieit
narrative of a conversation hetiveen N<i>iu
sita nod ll e Hishi Chy<ivaiu.

3 Turmerly, O chief of Rharau's race,
the great Kishi Cti\.rv.riia al Ul itun’s r/ice
alwajs praetisiiiy Ingti v<ms liecame ilesir
ntis ol leariinit for soinetiine the in nle ul
hfe calUd U lavatit, and sed himself to
cotninence it

4 iteiioiincing p'Tde, anger,* joy and
giief, ihe asceiic, pledging liiinsrli io ob-
serve that Vuw, set himself to live for
iMrIye yeirs, according to the rules of
Uj-jv<isn,

5 I he ifnpired all Cfeatnres nith
trust. And he inspiied similar cunfidence
ill all cieati res living in «atrr Ihe
powerful a-CeiiC resembled llie Moon Inin*
self in (ns conduct to all.

6 Ilonhig to all the deities and haviofr
(Toi^rirtt* itmiveil'' in' ymv, iScenTeret^nle 1
svairr at lie c infl lence of Gang* and
VHiiiiiiia, and stood there tike an iiiannnale I
post oi wood

7 PUcn»e I It head acamst it, lie bore '
tl>e fierce and roaring cm rent of tlie two
rivers nmied t tether,— -the current whose
speed rrseinbled that ol the wind itself

8 Gang* and Vainiina, however, and
the olher rivers and likes, whose waiers
uniie together at the coi (luence at Prcyag*. '
instead of aniicting the K»hi, we„| beyond

O Atrumingtlc altitirde of a wnod»is
r^t. Hie great Mum soineiimes Uid | unself
down 111 t)ic water and slept at case. And


sometiinff, O chief of BfiaraU's race, the
intelligciu sage stood erect.

lo He became quite agreeable to all
creatures living Jn water Wnhoui the
least fear, all tiiue used to smell Hie Uislu’s
tips.

II. In tins way, the Rislu passed a long
time at that grand confluence of waters.
One day, some fishermen came there.

12 Wilii nets in tlieir liaiuls, O jon of
grral effwlgcnce, tliose men came whire the
Itrshi was Jhey were many in number
and all ol them were bent upon caicliing
fisli

13 Well formed and broad chested,
gifted With gieat streiiglli and courage,
and never reliiriiing m fear from water,
those men who lived upon tfie earning by
their nets, came tfiere, resolied to calcfi
fish.

14. Arrived at that water wl icir con-
tained many fish, tfiose fiihenneii, O chief
of the UUaraias, tied all their nets togellier.

15 Desirous of fish, (hose ifiiiiimerahfe
K4ivari.4<, united together and siirrounrled
M pHtinn of the waters of Ganga and Ya-
muna with thrtr nets

iC Indred, ihey threw upon llie water
tU-ir net whit.li was made of new siiings,
capable nl covering a lar^e space, dnii
luving sufBvieiit lentil) and breedlTi

17 Getting down into the water, all of
Iherti b-gao to drag with great force that
net which wes very large and had bee'i
Well spread Over a large space.

»8 All of ilmm i\ere free from fear,
chf-rftd an 1 fully determined lo d > one
an nher's bidding llie> had succeeded in
c-iiching a Urge number ol fi>li and other
nqtiatic anun^u.


19 And as they dragged their net, O
king, they easily dmgg^d up Cnjava.M the
wii of lltingu, -lung wiili a large number


fits body was overgrown with the
river mos, i|., l,c,rd and m.tlei locks
bad become green And all over Ins body
cmildlmseen conebs and other mollusc*
Attached with their heads.

»■ H Hi’I" -Iio »s, »

mur ’Sfu 'I'l'iB'J "P by Ib.m I,.,,,
waty, all It e fiiherm-n stood wul, , .,i,ed

Srooiid .ni ,,p.„.dly btm.tkm l„. J,

(l-ir ‘ and m, Hecoilt.l of

llrir being brought upon the JduJ ,1.,.
fishes caught m the net died. ‘


124


MAilABIlAKATA.


23 Seeing that Rreat o«^ai»ght of
fillies. Uie ascetic became filled witiv ^Com-
passion and sighed repeatedly.

The fishermen said: —

24 We have perpetrated ihts sm un-
willingly Be pleased with iis ^ What wish
of yours sliatl we iulfUII' Conuriand lb, O
great ascetic.

. Bhishma said —

25 Thas addressed by them, Chja
vaiia. from among that mass oJ fist es
around him, said.— Do ye with rapt .titen-
lion hear what my most cherished wish is

t 26. I shall euher idle with these fishes
or do je sel] me wuli vUeai f have lived
with them tor a long lime witlun the water
1 do not wish to leave them al s*tcn a lime I
22 Wheu Ue said these words to ih-rn.
the fishermen became greatly terrified
\Vt I) pale faces i|ie> went to king Naliiisha
and infoimed him of all that had occurred


ClfAPTER LI.

(ANUSIIASANIKA PARVA> —
Centiiiiud,

Bhishma said

I. Hearmg the strait inro which Oiya-
vana was reduced. Ring Nahu^a speedily
went there, ascoiBpanied by lita muiisters
Slid priest. I

• a. Having puriBeil hwmelf duh'. the
kintti witli yiHitd hands and rapt atlenlimi
introduced himself to the great O'yaVana
3.. The kHig’s priest ihew adored with
due ceremonies that llishi, O kMig, who
was observant of the vow of truth »nd
gifted with a gieat soul, and wft* resam*
bled a god himself.

Nalxttsha said:—

4 lell me; D best ol twice-born ones
what act sImU we d>i |i<ai may be pleasing
to ymiT SI iwever difQcnIt titai deed ana)
be. there is.tioD mg, U Holy one, lliat I shall
n >t be able to do at yonr command

Chyavana said •—

5 Hiese m-n who live by catching fish,
have all been evlian^ied with fatigue. Do
)ou pay them the price that may be fixed
upon me along wiili the valtre of these
fish.

Wahufiha said —

6. 1 et inj piiesi give to these Nislndas


31 thousand coins as prica for huyiirf .■ <
sacred one as he Inmself bus ordered, i ,
raia(

Chyavana said : — »•'

7. A thousand coins is not my price,
rile question depends up in yo ir discretion
Give tfiem a fair price, settling with your
discretion Give them a fair price, seitln'if
with your own inieliigence what it should
be. , ,

Nahushtt said.—

8 Let, O learnpd Brahnvirw.ahiindred
ihotisand coins be given to tlicse Hishadai.
bhall this be your price, O holy one, or
do you think otherwise.

Chyavana said

9 I 'hoiiJ I nit be bought \>ith a hun-
dred thousand coins, D b.*st of Utmt' •
Lei a proper price be given to these ! IXi
you consult with )Our ministers,

Nahnsha said . —

*0, Let my priest give to these Mishada*
a crore of coins It even tins does not
cover your value, let more be paid to tliein^

Chyavana said:—

It O (king, 1 am not with fl orort
of corns or even more Lrl (hat price be
given to these men winch would be fair ol
proper Do you consult wkK the Bral*^
maiMs.

Nabusha saidt—

12 Let lirtlf my kingdom or even tli^
whole be given away to tliese NishaHas.

1 tlxnk tli.ll would be y nir price VVnat,
iKiwever, do you think O twice.born one ?

Chyavana said*—

13. l do not deserve to be piircha«d
with ImIi yniir kHigdonv or eveiv the whole
of H, D king*' Lri tint piice winch
proper be viven 10 ilwse men. I>> I®**
consiift witfi the Rishi-. I

Bhishma continned • —

14 Hearing tliese word? of the great
RisUi, Nahiisha because stricken with gf®**
sorrow. With his imnisters and priest he
began to think on the matter.

15 There then came to kmg Nahii*'':'
an ascplic living m the forest and subsist-
ing upon fruit aivd roots and born of ®
cow,

16 Thit best of twice born persons,
addressii gthe king. O monarch, said these
wTWfls — I «Viall soon satisfy you 'I he
also will be satisfied.


ANUSItASftNA PARVA.


125


17, I al'all never sreil* a htsel>rt<xi,--n<s
not even in )«« wl'al l»'ea "eed 1 say ol
other occasions 7 Vou should uiiJ)es»ta{M>g*
)y do wtiat 1 bi I you.

Kahttslia said

18 O I you, O iltiistrkMis one, say what
the value is of that Rroat Uishi of Blirigu’s
race O, save me from this terrible didl
cully, save my kiiigdotn, and save my
lai


U the holy Chyav-<na become angry,
d destroy the three worlds , what
say then of my poor self who is
(lie of penances and who depends
<1 the power only of his arms 7

20 O great Rislu, do you be^me
rail to us who have alt fallen into a fathom*
less deep with all our counsellors and our
pn^si 1 Do ) Qu settle wImI the value alwuld
be ol the Rtslu I


SS Kine are always |he root of pros* 1
perKy, lUere is no fault in kttie Kme
always give the best food, m the form of
liavi, t»lhc deities

.y ihc sacred ‘ 3 w-»l'a a"d

Vashat, are always established upon Uiiie.
Kme are the chief conductresses i>f S^cn-
Hces. Itiey form th^ mouth of baciifke.

|hey bear and yield evcelleril and
st^nglli-fiiving amhrosia. Ihey receive
tie adoration of all the worlds and arp
considered as thp source of nectar.

31. On Earth, kmc letembfe fire ir» ^
energy form, Indeed, knie represent

bub energy, and art co'iferrers <?( great
happiness upon all cteaioress

3t, Thai coumry where kuuspliced by
tlicir owners, breatlie fe,<r>essly, shines iiv
beauty. I he sms also of that country are
all feinovid.

Kine form the stairs leading to


Bhislima said —

3t< Hearing these words of Nshuslia,
the ascetic born ol a cow and gifted with
yreit energy spike thu<, 6l>i<idenu)g tl>e
monarch with 411 Ins cuunselfers *—

•

23 Brahmaiias. O king, belong to the
Iniemotl ol ilie fiiur castes. No value,
however yreat, can be fixed updn’ them.
Kme also are invaluable, lltercfore, O
iing, {do you rcgaid a cowas the vulue of
tlw Rislu 1 '

2t Hearing these words of the great
Ri^iii N^liiishi became, O king, filled
with {oy kluitg with all Jus couiiSelicrs and
fiiesi.

34 Proceeding then to Bhrigu's son
Chy^vana of rigid vows, he addressed him
lh«^,^0 nvmareii, lor satislying hlmlto ilie
best of his power.

Nahnslia said

35 Rise, rise, O twice*born Ristn, you
have been purchased. O sou of IMingit.
will, a covy AS your price* O foremost
ol i),>lite<iiis persons, even this, 1 think,
your prKe »

Cliyavaaa said

36 Yes, O king of kings, I do frse np.
1 hs\c been properly purchased by yew, Q
siiWss one I do not, O you of unfading
Rl-ry, see any tKlies that is equal

f a;. Jo speak rof Vme to l>esr ethers
speak of them, to mske gifts of kii>*, and
*** kine O king, are acts, that a,<
praised, O liero, and thJt arc liiglity
Fi<.wus a ,d purifying . ® '


tteaven Khie are worshipped in Heaveis
Itself Kiiie are goddesses that cau e>ve
everything and grant every wish rherix
uoiliMig else in the world that is so)iigl>
so superior.

Bbiahma said

34 il»s IS what t say to yon on iFie
suh)vcl of til* glory and supenurity cif kine*

O duel of Bliarau's race 1 am competeiil
descobe a part only of the inrriis of the ,
fcine. } have not the ability to exhaust ^
the subject.

The Kisbadas said

35, O asceiic, you have seen us uml
have also spoken with us. It has been said
Uv»t friendship, with tlie good, depends
upon o>ify seven wordi^ l>u you then, O
lord, show us your favour.

36. lliebUamg sacnruaal fire eats all
the oblations of clarified batter poured up,,*
It. Ol piouis soul, „nd gdted wuh great

**6 among men, a Wamig fire

ta energy .

3;. We propitiate j ou O you of great
learmug. Wesuirender ourselves to you
fv. r«, .


Do you, for sliowing us l^vc
from uS tills cow,

Chyavana said *—


3S. ihe eye 0/ j


poor or distressed


».i» .1 jcdicj po“r’

.will, hw p

ilm w«h H, „ " 'j

"vf j'

..n, 60 yoto


125


MAilABlIARArA


Uiese Rslies also that ye liave caught with

jouf nets

Bishma said:—

40 After tliK, on scconnl of the energy
of that great Hishi of purtRed sout those
fishermen along uith all those fish, through
virtue of those words that he had uttered,
vent to heaven.

4 i« Seeing the fishermen ascending (o
heaven with (liose fishes in their compan),
became filled with wonder, Q duel o(
Bharala’s race.

42. After tins, the two Rishis, «i« , the
one born of a cow and the other v%ho was
Chyavana of Ulingn's race, pleased Ling
Nnliusha by granting him many boons.

43 Then the highly energetic long
Naliusha that lord of all the Earth, filled
wnh joy, O best of the Bharatas, said, —

bufficient.

‘ 4 t. Like a seeond^lndra the king of the
celestials, he accepted tli« boon about Ins
own steadiness in virtue Ihe Rishis
having granted \i«m tli« boon, the de»
lighted king adored thetn both with great
respect.

45. As regards Chyavana, tus vow
having been completed, he returned to his
own hermitage Ihe Rishi who had taken
Ins birth from the cow, and who was gihed
with great ener’gy, also proceeded loins
own hermitage

46 Ihe Nishadas .ill ascended to
heaven as also tlie fishes they had esughi,
O king, king Nahiisha too, having got
lliose valuatte boons, entered liis own
City.

47—4? 1 have thus. O son, cold you

evet)lliing about what )oil had asked me
the aRicvon Oiat is caught by the »|.ht
al lie ci •.thers as also b) the fact of livmg
with tlieni, O YitJhishiliira and Stic lugh
Uesvedriess of kinetoo, and the a»cer(.«in.
inrnt of true virtue, are the suhji^i I liave
riescnlied Icll me, O hero what else is m
)our mind.


CHAPIFU LII.

(ANURHASANIKA PARVA) —
CenliuutJ,

Yudhiilitbira said —

I O you of greet )om,*l li»ve adsnbi
Wh«t. IS very tieat and »l reh is as vast
asil.eotr.n ,Urll (•tie., loir (t miglily.
a,in».l rmn. a« t l.v.g •itaillis.


* 1 have a grea( curiosity about Jenti*

dagni's son, O lord, tiie.i Rama that fore*
most of alf pious persons. You should
satisfy that curiosity.

3 How was Rama born who was gifted
with prowess incapable oi being baffled!
He belonged by birth to a family of twice*
born Rishis How did he become a fol*
lower of (Cshatriya practices?

4 Do you then O king, recite to m*
Ml full the circumstances ol Rama's birth
How also did a son ol the race of
Kushika who Was Kshairiya become a
Bralun ma 7

5 G>eat, indeed, was the power of the
higii soiiied Raina, O duel of men, at also
of Visliwainitra.

6 Why did the grandson of Ric'iika
Instead of his son become a Kshatrija?
Why aJ-»o did the grandson of Kushik*
and not his son become a Brahman*?
Why did such untoward incident* bef*''
the grandson* of both, instead of ihrir
sous? You should explain the truth o>
these circumstances.

Bbishma BAi^d —

7. Regarding It II Cited an old hisl'fy
of tlie discourse between Chyavana and
Kiisluke, O Bliarata I ,

8 Gifted with great Intellisehee,"*
Chyavana of Bhngii'a race, that best of
ascetics, saw '( with t is spniiust eye)*'**
Slain that would altect his own rnce*

9 Reflecting upon the merits and f*"***
ol that Micnlent, as also it* strength
weakness, Chy-ivana having asceliC»'»m I ir
hi* wealth, became d'siruus of con'Um ">f
the race of the Kushikas

10. » Going th(v> to the presence nf k'H 4
KustuVn, Ciiyavana Said in him — O sin**'*
one, the deine has ari«en in my heailol
living with you for sometiine.

KusUxkA B%id

11. O holy one, to live together is *
deed which tlie learned ordain for g»>«
when these are given away Ihe
always speak d t»,e practice m such con*
ncction only.

IX O Ruhi Iiaving asceticism for you^
wealth, the re«>(fence wliii.li you seek w' '
me »s not sanctioned by He ordm*"^*
Vet. however opposed to ine dictate* °

duty and virtue, t shall do wtiat you m*/

be pteased to order.

BhUlima aaid —

13 Oril»i|ii.. a «fal Is be pUeed f'’r
great aMrtic JCliyasan*. ki ig Km'
acco i»p*iiie J by I is •il’-, *lo-aJ b.fj'C I


ANUShASAMA PAflVA.


127


U a Iitlle )ar of water, the

t<,ng otfcred I* m water for I

e«t: He then, throitBl.I.ts servant. Cj.d«d
fill t».e rites to be duly performed In honor
of Ins illusiriotis guest.

,5 II,. Ill,.,lrb,.> Kml.ika. »'■» *"

ol rei,r.ints »i,d VO«!, U,."
tl.,.rlally prei.ni.d, ,« die lo'";* 1 e
ineredients fionsisime of honey and the

Other thincs, to the great Rishi and asked
him to accept tiie same.

t6 lUvme welcomed and honored the
lennied Brahmana Ihns. the Umg
addressed him and smd,— We »wa>t

your orders’ Command us what we are
to do for you, O holy one. * i

• 17. If tl is our kingdom or rtches or
kine O sou of rigid vows, or all articles
that areVven away in sacrifices, which you
Want, tell us the word and we shall bestow
all upon you

t8. Dus palace, this kingdom, 0 ns seal

of Justice, are at your di«poial You are
thi master of all thesel Oo
Earllil As regards myself, I depend en.^
lirely upon you.

19. Addressed in these words by the
king. Chyavana of Bhr.gu’s race,
great joy, said to KusUlka Hiese words jn
reply.

Chyavafia saidi—

so I do not, O king, covet year king*
dim nor your riches nor the damsels you
h»ve nor your kine, nor your provinces nor

ariicles needed for sacrifice ’ Do you listen

at 11 It pleases you and your wife, t
si all brsin to observe a certain vow 1
wish yon and your consoi^i to serve me
during thal period unhesilalingly

22 Ihus addressed by the Rishi. the
king and the queen became filled With de*
liKhi, O Bliarala. and answered him, say*

lug,— Be It so, O Uishl • i

23 Pleased with ll e RisI t's werds. llie '
king led l nn to an apartment of the palace,
it was an excellent one, agreeable to see.
lie king showed him eve'yihmg m that
room

Ibe king said

24 this, O holy one is your bed Do
you live here as you please ' O yon having
ascrbcism for your wealth, myself and my
queen shall iry onr best to give you every
tomlorl and every pleasure

25. Wide tl ey were llius conversing
with each other, the sun was over l! e meri*
dun file Itishi ordered the king to bring
1 im lood and dunk.


Boeing to the RIdil. King Kiishika
asked him. saying — Wnat kind of food is
liked by you? Wliai food, indeed, sluilbtf
brought for you.

27. Filled sViih joy, the Rishi answered
that king, O Bharata, saying,— Let food
that IS proper be given to me.

28 Receiving these words Willt respect,
the king said,— bo be it *— ‘and then olTered
to tl e KisliJ food of the proper kind.

29 Having finished bis meals, the holv
Chyavana, knowing every duty, addressed
the king and Ihetjuecn, saying. — I Wish 10
sleep, O powerful one, sleep binders me
now,

30. Proceeding tbenCe to a room that
itad been got ready for him that best of
Risins t1>cn laid hfmself down upon a bed,
the king and theq leen sal dowtf,

31. 1 he Risbi lold them >-*Do not, while
I sleep, awake met Do ye keep yourself
awake and continually press my feet as
long at 1 sleep.

32—33 Kusbika, dontferiant with every
duty, uOhesttaiingly, said —So be U ! In*
de^, Ihe king 'and the queen kept them*
selves asvake all night, duly engaged 'm
tending and serving ihe Rislu in the man*
ner directed. 1 be royal pair, O king, ae*
complisUed ibe Ruin’s order with earnest*
ness and attention.

34 Meanwhile the boty Brahmana,’
liaving thus commanded the king, slept
soundly, without changing hit posture or
turning even once, for one and twenty days,

35 The king, O debgliter of the Kurus,
abstaining from food, along with Ins wife,
sat joyfully the whole lime, engaged in
tending and serving the Rislii


36 On the expiration of one and twenty
days, the son of UliriBii rose of Ins own
accord The great ascenc then went out
of the room, without speaking to them at

all

J7 Famished and toll worn, the king
and the queen fallowed him but that lore*
most of Hisins did n< t please to cast a
single look upon any of them.

38 Proceeding a lltile way the son of
Bhri-u disappeared in the very sight of the
royal pair At tills, the king, struck with
grief, dropped down on the Earth.

39 Comforted, he rose up soon and
accoiripariied by Ins q ,een. the king pos.
sessed of great splendour, began to search
everywhere for tiie Rislii.


IftMtA'GtIAilArA.


I SB


x:HAPTER Lltt.
(ANUbHASANlKA PAUVA).-^
Conttniied.

iTudhislilbira said

I. After tlie Rislii liad disapp«Ar£d|
did llie kiiii' do and whai also hts
tii):lily«blessed wifet lell me lhi3> O
grandfather.

Bhishma said:-^

2 Not seeing the Risk!, ihe kiAg,
stricken »{th shame, tail'ivorn, and losing
Ins senses, returned to Ins palace, actoiA*
pained by ins queen.

3. Entering his mansion in a dejected
spirit, |he spoke not a word with any
cue. He thought only of that conduct of
Ciiyavana.

. 4> With a despairing heart he then went
to Ins room I here he befield the son of
Dhtigu stretched as before on hts bed. '

5 Seeing the Rislit there, they wonder-
ed mech. Indeed, Urey began to thtnk
tipoii that very strange incident. Ihe sight
of tire Kishi removed their fatigue.

6 Seated once more by his side, they
again began to gently press fns feet as
before Meanwiule the great ascetic con-
tinued to sleep soundly as before. Only, he
now lay on another side.

7. Gifted wall great energy, he thus
passed another tweiily-one d4ys Moved
by Tear, the royal pair sliowed no change in
their attitude or seniinicnt towards the
Rtsln.

S. Awaking then from his sleep the as-
cetic addiessed tlie king and tlie queen,
saying. — Do ye cub my body with oil, 1 wish
to iiave a baili,

9. Famishing and toil-worn though they
Were, forthwith tliey Volunteered their ser-
vices and soon approaclied ttie Kislii with
a rich oil liiai had been prepared by
boiling It a hundred times

10 Wilde the Rishi was seated at his
ease, ilie king and the queen, silenlfy, con-
tinued to tub lina Gnied with great asce-
tic merit the sail of Ulitiy^u dij not once
utter the word Sufilkieni.


II. Dhngu s sou however saw that the
roy,.J p»ir were lowHy unmoved Rising
up Mil on a sudden, he entered tlie bath


12—13 The various artreles neCessa
tor a bail! and siicti as were fii for a kine
U«, wrte ready there. Without using, al
cl (hose aiticles, the Itislu once more di
Appeared ttieic and tiitn by his Yog


goiter, befoVtt king Knsliika (and Ids witeb
lilts, however, O chief of Bharatas, failed
fo dis'turb the equannniiy of Ihe royat
pair.

14. Tlie next time the powerful Fishl
^as seen sealed, after a bath, on the throne.
It was from that place that he tlien showed
himself to the king and the queen, 0 de-
lighter of the Kurus.

15. With a cheerful face, king Kushika,
together with his wife then offered the
Rislii cooked food with great respect.
Gifted with wisdoui) and with heart loully
unmoved, Kusliua made this offer.

I'he Ascetic said •—

16 llet the food be brought. Assisted
by Ins wifC) the king soon brought there the
food.

17. 1 here were various kinds of meat

and different prepirations also thereof.
I'liere was a great variety of vegetables ats9
and potherbs.

18 1 here were juicy cakes loo among
(hose dishes and several agreeable kinds of
confectionery, and solid preparalions ef
milk Indeed, the viands were dilfereut in
kinds and taste. Among them there irere
also some food— forest produces-*sucl>
ascetics liked and took,

19 Various sweet fruits fit to be ealtn
by Icings, were also there. lliere were
Vadaras and Ingudas and Kashmeryys*

, And BliaUainkas

20. Ihe food tliat was offered contain-
ed such things as are taken by house liuMers
as also such things as are taken by
fnresi-dwellefs. riirougli fear of the
Kislii’s curse, the king had caused all kinds
ol food to be gathered and got ready
hb guest.

ai--22. All this food, brought from ihe
kilclien, was placed before Chyavana. A
seal was also placed for him and a bed too
was spread, 1 he dishes were then caused
to be covered with while cloths. Soon how-
ever, Chyavana of Bhrtgu’s race put fire to
all the things and reduced them to ashe».

23 Gifted with great inlellucnce, the
royal pair showed no anger at tins conduct
ol the Rishi, who once more, afier tin*,
disappeared before the ve<y eyes, of the
king and the queen.

24 The royal ssge Kushika thereupon
stood there in the same posture for the
whole night, with his svife by >us side, and
witfwut speaking a word Gifted nim
great prosperity, be did not yield 10 wrslh-

^5— s6. Every day, good and pure food
of various sorts, excellent beds, proluw


AHUSliASAMA PAttVA.


159


AtUciM rtetfded Mr baih, and dtftht ol
Various sorts, were collected and kept
t'eady irt tlie p*Iace Mr Ifie IlisJii. Indeed,
CliyAvana could not find anylaultinihe
conduct of the king.

a;, Tlien addressing king Knshlka, the
twice-born Rislii said lo him,— Do you wrih
your spouse, yoke yourself to a car and
take tne on it whereever t shall direct.

iS. Dfihesitalingly, the king answered
Cliyavana having asceiictsm (or wealth,
5 jiying-.So be It !— And he further enquir-
ed of the Itishi, asking, — Winch car shall
Hiring T Shall it be my pleasure-car lor
making pleasure-journeys or, shall it be my
war-chafioiT ^

Thus addressedbythedefight-
c'd and contented king, the ascetic SaiJ to
him,— Do you promptly get ready that
chariot with which you attack hostile cities 1
Indeed, that war-chsriot ot yours, with every
Vreapon, tvilh Us standard and (lags, its
dans and ]«vHiiis and golden columns and
poles, should be made ready, its raiiie
resernblesthe linkhngal belts, (t is adorned
with numberless arches made ol pure gold,
(l IS always furtustied witfi hundreds of high
and exesilent weapons*— 1 tie king said,—
So be It,— and soon made his great war*
chatiot ready.

31. And he yoked his wife thereto on
the left and his own tell on the right. And
the king placed on (he clisnot. among its
other articles, the goad which tiad three
handles and wlitch had a point hard as
^damant and sharp As the needle.

3] Having placed every article upon
the car, ilie king said lo the Kistu,— O iuily
one, where ehall (he chariot proceed f O, let
the son ol Ohiigu issue his order.

31 — 3 S- This your chaiiot shall proceed
to (he place winch you may be pleased to
direct I Ihus addressed, the holy man |
tephed to the king, saying,—Ht tliC car go
hence, draeged slowly, step by step Obey-
ing my wiU. do ye two proceed in such a
way that 1 may not letl Any ealiaustten.

3*5 I should be borne away pleasantly,
and let all }-our people tee this march that
I make Ihrougii (t>eir midst. No person
Ihsl owes to err, as | proceed along the
road, should be driven Away. I shall distti*
bute (ichet among all.

37. To the first msnjs who may ap-
proach ne on tl e way. 1 si, all grant iheir
wiiVs and bes'ow upon all el Ui«m gem*
And r>ches without stmt.

.Il- 4 n- l.rt all jl is be done. O kmg,
and da net entertain any srtuylrs J|ejf.
ing ii.«se words ol tl>e Uii! 1, the king ra’Ied
bvi KiTSrts and told tUoi.— Yc sboiJJ


WrihdUt any fedr, give Awiy tvlutever Ihc
ascetic will command —1 hen profuse jewels
and gems and beautiful women, and pairs
of siteep, and coined and uncoined gold,
and huge elephants resembling hills or
mounUin summits, and all the ministers of
the king, began to follow the Rtshi as he
was earned on that chariot.

4U Cfitt of Oh and Alas arose from
every part of the city which was plunged fn
grief At that extraordinary spectacle, Ihe
Itishi struck the Icing and the queen sud-
denly with that goad having a sharp point,

41. Though thus struck on the back
and the checks, the roytt pair sitll ahotved
no sign of agitation. On the otfier hand*
(hey coniioued to carry llie on as

before,

43 Trembling from head to foot, for
no food had passed tlieir lips for rifi''y night*,
'and exceedingly weak, lUe hero c parr
I somehow succeeded in dragging that ex-
I cellent chariot.


,1. Repeatedly and deeply cut by the
goad, the royal pair became covered n(ifi
blood. Indeed, O king, they then looked
lake a couple of Kfiiliuks trees m the
flowering season.

43 Seeing the plight lo wfiicfi their
king and queen had been reduced, the cm-
srns became slTlicied with great grief.
Tilled with (ear of the curse of the Uishl,
they kept sdttit under their misery.

46. Collected In masses they said to each
other,— See the mitlit of penances * Al-
though All of US are angry, «e are still
utiatife to look at the Kishl.

4 ,. Cr..t 1, ih, tntrB, .1 H. i,.,,
Risn of purified loun See also the en-
durtnee of the king and his toyil spause.

49. Though exhausted vjil!ifatmu»an4
hunger, they are still carrying the c^r*-
»«’• f; nhrigu, d-sp,ie the rrj.Mry he
caused 10 Kushika and his q teen, could s-a
no sign of dissaiufactiofi or agitation la


Sbhhma said:—

Ireasiiret. ol

SO. At this deed aim h,^- t-„ , .

I««l ton, h. "««>£


. MAIIAOIIARATA. ^


130


57. Indeed, the ^on ol Ohii^u, m *
sole, deep, and delighted voice, s^id,— a*!)
ready to give an excellent boon to >ou
boili. ,

53 Delicate as they were, their bodies
bad been pierced wnti the goad* M<i\ed
by affection, that best of ascetics soJU>
loiidied them with Ins hands whose healing
virtues resembled those of arabrosiA, itself,
O duel of the Bharatas, j 1 v

54. Then the bmg answered,— Myself
and my wife have felt no exhaustion — In-
deed, all their fatigue bad been removed
through the power of (tie Uisht, and hence it
vvas lint the king could say so to the Itislii.

55. Pleased with thrir conduct, the 1II-
usuious Cuyavani said to them,— I liave
never before spoken falsehood. It must,
therefore, be as i have Said.

56 This spot on the banks of Ganga
IS very charming and auspicious. I shall,
observing a vow, Tive for a little while here,
O king.

57. Do you return to your city. You
are exhausted ! You shall come again, iio-
morrow O king,' you shall returnmg with
your wife, see me here.

58. You should lint give to anger or
grief. Ihe time is come when you shall
reap a great reward ' I hat which is covet
ed by you and which is in jour heart mil
indeed be done.

59 Thus addressed by the Rishi. king
Kushika, nitli a pleased heart, replied to
the Rishi in these pregnant words. “

60. I have entertained no anger or grief,
O higlly blessed one I We have been
cleansed and sanctified by you, O holy
one I We have once more become youth-
ful bee our bodies have become greatly
beautiful and possessed of great Slreiigih.

6t. I do not any longer see those wounds
that were caused by jou on our bodies
vvilhyour goad' Venl), with my wde, I
am in good lieallh.

62 1 see my goddess become as beauti-

ful in body as an Apsara, Indeed, she is
endued with as much beauty and splendour
asslie had ever been before. 1


63 All this, O great ascetic, ts due to
your favour Indeed, there is nothine
wonderful in all this, O holy Rishief power
ever unbaffled.


returned to his capital like a sccoiidkir^
of the celestials.

C 6 'I lie counsellers then, with the '
priest, came out to welcome him Hw
troops also and the dtticmg women and all
bis subjects, did the same. '

67 Surrounded by them all, kingKu-'
sliika, shining iti bevuty .xnd splendour,
entered lus city, with a delighted heart,
and lus prntses were sung by bards and
encomiasts.

6S. Having entered his etty and per*
formed all his mnrning rites, he ate wlk
Ills wife. Gifted with great solendour, tlie
king then passed the night happily.

69 Each saw the other to be possessed
of fresh yoittlifulness All their siifferine*
and pains having ceased, thev saw each
other to resemble a celestial. Giited wiik
the splendour they had got as a boon front
lint foremost of Brahmanas, and possessed

; of exceedingly tovely features and beautiful
forms, botli of them passed a happy nU'^
in their bed.

70 In the Interval spreader of the feal*
of Bhrigu’s race, vir., the l^ishi having
penances lor his wealtli, converted by l't»
Yoga power, thst charming wood on the
bank of Gangs into a retreat full of vvealin
of every kind and adoined witli every
variety of jewels and gems on account 0*
which It excelled in beauty and splendonr
the very abode of the king of the celestial*'


CHAPTER LIV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued. .

Bhiahma said:—

I. Wlien that night passed away, tl^
great king Rushika awoke and performer
his morning rites. Accompanid by his w‘‘*

he then went towards that forest vvhich th®
Rishi had selected for his residence.^

2 Arrived there, the king saw a palatial
mansion made entirely of gold Having *
thousand columns each of which was mao®
of gems and precious stones it looked lik®
. a mansion belonging to the Gandliarvas.


64 rims addressed by the fcing.'chya-
vana said to him —You shall with your
wife, return here to morrow, O king.

63 With these vrords, the royal sage
Kiisi ika was sent away Saluting tbe Rishi,
the king, endued with a handsome bodj.


3—4 Kushika saw in every part of that
building si^ns of celestial design. And
he saw hills with charmin,g .valleys, and
lakes with lotuses on tlieir bosom, 3"“
mansions full of rich and curious articles*
and gateways and arches, O Bharata
And the king beheld many open glaJ«*


ANUSilASAHA PARVA.


I 3 t


nd optfn spot* carpeted miili gr*s<, add
cscmbliog fields ol gold.

5 And he saw many SahaVara* adorn-
ed with blossoms, and K^lakas and Udda-
Irfkas, and Dnavas, and AshoWas, and
blossoming Itiindas, and AlimiiUta*

6 And he saw there many Ctiampabas
niid Tilakas and Bhavyas and Panasas and
Vyanjiilas and Kariukaras adorned with
Bowers<

7 And the king saw many Shyantas
and Varanapiishpas and the creepers called
A^rapadika, all dipt properly and beauli*
.(ully.

8. And ihe UinK saw tree* on winch
lotniis of various species bloomed in all
their beauty, and some of which bore
tlower* of every season And he saw also
many mansions that looked like celestial
cars or like beautiful mountains.

' i)-~to And at some places, O Bfiaraia
there were tanks and hkes full of cool
water and at others were those that were
full of wrrm or hot water. And fliere were
various kinds of cacellent seats and costly
beds and bedsteads wade of gold and
gems nnd ovedsid with beautiful dotlis and
carpets Tliere were profuse viands attd
edibles, all well dressed and ready for use-

It—ia —And there were talking parrots,
she-parrots Bltrin<ara|as, Kokilas Shaia*
prtras with Koyashtikas and Kukkubhas,
and peacocks and cocks and DatyuUas and
Jivajivikas and Cfiakoras and monkeys
•ind swans and Sarasas and Chakravskas

It Here and there he saw bevies o*
repicmg Apsaras and conclaves of happy
Gandhafvas, O monarch.

T4> And he saw other Gandharvas at
ott tt places rrioicing with their dear wives
*1 he king sometimes saw these sights and
sometimes could not see them.

!$« Tlie king heard also sweet notes of
vocal music and the sweet voices of pre-
ceptors engSKed in lect iring their disciples
«ii the Vedas and (he bciiptiires. And
(he king also heard the harmonious notes
of the geese spotung in (he likes

(6 Seeing Such hiftlly wonderful spec-
tacled, the k»'g began (o reflect luwardK,
••jmKi— Is th'sa dieamt Or, is all this
dueto an alienalion ol my mind 7 Ores
It all teal T

t7. O, i have, without reneuncing my
body, atulnrd to the beatitude of lieascti
II '» land IS either the sacred country of
(le Uitara.Kurui, or (I e abode called
Amravati. at the k n^; ol the cclevtiah.


fS. O wfiat are lltese wonderfril spec-
tacles that I see*— Utllecimp ll us, the king
at last saw that foremost o( Uisliis.

19 In (hat golden psiace Ijnving cofnmns
made of leVels and gems the son of Bhngu
Uy suetciied on a coolly and excellent bed.

so. With his wife by his side, (he king
^approached, wiili an exiiUmi' heart, (he Kislir
‘as he lay on that bed. Cliyavana, how-
ever, speedily disappeared at lias, with the
bed Itself upon winch he lay.

s( riie king then saw the Rishi at
another part of that forest, seated on a mat
made of ICiisha grass, and mentally engaged
III the fcciial of some high Mantras

22 Through (ns Voga-power, thus did
that Brahmanx stupefy the king (n a
moment that charming forest, those beviss
of Apsaras, those bands of Candharyas,
those beautiful trees all disappeared.

2j' The bank^ of Gsnga became as silent
as usual, and Appeared as before covered
with ICusha grass and anthills,

24 Having seen that higlily wonderful
spectacle and us q nek disappearance also,
king .ICushika, will) his wife, became filleil
with Wonder.


2 $ With » dehgliled liearf, (he feme
addressed his wife ssying, see, O amU
abte one, ffie various agreeable scenes and
sights, cccuiring nowhere else, which we
two have |ust seen.

jd. All ihis IS due (0 the favour 0^
Bhrigu'^ son and the power of his penances,
fly penances one attains all which cherishes
lit Ills imaj'maUon.


the kingdom ct the three worlds With
penances welNperformed, Liberation jJstlf
may be acq nred, Mark, the power ol the
great and ceJrstial R,,},, Chyavana derived
from ins penances! He can, at his plea-

sure, create even other worlds.

29 Only Rrahmanas are barn m (fi,«
t Understanding sacred

Chyavani foulddo


nut%l.. «T‘ired easily. .


133


MAllADIIAKATA.


bendmu Uieir beads they adored Intn
who were worthy of adoration.

33 Utterin;; B benediction upon |?ie
king. Itie Rislit, f;dted wuli creat inlelli*
L*ciice, O king, comforted the king and said.
— Sit down on that seat,

34“”3S After tins, O monarcli, the son
of Bluigu, without guile or insincentyoi
any sort, pleased the king with many soft
words, and then said,— O king, you have
completely subjugated Ums five organs of
action and the five organs of knowledge
with the mind as their sixth. Tor this you
have come out unhurt from tlie fiery ordeal
1 had prepared lor you,

36. I have been properly honored and
adored, O son, by joU, O loremosi of all
persons gifted with speech. You have n®
sm, not even a minute one, in you.

37 Give me leave, O king, for ! shall
now proceed to lha phce I came from. 1
have been highly pleased wnh you, O king,
rray accept the boon 1 am ready to give !

Knshika said —

38- Before >ou, O holy one, I hive
staid like one staying m the midst of a fire.
Ihai lhave not yet, O duef of Bhngu's
race, been reduced to ashes is sufTicient.

39 Even tha is the highest boon that
1 have got, O dehghterol Bhngu' that
you have been pleased by me, O Bralimana.
and that I have succeeded m rescuiiig mv
race from destruction, O sinless one, are
tn my case the best boons,

40 This I consider, O learned Brah.
raana, as a distinct mark of your favour
the object of my hfe has been accomplished
Even tins is what I consider the Very obiect
of my sovereignly. 1 1, is is the liighisi fruit
ot my penances

41 If, O learned Brahmana, you have
been pleased with me, O d^iuier o1
Bhnp, ilien do you remove some doubts
which are in my mind.


CHAPTER LV.

(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
ConltnueJ.

Cliyavana said •—

1. Do you accept a toon from me

° The


Enshika said *

2 if you have been pleased wiili me,

0 holy one, do you tlien, O son of Bhrigo,
tell me your object m living tn my pvUee
for sometime, for 1 wish to hear it. \Vti»t
was your object In sleeping on the bed

1 assigned you for, one and twenty days
continuously, without changing sides.

3 O foremost of ascetics, what also was
jour object, again in going out of the room
wubout speaking a single word.

4. Why did you, again, without any
reasim, disappear and once more become
visible? Why, O learned Brahmana, did
you again lay yourself dowp on the bed,
and sleep, as before, for one and twenty
days.

5 Why did you go out after you were
rubbed by us with oil for your bath ? Wliy,
also, .ifter having made various kinds of
food in my pshce to be collected, did you
consume them with fire ?

^ 6 What was tlie cause of your sudden
journey through my city on the ear ? What
was your object m giving away so much
riches? What was your motive in showing
us the wmiders of the forest created by
your Yogarpower.

7. Wlwt, indeed, was your motive m
snowing O great ascetic, so many palaces
made of gold and so many b«d<stnads
supported on posts of jewels and gems T

8 Why also did all these wonders dis*
appear from our sight? 1 wish to hear
the cause of al< this l hinkmg of all these
acts of yours, O perpetuater of Bhngu’s
race, i became stupefied

9 I cannot comprehend your motive
U you iiaving penances for wealth, I wish
to hear the truth about all those act* of
yours m full.

CLyavaua said

«o Listen to me as 1 tell you folly the
reasons wl ich had moved me in alt these
acts of mine Asked by \ou, O king, 1
cannot refuse to e lighten you

It. In days of yore, on one occasion
when the denies had assembled togelher.
the Grandfather Brahman said some words.

I heard them O king and shall now repeat
them to you,

t On account of a quarrel between
nmana and Kshatriya energy, there
occur an intermixture in my race —

ourgraudson, o king, wiH become endued
with great energy and power.

, *3 Hearing tins 1 came here resolved
10 exterminate your race. Indeed, I came,


ANUSHASAHA l»AftVA


>33


0 Kosbfti, seeltjng ihc uU«f exUrmina-
lion of yout family, m fact, for reduciiV
to ashes all your descendants.

14 Moved fay this motive I came to
jour palace, O monarch, and said to you,—

1 shall observe some vow. Do you attend
upon me and serve me dulifulty.

15 While living, however, in your house
] could not see Iny sliortcomings m you
It IS for that reason, O royal sage, (hat
you are stiff alive, for otherwise you would
have by (his been dead.

16 It was with this resolution that I
slept (or twenty.ene days in the liope^that
somebody would awake me before 1 arose
out of my own accord.

ly. You, however, with your wife, did
not awake me. Even then, O best of kings,
1 became delighted with you.

ig. Rising from my bed I went out of
the chamber without speaking to any of
you 1 did this, O king. In the hope tliat
you would ask me and thus ( would have
an opportunity of cursmg you.

ip I then disappeared, and again
showed myself m the room of your palace,
, and once more following Yoga slept lor one
and liveniy days,

30. My motive was this. Exhausted
With toil and iiunger you two would be
angry tvilh me and do what would be un.
pleasant to me It was from this motive
that t caused yourself and your wife to be
adlicted with hunger,

31. In your heart, however, O king, the
slightest feeling of anger or vexation did
not rise For this, O king, I became higty
pleased with you.

73. When I f^used variout kinds of
food to be brought and then set fire to
'them, I hoped that yourielf with your wife
would yield to anger at the sight Even
that act, honever, of mine was tolerated
by joii,

33—34 I then ascended the car. O
king, and addressed you, saying, — Do you
with your wife bear met — You did what 1
ordered, without the feast scruple, O king (
1 became delighted at (his. The gifts of
riches 1 made could not excite your anger.

35, Pleased n illi you, O king, I created
with the help of my Yoga*power that forest
svh c!» j ourself wilo your wife did see here.
Listen, O king, to the object 1 had.

36. For pleasing you and your queen I
made you to have a gtimpse of ffeaven, All
those things which you have seen m these
woods, O king, are a foretaste of Heaven.

*;• O best of klags, for a liulc white I


'made you and ^our^wiFe ITehold, in even
your earthly bodies, some sights of Heaven.

38 All this’ was done for showing the
power of penances and the reward iliat is
instore for virtue llie deeire that arose
in your heart, O monarch, at sight of those
defightfuf objects, is kiioivn to me.

39 You became desirous of obtaining
; the dignity of a Brahmana and the merit of

penances, O king, disregarding the sover-
eignty of the Earth, nay, the sovereignty
of very Heaven.

30 You thought this O kine The
status of a Brahmana is higl ly difficult to
get, having become a Brahmana, it is
highly difficult to obtam the status of a
RisUi, having become a Rishi it is difficult
to become an ascetic. >

3t 1 tell you that your desire will be
fulfilled Fi'om you O Kushika, will origi-
nate a Brahmana who shad be called after
your name. The person that will be the
third m descent from you shall obtain the
status of a Bralimana. ')


33. Through the energy of Ihe Blifigus,
your grandson, O king, will be an ascetic
gifted with the splendour of Rre.

33 He shall always strike all men, in-
deed. the inhabitants of the thiee worlds,
with fear. I tell you the trutlu

34. O royal sage, do joii accept ilie

boon that is now |ii jour muid I shall
soon start for a sojoorn to alt the sacred
waters fime is expiring, .


Kushika said —

35 This, O grfat aJfcetic, is a high boon
in my case, for you have been pleased with
me! Let that take plate which you have
»»><>’ Let my grandson become a Urahma-
na, O sinless one

> 3« Indeed, JeUhedrgmtyofDrahmana-
hood attach to my family, O loly one!
1 his IS the boon I pray for I I wish to once
more ask you m full, O holy one.

° delighier of Bhngu,
Brahmanahood attscli to
my famJly? Who will be my fnend ? Who
will have my affection and respect ?


CHAPTER LVf.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAJ-

ContmueJ,


Lliyavana said —

*• l should Cfilainlv. O kins’ i»


you

for


r -llMtADUARATA.'


which, O moharch, 1 came Inlher for exler. i manxhood will alfach lo one who is third
mmatiiig\ourrai.e. iiidescent from yon Yon shall becomea

I ,« ».U-kno«n, O kmc, >h« lh= 1 «' Uk«ll>va. 1

Ksliatriyas should always have ine help «f T)hia 1 lTWa.B 3 !d*—

the sons of Bhrigu in tl>e mailer of sacei it >t , it

fices U.rouBh an irres.slible decree of IS MMrmg lli«e words of the greil
destiny, the Kshainyas and the Obargavas ascelic Chyavana, king Kushika becam
will quarrel. filled wuh joy, and answered as lollow —

3 The Kshatnjas, O ting, will kill all ig — \‘j indeed, O best of the Blisralds,

the descendants ol Bliri^u i Uy an ordi* fie said—Soi be it I— Gifted with hign
naice of fate, 0 ey will root out. tlie race energy, Chyavniia once more addressed
ol Biirigu, not s^iaring even infants tn their the king, and urged him to accept a boon
mothers' wombs-, _ from himself. The king replied, — Very

weir Tromyou, O great ascetic, I shall


4 There will then be born in Bhtigu’s


raceaRishiol the name ol Un


«d with great energy, he will in splendour I
certainly resemble fiie or the sun 1


Gift* I obtain the irurtion of my wish.


i8 — 19 — 20 Let my familybeedme inves-
ted wiih the dignity of Brahmanahood, and


5 He will cherish such anger as will be it always set us heart upon virtuef—

sufficient to consume the three worlds. He ||ie ascetic Cliyavana, thus soliciied,
will be competent lo reduce the whole granted the king's prayer, and bidding
Earth with ail her mountains and forests urewell fo the king, started on h s intended
Hito ashes. sojourn to the sacred waters. I have now

6. roralmle while he will put out the told yod everything, O Bharala,
flames of that fiery rage, ihrowiog it into to ><>« Q'leslions, ns , how the Blir«us
the Mare’s mouth that wanders tlirough and the Ku&lukas became connected wiiM
Iheocean. i each other by marriage Indeed, UKng,

" , everything took place as the Rishi Chya*

7-9 H. will h.vs . ,«n ol iko.omorf 7 ,, (oI

Rielioa. ll.o -1.OI0 K.oreo oli.-ms. O Bl.t.su'i raco) sod ol Vislmsmi tl ("i
stolsss ons, in ill tmbodisd (01m, »dl coms |,.ppe„,d in llid way ll«l

to him, for the extermination of the entire rh»avana had said ^

Kshairiya caste, tlirough a decree of Des* ^
tiny ''lleeelti g that science by inward
^ light, he will, by Yoga oower, communicate ■ —

! It lo his son the highly blessed jamadagni >■

I of purified sout that foremost Bhtt* CHAPTER LVIl,

t gu a race will bear that science in Ins mind

to O you oh righteous soul Jamadagni (ANU3HASANIKA PARVA)-“
will marry a girl, taking her from your Coniinved,

race, for spreading its glory, O chief t>l (be v . ■

Bharatas , > Yodhishtliira 6aid — ‘ ,

tt^ paving obtained for Wife tliedaugb- i 1 am stupefied', O grandfather, W


ter of Gadhi and your granddaughter, O hear your words • thinking that the Earl'*
king, that great ascetic will beget a twice* »s wow destitute of a very large wumbet
born son gifted with Ksliatriya accom- of kings all of whom were gifted with great
plishments, prosperity, my heart becomes filled with

13 In your race will be born a son, a 8'*'^

Ksliatriya gifted w ill the virtues of a Brail 3 Having conquered the Earth a^d
mana Possessed of great virtue, I e wil‘ - ii . . .


mana Possessed of great virtue, I e will acqiPred hundreds ut kingdoms, O Bharala,
W* OadU Known by the name 1 turn with grief, O grandfather, at the

of Vishwamitra, le wilt sii energy come to tUoiAtht of the millions of men I have
be considered as the equal of Vriliaspaii killed

Ih. p,.„pl.. .1 Ui, C.1„.11.1,. Al.s, wh.t ivill ihe cond.lion b= ol

13 The illustrious Riebika will grant those foremost ladies who have been de»

* ifu*°'' j* tl IS Kshatriya who prived by us of husbands and sons af’d

will be endued with high penances. Iwo maternal uncles and brothers 7

5.To“k"SU.' '.0''“’' 4 Hooine' killrf ,1,0.. ICurao-o"'

, kinsmen, that IS and ourfriOods and well*

14 All this will take plac* at Ihe wishers — we shall have lo sink m hell

command of the Grandfather It will with heads hanging downwards. IhcfC

never be otherwise, llie status of Brah is no doiAt of this,


AHUSIIASAMA PAkVA.


Ids


15 Orte having penances for wealth and .
afways passing his days in Yoga obtains
good beds and seals and vel icles. •<«*
nouhcing llie body by enten ig a burning
fire, one becomes an object of tespect in
the refcloo of Brahman

l8 Those who lie on the hard and bare
ground aeq lire houses and beds 1 f'ose
who cloilie tficmselves in rags and barUs
get good dresses and ornament^.


wilh se\efe penances With that end
in view, O king, I wish to receive msliuc*
tions fiom jou.

Vaishampayana said t—

0 Ihe great llhishma, lieanng these
words of Yndhishtltira, refleeicd upon
them acutely with tlie ll•■lp of tiis under-
standing, and addressed Vudliiahthtra in
reply.

SMahma said {—


wonderful


Hear whai I sty to >QU It Is highly ** gy avoiding tlie several agreeable
:rfut and is a great mjstery the tastes one succeeds in winning great P';o*-


tul ject IS liie ends that creatures acquire 1 pe,„y, fly sbstaintng from meal and fish:


after death as (he rewards of patticular
acts or courses of conduct they follow. |
8. One goes to Heaven by penances.
By penances one acqiires fame Oy
penances, O ^rniglity hing, one lives long
and gets all articles of enjoyment. ^

5, By penances one acquires knowledge,
science health and Ireedom from disease,
leaulyof person, pre^peniy, and blessed-
ness, O chiet ol Uliarata’s race. I

10 Hy penances one acquires riches.
Dy ebscivmg tie vow of silence one
succeeds in bringing (he wliole world
under I Is sway Oy making c'fls one
gels all kinds of enjsyable articles Uy
nhserviTig the rite oi Uikshaone acquires
birth in a good and In^.h lamll)*

tl, Thosewho spend tiicir lives living
upon onlv (lu Is and roots succeed m
aeq linng kingdom and sovereignty. Ihose
who live upsn the leaves ol plants and
trees as thsir laod succeed m Komg lo
Heaven.


gets long-lived clulden.
t8 One wlio passes sometime tn Uda*
isa, mode of life, becomes the very lord of ^
the celestial region. Ihe man who speaks
the truth, O best ol men, succeeds m sport-
ing happily with the celestials lliemselreS. ^

19 By making gifts one acquires gmst
fame on account of his high achievemeiiist
By abstention from cnieity, one acquires
lieaUh and freedom from dis-ase By serv-
ing Ihe Urahmanas with respect, one acquires
kingdom and sovereignty, and (he high
position of a Brahmana

so. Uy making gifts of water and other 1
drinks, one acq iires eternal fame on ac- I
count of Itigh achievements. Uy making
gills ol food) oiie^acq iitea various articles
of enjoyment.

31. One who gives peace to ail crea-
tures. (by refraining to do them any injury),
becomes (reed from every region. By serv-
ing the gods, one obtains a kingdom and i
celestial beauty.

33 Dy presenting J ghls nl places winch
are dark and frequented by men, one ac-
quires a good eye-sighi By giving a»ay
good and bfeauiiful objects, one acquires a
good memory and understanding.

33 By distributing scents and garlands.
13. Uy obt*rv mg Dlkshs upon potherbs ll* acq » res lar.reaching fame JJose
-1 Ye,..tabV,. acqnrm a Isrge r"**? . “‘'’V**” I'®"' ?

<1 ol k.ne 1 » oa, „ Ute upon du'dren.

grass and straw axe-el in going n> *4 Uy observing fasts and initial, nn

H»s«n By batlmg litre every da) ‘ haths, O B larata, for twelve sears <me

w.ih Ihe rreessary ,ue,. arqi res a I is supers to lhal

large ftumbee tf waves. By drinking ih* I aiumable by unretufomg h-r-
ar slane, one arnuirei residence in it,*' tr iiu ■


t}. One whn live upsn water only
attains to Heaven. Uy making gills one
s mply increases I is wealih IJy serving
With rcvermce Ins preeepior, one acquires
learning. Uy peiforming hlirarl IHascvery
day m lionor ollisnepsrted Manes, one
acquires a large 1 umber of cliiidrcn.


s ol Praiapati
Tie Bral man:


. -1 ■l»oeHtr on

an ehg We bridegrooni according la i»"
• hn batUs esery Urahma form, one gets, O bell of Jf.n

j^Vse'ss'edrf 'H «d wl*’*"*

KT.;. „« /,r.„v’tT7 -> ^b.


MAItABIIARATA.


13S

hway friilts and flowers succeeds In gaAiing
Sbcred knowledge.

r27. The man who gives away a thotisand
tine Wi\h horns bedecked wUh R«ld, suc-
ceeds In actjuirirtg Heaved. 1 hts has been
declard by ihe very deities In a ccUstial
assemblage.

28 One who Rives away a tCapiladvW

Sviih her calf, with a braien poi for milkingi
With horns bedecked wiih gold, and pos-
sessed of various other accomphshntentsi
obtains the fruition of all hts d-Siresftoin
that cow. j

29 ' Such a person, on aedount of that
act of gift, hves lit the Celestial region for
Bs many years as there are Imrs on the
body b( the Cow and rescues in the next
World his sons and grandsons and all Itis
family to the seventh degree-

3cl That ntan gets to the regions of the
Vasils vVho gives aWay a cow wUh horns
beautifully decorated vvitri gold, aceem-
pained with a brazen ]ar for milking, along
wall a piece oi cloth embroidered with gold,
a ;neajur« oi sesame and a sum of money as
giltt

3t. A gilt ci Ittne reSCties the giver in
ip the next world wtien he finds himself
falling into the deep darkness of heJI and
fettered by his own deeds in this world,
itkeaboat with sails that have caught the
air rescuing a person drowning m the
ocean.

*3J. He 'Who confers adeoghieraccor-
diti|; to the Brahma form upon an eligible
person, or who makes a gilt of lend to a
Urahmana, or who gives food according to
due rites, succeeds in attaining to the region
of Indra.

33. That man win presents a house,
furnished with every sort of furniture to a
Dral mans given to Vedic studies and en-
dued with every accomplishment and good ,
behaviour, hves in the country oi the Uttara-
Kurus.

34> Dy making gifts of draft bullocks, a
person acquires the region of the Vasus
Gift of golu secures Heaven Gift ot pure
gold )ietd$ greater merit still.

35 By making gift of an umbrella, one
acquires a palatial residence By making
gilt of a pair of sandals or shoes, one ac-
quires good car*. Ihe reuard ol cloths,
I* personal beauty, and by making gilts
ol scents, one geu a fragrant body in
next life.

35 One who gives flowers and fruits
and plains and trees to a Urahmana, ac-
quires. without any toil, a palatial residence


contaiRtng beduilfut wonted ahd i>leiil)'
riches ,

37. The giver Of food and dfink of
different tastes and pther articles Of enjoy-
ment succeeds in acquiring profuse supply
ol such articles. The giVer, again, oi houses
and ctoths get articles of a similar riatute.
Ihcre IS no doubt m this.

38. That person \Vho nialtes gifts oi
garlands and mceUse and scents And un-
guents and the articles needed by meil
after a bath, and garlands to Brahmaitasi
becomes freed from every disease and,
possessed of persoiiat beauty, sports in Joy
in the region reserved for great kings.

39 That man, O king, who presents to
a Urahmana a house that is stored with
grant, furnished with beds, full of ncliesi
ausptdioiis, and delightful, acquires a pala^
ttal residence.

40 He ‘who gives to 3 Brahmana a
good bed petfdmsd with fragrant scents,
covered with ad eXtellent ;sheet, and piilov^si
gels without any eflor^n his part a heec-
tifui Wife, belonging t^ Respectable family
and oi agreeable manners.

4t. The man who takes to a hero's bed
on the held of battle becomes the equal of
the Orandfaiher Brahman himself. There
IS no end that 1$ higher than tliii. Cved
this IS what the great Urshis have said. ,

VaishamjJayana said

4a. Hearing these words of his ^grand-
father, Yudhishthira, the dehghter of the
Kurus, became anxious to get the end
reserved for heroes and no longer expressed
any disgust for leading a domestic mode of
flic.

43. Then, O foremost of ttlen, Yudliish-
thira. addressing nli the other sons of
Pandu, said to them —Let the nurds
which our grandfather has said, command
your faith.'

V-j ‘liirs, -dll ‘fire *f-an&avi*5-v»lh>’J’'*-
famous Draupadi amongst them, highly
spoke of the words of Yudhishtliiraandea'd
‘yes.’


CHAPTER LVIIf.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
ConttnueJ.

Yudhishthira said

I. I wish, O Dharata, chief to hear from
yau what the rewards are, O best ©I the
Kufus, of the pUnting cl trees and tie
digging of tanks.


anushasam\ PARVA.


i.' A P'sce of Und o« a besl sight,
t.fide s.tu»ie in the midst of chatminR
adnrn’rd With Various kinds of meta S and

,„habited by all sorts of crealdres. U con-
sidered as the foremost of spots, '

, A particular portion of such land
Should be chosen lor diiralnir a ‘a"*; ‘
shall tell you, In du“ order, the diflerenl
binds of tanks 1 shall also tell
the merits also are of the diggiok. of tanka
A The man who causes a tank to be dug
becomes entitled to the respect and adora-
tion of the three worlds.

e. A tank full of water is as agreeable

and beneficial as the liouse of “./"end U

Is grallljmg to the Sun himself

helps the growth of the celestials It is the

foremost of all things tliat lead to fame.

6—7 The wise have said that the exca-
vation of a tank brings on Virtue. Profit and

Pleasure A tank is said to be pf“P«>y ,
excavated, if It is made on a piece of land
tfiat IS inhabited by respeciab e P*;*®"*

A lank is said to be necessary (or all the
four purposes of living creatures, ‘a®*'*
again, are considered as forming the ex-
cellent beauty of a country.

8 Ihe celestials, Iniman beings. Oars-
dharvas. Departed ^tane8 Uragas, Kaksha-
sas, and even immobile beings, all re*Oft
to a tank full of water as their refuge.

a I shall, therefore, recite to you the
merits attached to tanks as described by
great Rislns, and the rewards in store lor
persons who cause them to be excavated.

10 The wise have said that that man
acquires the merit of an Agiiihotra sacrifice
in whose tank water is held in the season of


rams

II, The hl|th reward in the world that
Is reaped by the person who makes a gift
of a thousand kine is acquired by llwt man
In whose tank water is held in the season of
autumn.

Ij. That person in whose tank water
lies in the cold season acquires the merit
of the wight who performs a sacrifice willi
profuse gifts of gold

13 That person in wliose lank water
ties in the season of dew, acquires the
have said, the mems of an Agnisbtoma
sacrifice

14 That man in whose welf.made lank
water lies in the season of spring acquires
the merit of the Altralra sacrifice.

15 That man in whose lank water lies
in the season of summer wins, the RtshI

say, the merits of a hone scrifice.
tS


16 Tliat man rescues his whole race in
whose tank kme are seen to satisfy llieif
thirst and from which pious men draw tlieif
water.

17 That man in wliose tank kine satisfy

tl eir thirst as also other animals and birds,

and human beings, gams the merits of a
horse sacrifice.

18 Whatever quantity of water is drunk
from one’s lank and whatever q uniity
IS taken therefrom by otliers for purposes of
bathing all become stored for the benefit
of theexcavaler of the tank and he enjoys
the same eternally in the next world

10 Water, especially m the other world,
IS difficult to get, O son. A gift of drink
yields eternal happiness

20. Make gifts of sesame liere Make
gifis of water Dojou also give lamps.
Wi lie alive and awake, do you sport liappi-
ly with kinsmen, these are acts which y lU
shall not be able to aclneve tii the other
world.

21. The gift of drink, O chief of men,
ts superior to every other gift In point of
merit, it is superior to all other gifts 1 here*
fore, do you make gifts of water.

22 Thus have the Rishis described the
high merits of the excavation of tanks 1
shall now describe to you the planting of
trees.

23. Of immobile objects, siX classes
I have been spoken They are Vrikshas,
I Gulmas. Laias, Vallis, fwaksaras, and
Irmas of diverse kinds.

24 Ihese are the several kinds of
getables. Listen now to the merit of
their planting Dy planting trees one
acquires fame in the world of men and
ipicious rewards in the next world.


_ Such a man Is applauded and res-
pected in the world of the Departed Manes,
buch a man's name does not die even
when he goes to live in the world of celes-
tials.

afi. The mao who plants trees rescues
the ancestors and descendants of both his
paternal and maternal lines Do you,
therefore, plant trees, O Yudhishlhira.

The trees that a man plants be-
come the planter's children There is no
doubt in this Departing from this world,
an goes to the celestial region,
ijoys many eternal regions of


such I
Indeed, he c
bliss.


28. Trees please the deities by their
flowers, the Departed Manes by il.eif

.CoY4‘inS‘‘* ""


MAflABIIARATA


I3S

7g. Kmnaras, Uragas, Raksliasas, deities
G'liidtiari'as, and Imman beings, as also
Risliis, all resort to trees as tbeir refuge-

3'3 Trees tliat bear flowers and fruits
please all men. The planter of trees is
saved" m the next world by the trees lie
plants like children saving their own
father.

3t. Therefore, the man who is desirous
oE achieving his own good, should plant
trees by the side of tanks and rear them
tite his own cliildren. 1 he trees which a
man plants are, according to both reason
and the scriptures, the children of the
planter.

33 That Brahmana wlio excavates a
lank, and he who plants trees, and he who
performs sacrifices, are all adored m the
celestial region as men who are devoted to
truthfulness of speech

33 IJence, one should cause tanks to
be excavated and tress to be planted, adore
(he deities in diverse saeriflces, arid speak
the irutli.


CIIAPTCR LTX. I

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
C«nlinu*J,

Tndhislitliira sard:— ■

1. Amongst all those gifts mentioned
in the work other than the Vedas, which
gilt, O chief of Kuru’s race, ts the most
superior, in your opinion 7

3. O powerful one, great is my curiosity
in this matter. Do you describe 10 me that
gift which (olfows the giver to the next
vorld 7


Shishmi said

3~“4 An assurance to all creatures of!
love and afleciion and abstention from
every sort of injury, acts of kindness end
favor done to a person in distress, gilts of
articles made to one who solicits with lliirsl
and agreeable to the sniiciior's wishes, and
whatever gifts are made without the giver’s -
ever ilunking of them as gills made by him,
lorm, O clnef of Bharata $ race, the high-
est and best of gifts

5. Gift of gold, gift of kfne. and gift ©I
earth.^these are considered as sin-clean-
sing I ley rescue the giver from Ins evil
deeds.


6. O king, do )o« alw^t makesoeh
gilts to the righteous Forsooth, gifts
rescue the giver from all hii sms. I


7. That perton who wishes to make htf
gifts eternal, should always give to persons
gifted^witli necessary rj lalificatioiis what-
ever ariTcfes are desired by all and what-
ever things are the best in his house.

S The mart who makes gifts of agree-
able things and who does to others what is
agreeable to others always succeeds itr
getting things that are agreeable to him-
self Such a person" certamfy becomes
agreeable to alf, both here and hereafter.

9. That man, O yudlnshthtra, is a
cruel wight who through vanity, does net,
to the extent of his means, attend to the
wishes of the poor and helpless wim sohgt
assistance^

10- He IS, indeed the forermst of men
who-sliows favour to even an helpless enemy
falterr into distress when such enemy comes
and prays for help,

ir No man is equal to him who satisfies
the hunger of a person who is emaciaiedi
possessed of learning, destitute of the
means of support, and weakened by misery.

I 13 One sloiifd always, Osoty of Kunli,

I remove by ever means in his power, ih*

I distress ol the pious observant of vows and
acts, wlio.'thougit having no sons and wives
and plunged into misery, do not yet solicit
others (or any kind of help

tj— 14 Ihose persons who do not utter

blessings upon the deities and men, wlio are
worthy of respect and always contented,
and w>)o live uport such alms as tliey gel
without begging, are considered as
able snakes ot virulent poison. Do you. O
Bharata alway s protect yourself from the"’
by makmg gifis to them. Hiey arc cep-
able to make llw foremost of Riiwij**'
You are to fnid them out by means of >0"*
spies and agents.

13. You should honor tliose men by
Rills of good houses furnished with every
necessary article, with staves and servant*,
with good dresses and vestments. O son 01
Kuru. and with all articles bringing o"
pleasure and happiness.

16 Righteous men of righteous deed*
should make such gifts, moved by l'’*
desire lliat it is their duly to act in that **7
and not from desire ol reaping any reward*
therefrom Indeed, good men slioold ad

in this way so that the virtu ms men des-
cribed above might not, O Yudhishlhir*.
(eel any disinclination to accept those gi'U
sanctified by devotion and faith.

17. There are persons bathed in
ing and bathed in vows Wiifiout depend-
ing upon anybody they get their mean* of
living, These Brahmana* ol rigid vo**
•re given to Vedic study anJ p-nsoee*


AMUSliASANA PaRVA.


139


^itljout proclaiming (ItsTf practices to any
one

t8 Whatever gifts you may make to
those persons of pure conduct, of tfiorough
mastery over their senses, and always
contented with Ifieir own married wives, are
sure to acquire for you a merit that wiH
accompany you in all the worlds into which
you may go.

19 One reaps the same merit hy mak-
ing nifts to twice-born persons of controlled
souls which one acquires by properly pour-
ing libations to the sacred fire morning and
evening

20. Tins IS the sacnfice spread out for
you,— a sacrifice that IS sanciified by devo-
tion and faith and >hat is accompanied wuh
Dakshina 1 It is superior to alt other sacri-
fices Let that sacrifice ceaselessly Row
from you as you give away.

21. Performed in view of such men, O
Vudiushlhira, a sacrifice in which the water
that IS Sprinkled for dedicating gifts forms
the obUiions * in honor of the Departed
Manes, and devotion and worstup rendered
to such superior men, serves to free one of
the debts he owes to t1i« deities

i» Those persons who do not give way
to anger and who never desire to isk« even
« bl^Je of grass belonging 10 others, as
also they who are of sweet speech, deserve
to receive from us (he most respectful
adoraiiont.


aj Such persons and others never pay
their regards to the giver. Nor do they try
for obtaining gifts. Jhey should, however,
be maintatned by givers as they matuiain
their own sons. I bend my head to them,
i'fom (hem also proceeds fearlesmess.

24 Riiwqas, Priests and Preceptors,
when well-read In the Vedas and. wlien
brhavtng miidiy lowards disciples, become
such horsooih, Kshitriya energy loses its
force upon a Btahmana when it meets him.

25 Thinking that you are a king, (hat you
are gifted with gtcat^power, and that you
have iiehes do, not.O Yudhishthira, enjoy
jour aWoence wn'nout giving anylhmg lo
the Orahinanas.

26. Observing the duties of your own
caste, do you adore the Oralimanas with
whatever riches you have, O sinless one, for
purposes of adornment or susiaiomg your
power.


37- Let the Orahmanis live in whatevc
way they like You should always bend yot
head to them wuh respect. Let them alway
rejoice m you as your children, livin
happily and according lo their wishes.

a 3 . Who else t»re you, O best of tfi
Kurus, can provide the means of liyelihooi


lor such Brahmanas as are gifted wiin
eternal contentment, as are your well-
wishers, and as are pleased with only a
little 1

29 As women have one eternal duty, in
tins world, vts , dependence upon, and Hie
obedient service of, (heir husbands, and
as such duly forms their only end, so is tiie
service of Brahmsnas our eternal duty and
end


30 — 31. If On seeing cruelties and other
siiilul deeds in iCsIiatriyas, the Bralimsnas,
O son, unlionored by us, leave us afl, ( say,
of what use would life be to us, in the
absence of all contact with the Brahmanas,
especially as we shall then have (o carry on
our existence wiiliout being able to study
the Vedas. 10 celebrate sacrifices, to hope
for worlds of bliss hereafter, and toper-
form great deeds T

32. 1 shall, about it, tell you what the
eternal practice Is. Formerly, O king, the
Kshatriyas used to serve tlie Brahmanas.

33, liie Vaishya likewise used in those
days to adore the Kshatnya, and the
Shudra loadore the Vaishya. I Ins is what
IS heard. I he Bralnnana was like a burn-
ing fire. Without being able to touch him
or approach Ins presence, the Slmdra used
to serve (he Brahmana from a distance.


34 It was only the Kshatnya and the
Vaishya who could serve the Brel mana by
touching bis body or approaching his
presence. 1 he Brahmanas are gifted wiib
a mild disposiiioii. Ihey are truthful in
conduct. Ihey are followers ol. the true
religion.

35 When angry, they are like snakes
of dreadful poison. Such being their
nature, do you, O Yudliislithira, serve and
attend them with obedience and respect.
Ihe Uralimanas are superior to (hose who
are higher than the high and the low.

36. The energy and penances of those
Kshatriyas who blaze forth with energy and
power, become powerless and neutralised
when they icome in contact with the Brah-


o/. ...y lainer iiimseii is not dearer to
me than the Brahmanas. My mother is not
dearer to me than they, grandfather.
? dearer, my own life 1$ not .

dearer , .0 king, to me than the Brahmanas.

'* »«hing, O Yu-
dhistMra, that is dearer to me Hian you.
But, O chief of Bhirata’s race, the Brah-
nianas are dearer to me than even you.

39. I tell you truly, O son of Pandu •

I swear by this truth, by winch f hops to

i.«n shMuS;;


mahabharata.


140


40, t see lliose sacred regions with
Brahma shining conspicuously before them
I sliatl go there, O son, and live m them
eternally.

41. Seeing these regions O best of the
Bharatas, 1 am filled with |0y at the
thought of all these acts which 1 have done
in aid and honor of the Brahmanas, O
king.


CHAPTER LX.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

Coniintied.


Tudbialithira said
t. lo which of two Brahmanas. when
both happen lo be equally pure m conduct,
equally gifted with learning and purity, ol
birth and blood, but differing from each
other in onl} this, tiia , tl e one solicits and
the Ollier does not, — I ask, O grandfather,
would a gill be more meritorious 7


Bhisbma gaid —

a It has been said, O sen of rrilha,
that a gift made to an unsehemng person
yields greater merit than one made to a
person who begs One endued with con*
lentment is certainly more deserving than
that person who is shorn of that virtue and
IS, therefore, helpless amidst the storms and
buffets of the world.


3 The firmness of a Kshatri)a consists
in the protection he gives lo others The
I firmness of a BraUmatia consuls in his

1 1 refusal to beg 1 he Brahmana endued
with sieadiness and learning and content-
tnent gUtldens th* celestials.

4. The wise have said that an act ol

I begemg on the part of a poor man is a
great reproacli 1 hose persons who solicit
others are said to annoy the world like
thieves Slid robbers ....

5. The person who solicits is said to
) tnetlwiih drolit. The giver, however, is
1 said not to inert with death I he giver is
I said to ^ive life to him who solicits. By an
I act of t.ift, O Vudhishiliira. the giver is
1 said to rescue Ills own self also.


MetC) IS a very hieh virtue I cd by
cy people make gilts to those who
Cit. those, however, who do not beg
are iiiok into poverty and distress,
lould be respectfully invited for receiving


I tip.


7. If such Drahmsnat, who must be
eonjidered as the farrmost of their order,
live in your Lingdcm. )on should Consider
Uem IS file coteted with ashes.


8 Burning with penances, they are
capable of consuming the whole. Earth.
Such persons O son of Kuru’s race though
not generally adored, should still he con-
sidered as worthy of adoration in every
way.

9 Gifted with knowledge and spiritual
vision and penances and Yoga, such persons
always deserve our adoration. O scorcher
of enemies, do you always oHer adoration
to such Brahmanas.

10. One should go of his own accord lo|
those foremost of Brahmanas who do not!
solicit any body and make gifts to them of|
variou> binds of wealth in abundance * |

merit that comes from pioperly pouring^
libations on the sacred fire every mormngji
and evening, is acquired by the person who |
makes gifts to a Brahm ana e odawe d .w illi
learning, with the Vedas, and with highand
excellent vows.

tl— YaT' You should, O son 0! Kiinln
invite those foremost of Brahmanas, who
are cleansed by learning and the Vedas
and vows, who live in independence, whose
Vedic studies and penances are concealed
without being announced from the house
lop, and who observe excellent vows, and
honor them sviih gills of well-built f'd
charming houses containing servitors and
robes and fumnnre, and all other articles
of ple<*sure and enjoyment.

13 Knowing all duties and possessed ol
minute vision those foremost ol Brih*
manas O Yudhishlhira, may accept the gin*
offered to them with devotion and respect,
thinking that thny should not refuse and
disappoint the giver.

14. You should invite those Brahmans*
whose SMves wnt for their reiurn like tillers
in expectation of ram. Having fed them
well, you should prespot additional food to
them so that upon their reiurn home their
expectant wives inieht be able to distribute
that food am mg their children who had
clamoured lor food but wtio had been con-
soled witti promises

15 Brahmacharms of controlled sense*.
O son, by eating at one's house m the
forenoon cause the tl ree sacriricial fires to
be pleased with the householder at whose
bouse they eat.

tC I et the sacrifice of gift proceed u* /
your house at mi Iday, O son. and do yoi*/
also disirihu'e kine and gold and dfess»**|
By aciing thus, you are sure to please lh*4
king of the celestials himself.

*7. That would constitute your third
aacnfiee. O Yudhishlhira. in which offeimc*
ar« rtide to the deities, the Depatt'®


Manes and 0 »c Brahmanai By such sacn* .
fice you afc sure lo please ihe Vishwedevas.

18 Let mercy lo all crealures, giving lo
all creatures wlisl is ilue to them cwurol- |
Imp the senses, reniincialtoii, firm >ess, and
trutli, form ifie.finaLbaili of tliat sacrifice
whicli IS ioimed by gilt.

19 This IS the sacrifice itiat is spread
out for you a sacritice winch is sanctifi-'d
by devotion atid faiCli, and who has a targe
sacrificial gift attached to it Ttus sacrifice
which IS formed by gift is supendr to all

\oiher sacrifices O son, let this sacrifice be
{always celebrated by you.


8 H such Brahmanas do not accept
your gifts, no merit wiJI become yours.
Do you celebrate sacrifices with profuse
Dabshi la, and inahe gifis of good and
agreeable food to llie rigliteous

g By maiiiiig an act of gift you should
consider yourself as performing a sacrifice.
You should, with gifts, worship those Brali-
manas who perform sacrifices By dung
this you will acquire a share lu the merits
of those sacrifices of theirs,

to. You should support such Brahmanas \
as have children and as are c.ipable of |
sending people lo heaven. By acting tiiuSv |
you are sure to get a large progeny,— in J
fact, as large a progeny as the Par]dpali
luinself.


CHAPTER LXl.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Conlittued,

TadhiaMbira said •—

1 wish to know fully, O Dharata,
where one gets the high rewards of gilts
and sacrifices Are tl os<* rewards acquired
here or hereafter t Winch afflon|st tfiese
two (vis , Gift and Sacrifice) yields superior
merit? to whom should gifts be made?
In what manner are gifts and sacrifices to
be made? When alio are they to be made?

I esk you tins, O learned «tre? Do you
discourse to me on the duty of gifts I
^ Do you tell me, O grandfather, what
brti gs on tie higfirst reward, vis, gitis
made from the sacrificial platform or those
made out of that place ?

Dhisbma said —

4 O soil, A Kshairiya is generally
gaped in deeds of fierceness. In his c
sacrifices and gifts, are considered as clean,
sing or sanctifying liirti.

5 The good and righteous, dn not ac-
cept tl e gills of persons of the royal order,
who perpeirale sinful deeds Dierefore, the
kii g should celebrate s-iCrifiees with pro-
fuse gifts in the form of Uakslitns.

6 U the good and righteous would ac»
Cepl Ihe gifts made lo them, ihe Kshjtriya,
O kii p should continually make sifts with
devotion and faith to them Gilts yield
great nuiil, and are higl ly cleansing.


7 Observing vow,, one should celebrate
j saenfices and pleaic with wealth, such
f Ur.I.manai as are friends of all creatures.
- with righteousness, conversant of

t the Vedas, and pre eminent for acts, con-
Vd«t and ptnantcj.


The righteous support and advance
(he cause of virtue One sfiould by giving
up 1m all, support such men as also those
who do good to all crealures \

YourSeU being rich, you, O
Vudhishthira, make gifts to Brafiminav of
kmc and bullocks and food and VmbrelUs
and robes and candles or slioe'j^^

13 Do you give to sacrificing Brah-
manas clarified bulier as also food and
cars and vehicles with horses harnessed
tl ereto, and dwelling houses and mansions
and beds.

Such gifts yield prosperity and
aflluence to the giver, and are considered
as pure, O Dhorata Diose Brahmanas
who are not censurable for anything they
do and who have no means of support
assigned to them, should be found out

15 Coverjly or publicly, da you main,
tain such Brahmanas by giving to them
the means of support Such conduct al-
ways gives I igfier benefit t » Kshatriyas than
the lta|asuya and the Horse bacrifices

16 Purged oft of sin. you are sure of
.lU. .me 10 Hav. . F.ll.ne

you should do good to your kingdom.

17. By such condocf you are sure to
acquire I n nense.rut)n>a. wA ba.7.-Wrt, afttaVi-
man (in joi.r next life) Do you, O B-.araia,
protect your own means m aho the means
of other people s livelihood.

18 Do you soppori your .eryjol,
>our own cl ildren Do >00, O Bliarafa
Brahmanas in the enjoyment *of
what they have and make oili*
such articfes as they have not ^ ***


19 Let your h/e b® devoted (0 the
Brahmanas Let it never be said that
you do not grant protection to the Brah
tnanas. Mucfi wcaJih. when possessed by


^tAUABHARATA


M2

a Brat mana , become^ a source of evil to
t<im

20 Constant association with riches
and prospetiiy is sure to fill fiirit with
pride and cause him to be' Stupefied
If the Brahmanas became stupefied and
steeped m folly virtue and dimes are sure
to SI fier destruction Forsooth if virtue
and duty come to an end, it will lead to tlie
destruction of all creatures

2t That king who having amassed
riches makes it over to bis treasury officers
and guards, and then begins to aeam
plunder his kingdom, saying to his officers,
— Do )e bring me as much riches as you
can extort from the ktngdain<

22 And wl o spends the riches that is
thus collected at his behest under circums*
leoces of tear ae.d cruelty , w tlve perform
inance of sacrifices, should know that those
sacrifices of Ins, are never highly spoken of
by the pious.

23\ *1 should celebrate sacrifices

with itic'giTioney as IS willingly paid to his
Ireasut^ prosperous and unpersecuted
subjeei^' Sacrinoes should never be
celebrated with money got with severity and
extortion

24 The king should then celebrate
great saertfiees with large presents in the
shape nl Dakshina when on account of
Ins being devoted (0 the behoof of his
subjects the latter bathe him with copious
showers 0! riches brought willingly by
them for the purpose.

25 The king should protect the iiehe*
of those that are old, ol those that anR
minors, of (hose (hat are blind, and o?
those that are otherwise disqualified n<«
king should never take any money from
Ins people, if they, in a season of droiiglit,
succeed in growing any corn with the help
of water obtained from wells Nor should
I e take any wealth from weeping women.

a6 Tl e riches taken from the poor and
(he helpless is sure (0 dcs(roy (lie kingdom
and the prospeiity of the king Ihe king
should always present to the righteous all
enjoyable articles in abundance He
should cerlainlv remove the leaf of famish*
ing which those men may have

27 There are no men more sinfu! than
those upon whose food children look wist*
fully without being able to eat them duly.

2S. H will m your kingdom any learned
Bralimana dies with hunger like any of
those children, you shall then incur the
sin of Icsticide lor having allowed such »n
act.

t') llmg Sbivi himself had said this.


ntg , ^Fic on that king in whose kingdom 1

Brahn*aoa of even any other man starves

30 That kingdom in which a Brahmana
of the Sn-«taka cUss starves, becomes over*
wl elmed wiili adversify Such a kingdom
with king also incurs reproach, |

31. 1 hat king is more dead than alive

in whose kingdom women are easily
abducted from tUeir husbands and sons
utteririg cries and groans of indignation
and gfief.

I 32 The subjects should a’-m themselves
I for killing that Sing who does not protect
them, who simply plunders tl eir riches,
who confounds all distinctioni,r wh • is in-
capable of taking their lead who is witlout
mercy, and who is considered as the tnosC
sinful of kings. ,

33 That king who tells his people thsf
he IS their protector but who does not or is
unable to protect tliem, should be killed
by Ins subjects in a body like a dog that ■<
aflected with the rabies •and has become
mad.

34 K fourth perl of whatever sins are
committed by ihe subjects visits that king
who does not protect, O Bharata.

33 Some authoniiet say that the whole
of (lose sms visits such a king Otiers
aie o( opinion ihat a half thereof visits him-
Bearing m mind however, thessjingo!
Manu. H u our opinion ihaia fourth part of
such sms visits the unprotecling king

35 That king, O Bharata, who affords
proteCiion lo his subjects gets fourth part
.1 wtiaiever ments his subjects win by
giving under his protection.

37 Do you, O Yudliishlhira, act m
such a way that all your subjects may seek
refuge with you as long as you are alive,
as all creatures seek the refuge of the god
of ram or as the birds seek the refuge of
a large tree.

3^ Let all >our kinsmen andall)Ouf
friends and well wishers, O scorcher of
enemies seek reluge with you as the
Uakshaias seek Kuvera or the gods seek
Indra as theirs.


CHAPTER LXII.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Cenltnuedt

Yndliishthira said

I, People accept with respect the sat *
mgs of the Shrutis which say —This is to bo
given— This other thing is to be given '■*“
As teeardskinct aeain Ihev make Elhs


ANUSHASANA PARVA


M3


various liunRS I® Various iBeti. What,
however, O grandfailier, is the beat or
/oremost of ati gifts ?

Bhislima said

3 . or all lunds of gtHs the gift of earlfi
is said to be the first Earth is immovable
and indestructible It is capable of givmit
to him who possesses it all tl e best lUings
Upon which he may litre to have
^ 3» 1* dresses and vestments, jewels

and f^ems, animals, paddy, and batley
Amongst all creatures, the giver of earth
grows rich for ever and ever.

4 As long as the earth lasts, so long
does the giver lliereof grow ricli there
Is no gift that is liiglicr, O Yudhishthira,
chan the gift of earth.

5 We have heard that all men have
given a liitle quantity of earth AH men
liav* made giJij j>I >a'ih, htina ail men
enjoy a little of earth

6 Whether in this or m the rrevt world,
all creatures live subject to tl eirown deeds
Earth IS Prosperity’s self She is a power*
lul goddess She makes him her ford
who makes gifts of her m this life to other
people

7 That person, 0 best of kings who
gives away earth, which Is indestructible :
as Blit IS born m nest life as a man and
becomes also a lord of Earth

8 The quantity of one's enjoymertt m
|}»s life is equal CO orre's gifts rn a pristine
life lliis IS the conclusion pointed out by
the scriptures For a Kshatnya should
either give away the Earth cn gift or
renounce his hie in battle

9 This IS the highest source of pros*
penty to Kshatnyas We have heard that
earih w) en given away, cleanses and
sanctifies the giver.

10 lie man who is of sinful conduct
who IS guifly of □rafimanici le and of
fatseliood, is purified by a gift of earth
Indeed such a gift rescues even such a
sinner from alt his sins

It The Virtuous accept gifts of earth
only and no oilier elimg from smful kings
Like one’s moilier, earih when given away,
purifies tlie giver and the t.«ker.

13 This IS an eternal and secret name
of earth, vie , Priyadatra Given away
or accepted in gilt, the name that is dear
to her IS Priyadatia, !

13 The gift of earth is desirable I
That king who makes a gift of earth to a I
learned Drabmana, gels from that gift a
kingdom. I


14 Upon being born again in this
world, such a man, forsooth, attains to a
position eq laj 10 that of a king Hence, a
King, at soon as he gets earth, should make
gifts of earth to the Brahmanas.

15 None but a lord of Earth can make
gifts of earth. N >r slioul J one who is not
a worthy person accept a gift of earth

16 They who desire earth sliould act
thus Tlial person who takes away earth
befongiit^ 10 a pious person never gets any
earth

17 By making gifts of earth to tlie
righteous one gets gO)d earth Of vir*
tuoiit sou], such a giver acquires great fame
both in this world and in the next.

t 9 That pious king about whom the
Brahmanas sa^ -~VVe live on earth given to
us by him,— 'IS such that bis very enemies
cannot Utter the least reproach about liis
kingdom

tg Whatever sms a man commits from
want of ih« means of livelihood are all
washed off by gift rif only so much earth
as IS covered by a cow hide

»0 I'hoseTtun'S who are mean in thetr
acts or are cl fierce deeds should be ta rght
that gift of earth is highly purifying and
ts at the same time the highest gift.

3t The ancients ihnugbt that there is
always very little d fference between I) e
man who celebrates a Horse Sacrifice and
him who makes a gift of earth to one wfto
It righteous.

33 The learned doubt the acq iision of
merit winch all other pious acts yield The
only act about which they are dead ceitain,
Is the gift of earil) which, indeed is the
foremost of all gifts

33 The wise man who makes gifts of
earth, gives away all these vie gold, silver
cloth, gems and pearls and precious stones

34 Penariees sacrifice, Vedic learning,
good conduct, nbsence of cupidity, firmness
rn (ruth, adoraiion of elders preceptors,
and the denies, all these live m him who
makes a gift of earth.

35 Ifiey who ascend lo the region of
Brahman by renouncing their lives in battle
after having fought wiihout any consider*
ation for themselves for securing (he behoof
of their masters,— -even they are unable to
go above the merit of those who make gifts
of earth

a6 As the mother always nourishes I er
own child with milk from her breast, so
does canh please with all the tastes the
person Uiat makes a gift of earth

37 Mriiyu, Vaiktnieara, Danda, Tama,
Fire, who is highly fierce, and all heinous


144


mahadharata.


»nd terrible sins are incapable of loucliing
the person xnIio makes a ^ift of earth

aS lhat man of tranquil sout siho
makrsaeilt o( earth pleases (by that act)
the Departed Manes living In their region
and the deities also hailing from tlie region
tliat IS theirs

29 The man who makes a gift «( earth
to one who is w*ak and cheerless and desli
tiite of tt e means of life and famishing
with weakness, and who tlierehy supplies
one with the means of sustenance, de>
serves the honor and merit of celebrating a
sacrifice.

30 As an afTectionate cow runs towards
her half, with tuH udders dropping milk
Similarly the I i|thh blessed Earth, runs to*
wards the person who makes a gift of earth

31 lhat man who makes to a Drahmana
a gift of earth winch I as been tilled, or
sown with seeds or whieh contains standing
crops, or a palace well furnished with every
necessary article, succeeds in becoming the
Bccomphsi er of the wishes of everybody.

3^ The Rian who makes a Brahmana
having the means o< hfe, possessing a
domestic fire and of pure vows and prac*
tices. accept a gilt of earth, never falls into
any danger or distress.

33 As the moon Increases day by day,
so tl e merit of a gift of earth increases
every time such earth produces crops

34 Those persons conversant with
ancient history airg this verse regarding
the gift of earth Hearing that verse
Jamadagtii's son (Rama) gave away the
whole Earth to Kashyapa

35 Ihe verse to winch I refer ts tins -*■
Receive m~ in gift Give me away By
giving me away you (O kiver) will oblain
me agaiil lliat which is given away m
tins life IS re*acquired in (he next

36 1 hat Drahmana who recites this
great saying of the Vedas at the time ol
a Shraddha get the highest reward

^ A gift of earth is a great evqialion
tor the sin of those powerful men who per-
form Atharvan rites tor inpiring others
Indeed by making a gift of earth one
rescues ten generations of his paternal and
maternal (anuhes

33 lhat person who knows this Vedic
say II g about the merus of a gift of earth
succeeds in rescuing ten generations of
both Ins paternal and maternal families
Barth IS the original source ol all creatures.
U has been said that the god of fire is the
presiding genius of earth.

39 Alter the coronation ceremony has
been performed of a king, this Vedic say*


ing should be recited to Innl, so (hatflf
may make gifts of earth and may never
take away earth from a pious person,

40 rorsooth, the entire wealth owned
by tf e king belongs to the Drahm-inas A
king knowirlg well the science of duty and
morality is the first requisite of the Isng<
dom's prosperity.

41. Tliose people whose king is un«
righteous and atheistic in conduct and be*
hef, can never be happy Such people can
never sleep or wake in peace. ,

4* — 43 On account of his deeds of
wickedness his subjects become always filled
with anxiety. Protection of what the sub*
yects already have and new acquisitions
by fair means are events that are not seen
in the kingdom of such a king Those
people again, who have a wise and righte
ous king, sleep happily and wake up 1
liappiness,

44 By the Blessed and righteous act
of such a king his subjects become shon
of anxiety The subjects, restrained Iron
wicked deeds grow m prosperity througl
Meir own conduct Capable el keepiii
what they have, they go on making ne
acquisitions

43 That king who makes gifts of eartli
tt considered as well born He is eon
sidered as a man He is a friend flei
righteous m his acts He is a giver. H
IS considered as possessing prowess.

46 Tliose men who make gifts of ampi
and fertile earth to Brahmanas known
the Vedas, always thine m the world, 0
account of their energy, like so many suns

47 As seeds scattered on the soil grov
and yield a goodly crop, so all one's wishe
become successful on account ol his makinj
gifisof earth

4S The Sun, Vanina, Vishnu, Drahmar
the Moon the Fre-God and the illustnoi
and tndent-bearning Mahadeva all pran
the man who makes a gift of earth.

49 Bwing creatures origynalelrom E»tt
and It is to the Eirth that they retur
when they disappear. Living creature
which are divided into four classes hav
Earth for their primordial essence

50 The Earth is both the metherari
11****^ ®' u iiverse of creatures O kmi
< iiere is nr, element, O king, that can com
pare with Earth.

51 About It IS cited the old discour'
between the celestial preceptor Vnhaspa
and Indra the king of Heaven, O Yudhisl
thira.

SI Having worshipped Vishnu m
hundred sacrifices each of which w


MiVSnAShUA PARVA


taVnoHS ior plentiful Rifts, Magliaval put
tins question to Vrifiaspali, tliat foremost
nf nil orators.

Magharat said —

5} O illiutDoiis one, h) wlist Rift does
one succeed in cominc to ilie celestial region
nnd acquiring beatitude f O foremost of
speakers, ds jou tell rne of llial gift wiiicli
jields liigh and eternal tnenl.

fehislirda said —

llius addressed by llie kingoflbe
Celestials, tlie preceptor of the gods, vit ,
Vntiaspali of great energy, said these words
in reply to liim of a hundred sacrifices.

VnUaSpati said:—

55 Gift of gold, gift of kine, md gift
nf earih,--.by ihete, O destroyer of Vritra,
one becomes cleansed, O you of great
wisdom, of all sins

Sfi There is no gift. O king of the cefes*
Itals higher than the gift of earth, O
powerful one. ( consider this gift as the
most superior, according lo wliat has been
declared by the wise.

S7 Those heroes who, fearless of battle,
give their lives in battles with enemies
come to Ifraven. How high cover their
end, none of them can get over the giver
of earth.

5S. Tliose men who, disregarding their
bodies, give their lives in battle white work,
ing for the behoof of their masters, ascend
to tiie region of Bratiman himself. Out
even they are unable to get over the giver
of earth,

59 By making a gift of earth one res.
Curs these eleven, eis , five grneraiions of
finersiors and six generations of descen.
d^nts.

d I. That person, O Purandara who
makes a gift of eatth rich with jewels and
gems becomes purged eg oI all his sms and
IS highly respected ux the celestisl region,

til. If a person, O king makrs a gift
nl ncti and Irtlile e-irlh that is capable of
tranilng rverj aMhhe Succeeds m attain,
mg to lie position of a king of kings ( in
lii« next life ) A pifi of eaitti, therefore,
IS the (oirmosl of nil v>lts.

fjj That person. O Vasava, who makes
n gift of rai |h capahle of satisfying every
wish with fruition is considered as making
a gill of evtty ol [ki m the world

Ct Thsi msn wtio gives aasy a cose
endued with esery accomphshment and
gianlirgtie frnionn of eiery desire, sue.
rirrds, O you «f a Ihniisjni] eyes, in ailam.
mg il e eetesiiil region,

•9


U5

6| The giver of earth, O king of the
cefestiafs, IS pleased when he comes ta
Heaven, by hundreds of rivers which run
honey and ghee and milk and curds

65 A king, by making gifts of esrlli,
IS purged off of at] hjs sins Ihereisno
gift tlierefore, which is superior to the gift
of earth

66 That king who gives an.iy the Carth
bounded by the ocean, after having con*
quered It with the help of liis weapons, is
talked of by all men and his memory Usis
as long as llie mountains last on the surface
of Earth.

67. Gifted as lie IS With the merits that
belong to ttie gift of earth, the region of
happiness reserved for the person who
makes gift of such eartlj as is auspicious
and Itch svith every taste, never become
I exhausted.

^ dS Tht{ king, O Shakes, uho wohes lo
I have prospeniy and who wishes to acq nre
happiness lor himieff, sfioufd always make
' gifts of eartlif with due riles, to worthy
persons.

69 If after committing numerous sins
a person makes gifts of earth to the twice*
born class, be leaves off all those sins like
a snake casting ofT us slough

JO The person who makes a gift of
earth IS said to make gilts of everything,
tliat IS, of seas and rivers and mountains
and loresfs,

j\, Cy making a gifl’et earth, the person
IS said 10 giveaway l4kes and tanks and
Kells and rivers On acceant of the
moisture of earth, one IS said to five away
articles of various tastes by making a gift
of earth,

jj The man who makes a gift of eaith
IS considered ns giving away herbs and
plants possessed of lugh and tflicacious
virtues, trers adorned Kith flowers and
fruit, charming forests, and hiftocks,

J3 The merit wJ ich a person arqiiires
by making a gift of earth is incapable of
bring acquired by the peifcrmancc of even
such great sicnrices as the Agiiishtoma and
others with profuse gifts in il e shape of
OaLshina.

j4 The giver cf rsriJi, It las Iren al-
ready said rescues ten grneratii'ns of both
bis parcrnal and mairn at familxs. {ike-
wiae, by takii g away raiih that was given
away, ewe sinks > imtell into hill and cstls
lr*i genrrsi'Ons of both one's paternal and
tnalernal lines into lie same place of
nnsrry

yc. That man who having ptm sed to
Riatie a gill cl caitb dees 1 rt tciuv U r akn


MAIIADIIARATA,


14G


It or wlio Iiavtntr made a gift resumes tl,
l.as 10 pass a tong Hme. m great misery on
.ccent or bting nod
Varuna at llie command ol Llealli.


76 Those men have never lo go to
Yama w’lO honor and adore Hiose loremosl
ol IJ.ahmatias who pour hbaiions every day
on their domestic fire, who are always
encaeed m the performance of sacrifices,
who have scanty means of livelihood, and
who receive with hospitality every guest
seeking shelter m tl»eir Iwuses

77. 'Ihekrng, O Purandara, should free
Jiim«'e 1 f from the debt he owes to the Brah*
mtnas and protect the helpless arid the
weak of the other castes.


78. 'Ike king should never resume, O
chief of the gods, e yth that has been given
away by anotlrer to a D 7 ahmaiwi, O king,
of the celestials, who is destitute of the
means of hfe>

79. The tears that would drop from (he
eyes of such cheerless and destitute Brah*
manas on aceount nf their Unds being
resumed, are capable of destroying the
ancestors and descendants to the third
generation of the resumer.


80. lhat man who re<?nstates a king
driven away from Ins kmgdonr, gets resi-
dence in Heaven and is much honored by
the denisens thereof.


'lhat king who succeeds in
' making g'fls of earth with such crops |
standing thefeor\ as sugarcane or barley or'
wheat, or with kme and horses and other
draft cattle — earth that has been acquired
with the might of the giver's arms, — that
[ has mineral in rts bowels and that is covered
k with every kmd of wealth on the surface,
acquires unending regions of liappiiiess in

I the next world, and such a king it 1$ that
IS said to celebrate the earth-sacriBce )

83 That king whoTnakes a gift of earth
IS purged oS ol every sin and, and therefore,
IS pure and liked by the righteous In this
»vrti^rt.hn.'f-.hitj}il«jhnnnr«l 'uirL qr^wwL'uj
all rigl teous men


84 llie merit of a gift of earth in-
creases every lime the earth given away
bears crops (or the benefit of the owner,
as a drop of oil, falling upon water, is seen
to extend on every side, and cover the
watery suiface.


85 'Ihose herorc kings and ornamenls
ol assemblies who give their lives in battle
with faces towards the foe, attain, O Shakra,
to the region of Brahman.


86 Beautiful ltdies skilled in music and
danctrt: and adorned with garlands of
fiowers, approach, O king of the


deities, the giver of earth as he comes 10
Heaven departing from the Carth.

Sj That king who makes gifts of earth
with due rites (0 persons of the twice-born
order, sports in bliss in the celestial regions^
worsl^ped all the while by the celestials
and Gandharvas.

83 One hundred Apsaras, adorned with
celestial garlands, approach, O king of tl'?
deities, the giver of earth aS he ascends tn
the region of Brahman.

89 Sweet-scented (Towers, 'an excellent
conch and excellent seat, an umbrella and
excellent horses with goo I vehicles, are
ahvays ready for the person who makes gifts
of earth.

go By making gifts of earth a kmg
can always command fragrant flowers and
. heaps of gold. Having all kinds of weahli.
(he commands of such a king can never be
disobeyed anywhere, and cries of victory
welcome him whereever he may go.

91. The rewards of the gifts of earth
consist of residence itt the celestial regioih

0 Purandara, and gold and ffowers, •ml
plants and herbs of medicinal virtue, and
Kusha and mineral wealth and verd^mt
grass. A person by mekiivg a gift of earth
wins in his next life nectar-giving eatlh.

pj There 1$ no gift equal to a gift of
earth. There is none worthy 0! greater
respect than the motlier, Tliere is no duty
higher than truth. There is no richee
more valuable than that which is givers
away,

BWslima said —

93 Hearing these words from the son

01 Angiras. Vasava made a gift to him of
the whole Earth with all her jewels and
gems and all her riches.

94 If these verses describing the merit
ol the gifts of earth be recited on the
occasion of a Shraddha, neither Rxkshasas
nor Asuras can succeed m’ getting any
iJiftnftexA'hruVrrwrnigs tnafie in 11.

93, Forsooth, the offerings one makes
loihe departed manes at such a Shraddha
become unending. Hence, on occasions-
of Shraddhas, the learned man should
reci'e these verses on tlie subject of the
merits of the gifts of earth, in the presence
and hearing of the invited Brahmanas
when engaged in eating,

96. 1 have thus, O chief of the BharStas,
described to you that gift which is the
foremost of all gifts. What else do you
wish to hear ?


anusiiasana pauva.


M 7


CHAPTCR LXm.
tANUStUSANA PARVA) —
Conttiined.

Tudhishthira said —

s 1. Wl>«n a km(' wtslies to make
'' tn Dus world, wltat, indeed, are il Ofe lidt*
winch he should make, O best e( tite
^ Charatas, to such Rrahmanas as are endued
, with superior accoinphshinentsT What (>)rt
IS that by which the Grahmanas become

• readily pleased 1 Whal fruits do they

• give III retiirri 7 O you of powerlul arms,
f tell me what ts the high reward which can

• be won through the merit of gifts

3 What gifts, O king, yield rewards
both <n (his world and in the neat 7 I wish
to hear all this from you. Do you describe
to me all this m detail,

Bbishma said *-*

4, 1 heae very q lestions were formerly
put by me to Narad*, dear me as I
recite to you what that celestial sage had
told me in reply.

Narada said*—

j. The celestials and all the Rislns
speak highly o( food, the course of the
world and the intellectuat faculties have all
beerr fixed on food.

6 . riiere hat never been, nor will be,
any gift equal tothegift of food. Hence,
men always wish particularly to make gifts
of food

7. (n this world, food is the root of
energy and strength, 1 he vitei errs are
established on food. It is food that keeps
up the wide universe, U powerful one

8 All classes ol men, house holders and
mendicants and ascetics, five upon food
Ihe vital airs depend upon food, fliere
IS no doubt m this.

Q AIRiciing one’s relatives, one, if
desirous of lus own prosperity, should make
gtdv tfi' ihuu* rv if RnrsC or a

person of the mendicant order.

10. That roan who makes a gift of food
to an accomplished Oratirnana who begs
the same, secures for himself in the next
world wealth of great value.

11. the house*halder who seeks hiS
own prosperity should receive with respect
a deserving old man who is worn ',out with
toil while proceeding on his way far from
home wheri such a man comes to the house-
holder's house

12. That man who, shorn ol irrepres-
sible anger and becoming righteous in
nature and freed from malice, makes gifts


of food, IS sure to .scq lire fianplnes*, O
king, both in thit world.a'id in (he next.

*1 The liouse-liolJer should never dir-^
regard the man wlio comes to his place, nor
should he insult turn by sending him away .
A gift of food made to even a Chuiddla
or a dog is never tost.

14 f ha( man wfvo makes a gift of efean
food to A person on (he way wl o n fatigued
and Unknown to the giver, is sure to win
great merit.

15 The man who pleases with gifts 0
food the departed manes, the deities, ili<
Kisfns. i()e Grahmanas, ami guests atnvci.
at Ims house, wins great merit.

t 6 That person who having enmnnete
even a hemoiis crime makesaxiftof food
to one who solicits, or to a Urahmana n
special, (s never stupelled by that l>ei>i
ous sin.

17. A gift of food made to a Drihmana
becomes eternal. 0»e made to » Shndn
yields great merit. Hnsistlie dill rence
Mtween the merits of (lie gifts of food
made (0 Grahmanas and Shildras.

tS. Solicited by a Orahmana, one shnul I
not enquire about ho family or conduct or
Vedic learniiig. Asked for food, one should
give food to him who asks.

19 Ihere is no doubt in tins, O king,
that he who makes gifts of food gels both m
this world and tn t'le next many trees
giving food and every other obj'Ci ol desire.

to Like cultivators expecliiigauspii.iuii<
showers of rain, the departed mines always
expect that their sons and grandsons would
present food to lliein.

at. The Brabmana is a great being.
When he comes into one's house and
snficits, sayinx, — Give me f — the owner of
(be house, wbellier actuated or not by tlie
desire of gaining merit, is sure to win great
merit by hitening to that prayer

32—23 fhe Brahmana is the guest of
«ir creatures in tlie universe ffe is en>

' titled to the first part of every {ood I haC
house increases lu prosperity to wliicii the
BraUmanas go (rnm desire of getting alms
and from which ttiey return honored on
account of their desires being silisfied.

Ibe owner of such a house is born 11 his
neei life in a family O Bharaia, that has
alt (he comforts and luxuries of life.

24. A man, by making gifts of food in
(Ins svorld, is sure to acquire an excellent
pUee hereafter. He wli > makes gifts of
sweetmeats and all food that is sweet, gams
a residence in heaven where he is honored
of all the deities and other denizens.


148


MAil&BIIARATA^


25. Food form? llie life-brea*hs of men
Everj tiling rests upon food. He wlio mates
gifts of food gets many animals, many
ciuldren, prolii»e nclies fin oUier shape),
and all articles of comfort and luxury m
profusion.

26 Tlia giier of food is said to be ihe
giver of life Indeed lie is said to be liie
giver of everytiung Hence, O king, such
a man acquires both strenglii and personal
grace in tins world.

27. II food be given duly to a Brahmana
come to one's house as a guest, the giver I
acquires great happiness, and is adored by I
the very celestials. '

2$ TI e Brahmana, O Vudhishihira, is
a great Being. He is also a fertile field
Wliatever^seed IS sown on that field yields
an abundant crop ol merit

29 A gift ol food readily yields the
happiness of both the giver and the te«
ceuec. All other gilts produce unseen
fruits.

30 From food originate creatures From
food springs happiness and }oy, O Bharaia,
Know that virtue and worldly profit both
spring from food the cure or disease or
health also comes from food.

31. Ilia former lEon, ttie Lord of all
creatures said that food is ambrosia or the
source of immoitahty. Food is Earth, Food
IS Heaven, Food is the Sky. Everytlung
rests on Food.

33. In the absence of food, the five
rlements that form the body cease 10 exist
III a state of unition From want of food
the strength of even the strongest man is
seen to fail,

33 Invitation and marriages and sacri-
fices all cease for want of food Ihe very
Vedas disappear when there is no food

34. All the mobile and immobile creatures
of the universe depend on food Virtue
and worldly profll, in the three worlds
dtj tnd on food Hence the wise should
make gifts of food

35 The slrengtli, energy , fame and
actnevemenis ol the mm who makes gifts
of food, alwiys multiply Itiemselves m the
lliree worlds, O king.

3f>. The dcit) of wind, places above the
ctoMds (Ihe water drawn by the Sun) IW
wsier thus taken to the clouds is caused by
^lakra to be poured upon the Carili,
O Uharata

37* The Sun, by means of I is rays
draw, up the moisture of the Larlh. The
god cf wind emses the moistuie to fail
flown from the bun.


38 When the water comes down from
the clouds upon the Earth, the goddess
Earth become moist, O Bharata.

39 ihen do people sow various kinds
of crops upon whose outturn tlie tintverse
of creatures depends It is from the food
tints produced that the flesh, fat, bones and
vital seed of all beings ungiiiate.

40 From the vital seed thus made, O
king, spring various kinds of liviiix crea-
tures Agnt and Soma, living within the
body, create and maiiiiaiii the vital seed

4t, Thus from food, the Sim and the
god of wind and the vital seed spring and
act. All these are STid to form one element
or quantity, and it Is from these that all
creatures originate 1

42 That man who gives unto one who
comes to his house and begs it, is said,

0 chief of Ihe Bliaratas, to contribute both
lile and energy to living creatures.

Bbislima said

43 1 lius addressed by Narada, O kioc*

1 have always made gifts of food. Do you
also, therefore, freed from malice and wiili
a cheerful heart, make gifts of food.

44 By making gifts of food, O
worthy Bralmianas with due rites, you iniy
be sure, O powetiul one, ol attaiiung
Heaven.

45 Hear me, O king, as I tell you what
the regions are reserved for those who
make gifts of food, i he mansions of those
great persons shine with resplendence t'*
the regions of Heaven.

46 Bright as the stars in the sky, and
supported upon many columns, white as
the disc of the moon, and adorned «"h
many tinkling bells, and rosy like li>e
newly risen sun, those palaces are either
fixed or movable.

47 Those mansions arc filled wiili I un-
dreds and hundreds ol tilings and aivuna'r
that live on Und rtud as many thniRS ami
animals livini; m water Some of them
are effulgent like lapis lattilt and some are
respJeodem like the sun. Some of them
are made of silver and some of gold.

4 $ Wilhin those mansions are many
trees capable of satisfying every desire c|
tie inmates Many t-inks and roa Is and
halls and wells and lakes are all there

49 Thousands of vehicles with hor*er
and other animxU harnessed iherelu a"d
with wheels whose caliler is always loud,
are all there. Mounlains ol food arid all
enjoyable articles and heaps of clv’ls and
ornaments arc also there.


ANUSIfASANA PARVA.


'49


50 Numerous nvers that run milk, and
lulls ol rice and oilier edibles, (are also
tirere. Indeed, many palatial residences
looking like wliite clouds, wiili many beds
ol golden splendour, are m those regions.

51 All these are won by those men who
make gifts of food in tins world Do you
therefore, become a giver ol food Indeed,
lliese are the regions reserved for lliose
great and righteous persons who make gifts
of food in ll IS world For these reasons,
men should always make gifts ol food tn
this world.


CHAPTER LXIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued,

Tudbishthira said —

1 1 have beard yOur discourse about

the ordinances for tlie gift oi food Do you
describe to me now about the conjunctions
tf the planets and the stars m reUtion to
the subject ol making gifts.

Ehishma said.—*

3 Regarding it is recited this ancient
dixceurse^betweeii Devaki and Narada. I
lliat fofeinosl ^of'Rfshis * 1

3 Once on a time when Narada of
god*lfke features and knowing every duty
arrived at Owaraka, Oevaki asked lti*n this
question.

4 The celestial Risln Narada replied
to iier question tn ihe iollowiug words Do
30U hear as 1 recite tlic'n.

Narada said

‘ 5 Oy pleasing. O blessed lady, worthy

5 Brahmanas with pudding mixed with ghee.

under the constellation Rrntike, one ac«
j quires regions of great happiness

6 Under (he coitstellation Rohini. one
should, for freeing himself from the debt
he owes to the Orahmanas, make gifts to
them ol many handfuls of vension along
with rice and clarified butter and milk,
and other kinds of edibles and drinks

( 7 One giving away a eow with « call
under Ihe constellation called Somadaivaia
tor Mngashiras), proceeds from llits human
region to a region m Heaven of great
lehciiy,

8. One undergoing a fast and giving
away Krishara mixed with sesame, gets
over alt difUculties in the next world, in>
chiding those mountains with rocks sharp
as razors.


9 By making gifts, O beautiful ladj, 5
of cakes and other food under ilie consieU ‘
latJon Puoarvasu, one gets personal beauty ’
and great fame and takes birth in his next
fife tn a family in which there is profuse ^
food.

10 Making a gift of wrought or un* f
wrought gold, under ihe consteiJation /
Piishya, one shines like the Moon lumseU {
m regions of saccounding darkness

fi. He who makes a gift, under the
constellaiioii Ashlesha, ol silver or a bull,
becomes freed from every fear and ac>
quires riches and prosperity.

12 By making a gift, under the cons*

I (ellation Megha, of earthen dishes filled
with sesame, one gets children and animals '

I in this world and acquires happiness in the
j next.

I 13 By making gifts, white fasting, to
I Oral manas, under the constellation called
Purva*Piiafguni, of food mixed with Pham*

I ta. the reward is great prosperity bolli here
and hereafter.

14 By making a gift, under the cons*
Ullation called Uuara>Phalguni, ol ctari 5 ed
butter and milk with nee called Sliasti*
thika, one wins great honors m Heaven.

15 Whatever gifts are made by men
under (lie constellation of Uctara Phalguiil
yield great metit, wl>ich,iagain, becomes
unending. This is very certain.

16 Observing a fast, the person who
makes, under the constellation Hasta, a
a gift of a ear with tour elephanis, acquires
regions oi greet happiness that are capable
of granting the fruition of every wish.

■7 By making a gift, under the cons*
telUiloti Chiltra, of a bull and of good per*
fumes, one sports in bliss in regions of
Apsaras like the deities sporting in the
garden of Nandana.

18 By making gifts of riches under (he
coristeiUtion Swati, one acqures such ex*
cellent regions as one desires and wins,
besides great fame.

19 — so. By making gifts, under the con*
stellation Vishakha, of a bull, and a cow
giving profuse milk, a cart full of paddy,
with a Wasanga for covering the same, and
also ctoths for wear, a person pleases the
departed manes and the deities and ac*
quires externaf merit tn the other ivarl I,
buck a person never meets with any cata*
mity and certainly reaches fleaven.

91 . By making gifts the Brahmanas of
whatever articles (ley want, one acquires
such means of subsistence as lie wishes,
and becomes rescued from Hell and every
calamity that befall sinners after death.


MAIIABIIARATA.


'50

Tins IS ihe certain conclusion of tAe
sciiptures.

23 By making gifts, under the constel-
lation Anuradlia, of embroidered cloth and
other dresses and of food, observing a fast
all the while, one becomes honored in
Heaven for a hundred cycles

25 By making a gift under Ihe cons-
tellation Jyeshiha, of Ihe potherb called
Kalashaka with the roots, one acquires
great prosperity as also such an end as ts
desirable,

34 By making to Brahmanas a gift
under the constellation Mula, of fruits and
roots, with a controlled soul, one pleases the
departed manes and attains to a desirable
end,

25 — 26 By making, under the constella-
tioii Purvashada a gift, to a Brahmana
knowing the Vedas'and of good family and
conduct, of cups filled with curds, while
observing a fast, one is born in his next
I fe in a family having abundant kine. One
secures the fruition of every desire, by
making gilis, under the constellation Utta-
rashda, of jugs full of barleywater, with
clarified butter and juice of augar>cane in
abundance

37 , Qy making a gift, under the eonjunc-
tiun called Abinjit, of milk with honey and
ghee unto men of wisdom, a tighteous
person attains (0 ffeaven and becomes an
ob|ect of adoration and honor there.

sS By making, under the conjunction
Shravana a gift of blankets or oilier cloth
of thick texiure, one passes freely through
every region of happiness, riding on a white
car of pure resplendence.

29 By making with a controlled soul
under the consieiUtion Ohanishtha a aift
of a car with bulls yoked thereto, or masses
of clotl s and riches, one at once acquires
Heaven in his nest life

30 By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Shatabliisha, of perfumes with
Aquilaiia Agallocha and sandal wood, one
acquires in the next world the companion-
ship of Apsaras as also eternal perfumes of
various sorts

3t. By making gifts, under the con-
ttrlUlion Purva Qhadrapada, of Raja-
maiha, one acquires great happiness in
nest tie and comes by a profuse supply of
every kind of food and fruits

33 One who makes, under the consleHa-
lion Uilars, a gift of mutton, pleases the
departed manes by such an act and ac-
quires unending merit in the neat evorid,, I

m If one makes a gift, under the eon-
I lUUation Revsii, el a cow with a vessel of|


evliite copper for milking her, the cow $0
given away approaches him in the next
world, reedy lo grant the fruition of every
desire.

34 By making a gift, under the con-
stellation Ashwmi, of a car with horses
yoked thereto, one is born in his next I fe
■n a family possessing abundant elephants
and horses and cars and becomes gifted
with great energy.

35 By making, under the constellHiui'
Bliarani, a gift to the Brahmanas of kine
and sesame, one attains in liis next hie
great fame and abundant kine.

Bhishma said*—

36 thus did Narada describe (o
Dcvaki the subject of what gifts should be
made under what constellaiions Pevali
herself, having heard this account related
tt m her turrt to her dau^jhters in law-


CHAPTER LXV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-
Confmwed.

Bbishma said —

t. The illuttiious Atri, the sen of (I e
Grandfather Brahman, said ,— 1 hey who
make gifts of gold are said to make gift*
of every thing in the world.

2 King HsTivhchandra said that the
gift of gold waslies off sms, leads to loi’it
life, and yields inexhaustible merit to tho
departed manes

3 Manu has said that a gift of drink i*
the best of all gifts therefore should ■
man cause wells and tanka and lakes to be
excavated

4 A well full of water and from which
various creatures draw water, ts said to
lake off half the sinful deeds of the person |
who has excavated it.

5 The enure family of a person is
rescued from hell and sin in whose w«“

. or unk or lake kine and Brahmanas
, pious people constantly satisfy il eir tlurst,

I 6 That man gets over every sort of
calamity from whose well or tank everV
one draws water without restraint durii g
(he summer season.

7. Clarified butter is said to please the
iHuarious Vtihaspati. Puvhan Uhaga, ll «
twin Avhwms, and the god of fire.

8 Clarified butler is possessed of high
medicinal virtues It is a Inch rrquis'ie
ef Sacnrice. It is the best of all Iquid*-


AHUSfMSANA TARVA


i 5 >


']'! e merU a gi(t of clarified butter yields
JS very superior.

9 That man who wishes for the reward
of happiness in the neXt world, who wishes
for fame and prosperity, should, with a
piiriried heart and having purified himself,
make giffs of clarified butter to tlie
Brahmanas.

10. The twin Ashwins, pleased, confer
personal beauty upon (bat man wlio makes
l,ifis of clarified butter to the Brahmanas
III the mortli of Ashwrn,

tl. Rakshasas never invade the house
of that man who makes gifts to the Bralu
manas of pudding miaed with clarified
butter.

12. That man never dies of thirst who
makes gifts to the Brahmanas of jars filled
witf) water. Such a person gets every
necessary of life In profusion, and has
never to sutler from any calamity or da*
tress,

13. That man, who with great devotion
and Controlled senses makes gifts to the
foremost of Brahmanas, is said to take a
sixth part of the merits acquired by the
Orahmanas by their penances.

I4'--IS. That man who makes presents,
to Brahmanas having die means of life, of
(ire<weod for purposes of cooking as also for
enabling them to drive cold, Rndi all hh '
purpoiei and all his acts successful. Such ,
a one IS seen to thine over all his enemies,
t6. The illustrious god of fire becomes
pleased with such a man. As another
reward, he never becomes divested of
cattle, and be JS sure to win viciory In
battle.

17. The man who makes a gift of an
, umbrella gets children and great pros*
^penty. Such a person never suffers

from any eye-disease Ihe merits also
V that originate from the performance of a
I sacrifice become Ins.

18. That man who makes a gift of an
'.iur\hwl!fi»i*«ihrv«»rvu'rm‘'vuimtT»' isnmr,
has never to suffer from any heart-burmng
on any account.

ig—30 Such a man quickfv succeeds
In iieeing himself from eveiy difTiCuliy and
obstacle 1 he highly blessed and dfiistri*
OUI ttishi Shandil)a has said that of nil
gifts, the gift of a car, O king, is the
greatest.


CHAPTER LXVl.

(ANUSHASANlKA PARVA)-

Conlmtied,

Yndhishthira said

I. I wtsli to hear, O grandfather whst
the merits are of that person wlio makes
the gift of a pair of sandals to a Brahman*
whose feet are burning or being scorched
by hot sands while walking.

Bhishma said *

2 I lie man who gives to the Brahmanas
sandals for the protection of their feel, sue*
ceeds in criisliuig all (liorns and gets over'
every sort cJ di/Bculiy.

3 — 4 Such a man ,0 Vudhtshthira, stands
over the heads of alf his enemies, cars of
: pure splendour, with mules yoked thereto
and made of gold and silver, O monarch,

I approach him He who makes a gift of
sandals is said |o acquire the merit of
makingthe gift of a car with well-broken
horses yoked thereto.

Yttdhishithra gaidf—

5. fell me fully once more, O grand*
father, of the merits of gifts of sesame and
land, and of kme and food.

Bhiebma said i-'

6. Hear, O son of Kuntt, what the merits
are of the gift sesame Hearing me, do
you then, O best of the Kurus, make gifts
of sesame according to the rites,

7. Sesame seeds were Created by the
Self create Brahman as tke best food for
the departed manes. Hence, gills of sesame
seeds always please the departed manes
greatly.

8. The man who makes gifts of sesame
seeds m the month of Afagha, to tfie Orah*
tnanas, has never to see Hell which is full
of ait dreadful creatures.

ft .Hw who worih(o lire d^oarfed muttes
with offerings of sesame seeds is considered
as worshipping the deities in alt (he aaen*
flees One should never make a Shraddhit
with olTerings of sesame seeds without en-
teiUining some purpose,

10. Sesame seeds sprang from the fimbs
of the great Rtshi Kashyapa ffence, m
the matter of gifts, they have con»e to be
considered as possessed of great efficacy.

tl. Sesame seeds confer both prosperity
and personal beauty cleanse the giver of
alt his sins It is for (his reason iliat the
gift of sesame seeds is sosenor to the gift
of every other arucio ^


>52


MAlIABtlARAtA


12 Tlie inlelltt7ent Ap^iMamv^,

Slianklia and Liklnta, and the great Ri^hi
Gautama, have all gone to tie Celestiiil
region by having made gilts of sesame
steds

13 Those Brahmanas who make llonla
vith offerings of sesame abstain from
Sexual intercourse, and are observant of the
religion of Acts, are considered as equal to
vaccine if avt

14 The gift of sesame seeds is superior
to all gilts Amongst all gifts, the gift of
sesame is considered as yielding unending
merit

15 Formerly when Havi (clarified
butter) on one occasion could not be pro-
cured, the Rishi Kushiica O scorcher of
eremies made offerings of sesame seeds to
bis three sacrificial fires and succeeded in
acquiring an excellent end

16 1 have thus said to you, O cbicf of
the Kurus what the regulations are about
the excellent gilt of sesame seeds It is on
account of these regulations that the gift
of sesame seeds has come to be considered
as fraught with very superior merit j

After IhiSr listen to what 1 would
say Once on a time the gods, desirous of
malting a Sacrifice, went, O king, to the
presence of the Sell cr*aie Brahman.

tS Having met Brahman, desirous as
they were of celebrating a sacrifice on the
Cattli, (hey begged him for a piece of sacred
earth, saying,— We want it for our sacrifice.

The deities said —

19 o illustrious one, you are the lord
r>l all (he Barih as also o( all the gods 1
With your permission, O luehly blessed
one, we wish to perform a sacrifice.


20 The person Who has not got by
lawful means the earth whereon to make
t»ie sacrificial altar, acquires not the merit
01 the sacrifice he performs


2t \ou are ihe Lord ol all the universe
consisting of Its mobile and immobile
ohj-cis rherefore, you should grant fus a
piece of earth for the sacrifice we wish U
nialee


Brahman said —

2J Ye foremost of gods, I shall giw
\ou a piece of earth whereon, \esonso

f,™ ■”

The gods said:—

23 Our wishes O holy one. I ave be-
come fueep„tul We tia'i celebrate oui
sac.ifice even I ere wiih l.igegiftj L«,


however the ascetics always wofsliip U 1*
piece of Earth

24 Then there carrle td”^ that pUc''

Agastya Kainva Bhrigu Atrl, and Viisha*
kapi, Asita and Devala ^

25 The great deities then O yoi of
unfading glory, celebrated ilteir sacrifice,
lliose foremost of gods finished it in dud
time

f 6 Having completed that sacrifice of
theirs on the breast of that foremost of
mountains vts , Himavat, the celestials
attached to the gift of earth a sixth pari
of the merit originating front their sacrifice

27 The man who makes a gift of evert
a span of earth with reverence and faith
has never to sliffer from any difficulty artd
has never to meet with any calamity

28 By making n|gift of a house that
prevents cold, wind nnd sun, and that
stands upon a piece of clean land, the giver
attains to the region ol the celestials a"®
does not fall down even when Ins mtrif
becomes exhausted.

29 By making a gift of a house la

in. (lie giver, endued With wisdom, livcSi 0
king, happily in the company of Shaltra,
Such a person receives great honors li
the celestial region

jo That person in whose house A
Drahmana of controlled senses, well read
in the Vedas, and belonging by birth to a
family ol preceptors, lives m contentment,
succeeds in attaining to and enjoying a
region of great happiness'

31 Likewise, O best of the Bharalas,
by giving away a shed for the shelter of
kine that can prevent cold and rain and
ttiat IS substantial Iri structure the giver
rescues seven generations ol lus race.

32 By giving away a piece of earth fi>
for cultivation, the giver acquires great
prosperity By giving a piece of earth
contnini ig mineral riches, the giver ad-
vances his family

33 One should never giveaway earth
that IS barren or that IS burnt, nor si ould
one give away any earth that is near a
crematorium, or that has been possesied
and enjoyed by a sinful person belore sod'
gift.

j 34 When a man performs a SI raddl*

I 10 honor of the departed manes on earlu

I belonging to another person, the departed

I manes render both the gilt of (hat earth
j and the Shraddha itself fruitless

I 35 IHnce, a wise man should buy even
I a small p ece of earth and make a t,ift of
jit. Ihe funeral cake tfat is cfTeied


ANUSIIASANA PARVA.


153


one’s BncesWfs on eiriJi iJnt )ia5 been dulj^
durclosed, becomes endless
56 Forests, mountains, rtvers, nnd
Tiftbas, are considered as having no
owners No earili need be boiigbi here lor
performing Sliraddlias

37. Tins has been said, O king, on (be
subject of the merits of making gifts of
carili After this, O sinless 0 le, I shall
describe to you the subject of the gift of
lone.

3S Kine are considered as superior to
afl the ascetics And (tierefnre the divine
Mahadeva practised penances in tbeir com-
pany.

39 ICine, O Rbaraia, Jjve in the region
of Brahman, in the company of Soma.
Forming as it does, Uhe highest end, tiie |
twice born Rishis, crowned will) success, '
try to attain to that very region. !

Kine benefit liiiman beings will)
milk clarified butter, curd, dung, skin, '
bones, horns, and hair, O Uuarata

41. Kme do not feel cold or heat. They
afw-iy« work Lveu the rainy season can-
not afHict them at all

42 And since kine attain to (he lugliest
end, in the company of lirnlim^iins I'lore-
fore do tlie wise say that kme and Urah-
tnanas are eq laf

43 Formerly king Hantideva celebrated
a grand saenuce in which an immense
number of kme were offered up and killed
From (he j nee lliat was secreted by the
skins of (he slam animals, a river was
formed that passed by the name of Char-
mannati

44 — 45 Kme no longer are animals fit
for sacrifice Itiey now are animals fit
(or gilt lhat king who presents kme to
foremost of Brahmanas O king is sure (o
get over every danger even if he falls into it
1 he man who presents a thousand kme has
not to go to hell.

46 Such a person O king wins victory
everywhere 1 he very king al (he celesCufs
iWo’saio’i'il'.n.'itlc-iiniV-ijs'kiinririiectar.

47. Therefore, one who presents a cow I
IS considered as making a gift of nectar.
Persons, well read in the Vedas, have de-
clared that the clarified butter, manufac-
tured from cow's milk, IS the very best oi
all hbations poured upon tlie sacrificul
fire.

45— 4<J Therefore, the man, who pre-
sents a cow, is considered as making a gift
of a libation for sacrifice A bull is (he
embodiment of Heaven, He who makes
the gift of <1 butf (a a qualified Brahmana,

receives great honors in the celestial

30


region, Kme, O chief of Bbafala's race,
are said to be the vital airs of living
creatures.

So, Therefore, the man, who makes the
gilt of acow, is said to make ilie gift of vital
airs. Persons conversant wiili tlie Vedis,
have said that kme are the great refuge of
living creatures,

I 5t. Ihe man, who makes the gift of a
cow IS considered as making the gift of
I what IS the high refuge of all creatures.
Ihe cow should never be given away for
slaughter; nor should the cow be given to a
tiller of the sod , nor should the cow be given
away to an atheist. The cow should not
also, O chief of the Qliaratas, be given to
one whose occupation is the keep of kme.

52 The wise have said that the person,
who gives nway the cow to any of sucli
sinful p-rsons, Jias to sink in eternal IfeJI.

53 One should never give to a Brab-
mana a cow that 1$ lean, or that produces
dead calves, or that is barren, or that is
diseased, or that is defective of limb, or
that IS worn oUtwilh toil.

$} The man, who gives away (*n thou-
csiiJ kme, OKams (0 Heaven and sports in
bliss in the company of Indra, The man,
who makes gifts of kme by hundred thou-
sands, wins many regions of eternal happi-
ness.

35 TIids have I recited to you ibe
merits ol the gift of kme and of sesame, as
also of the gift of earth Listen now to me
as 1 describe to you the gift of food, O
BHarata.

$6 Ibe gift of food, O son of Kunii. is
considered as a very superior gift. Tor-
merly king Rantideva ascended to the
celestial region by having made gifts of
food.

57 That king, who mikes a gift of food
(o one who is (oif-worn and hungry, ac-
q ures the region of supreme happiness be-
longing (o the Self create.

53 Men cannot, by gifts of gold and
dresses and of other (lungs win that
happiness which givers of food succeed m
winning O you of great power.

59 Food rs, indeed, (he first article.
Food IS considered as the highest pros-
perity. ft IS from food (hat life origi-
nates as also energy and prowess and

strength.

6s. He, who always makes gifts of, food,
with attention to the righteous, never
suffers any distress. Ihis has been said by
Paraihara.

6(. Having adore I the deities dufv,
food should be first dedicated to them. It


*54


MAllABIIARATA


lias been said, O King, lint llie kind of food
that IS taken by particular men is taken
also by the gods those men worship.

62. lhat man, who makes gifts of food
in the light halt of the month of Kartika,
succeeds in getting over every difficult)
here and acquires endless happiness liere-
after.

63 That man, who makes a gift of food
to a hungry guest arrived at his house,
.ncquires all those regions, O chief of
Bharata's race, that are reserved lor
persons acquainted with Drahinan.

64. The man, who makes gifts of food, is
sure to gel over every difficulty and distress
buch a person gets over every sm and
purges himself of ever) evil act.

65 I hate thus described to )oa the
merits of making gifts of food, of sesame,
of earth, and of kme.

CHAPTER LXVfl.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-
Contiutud,

Ttidliishtbira said —

I. 1 have heard, O sire, of the merits
of the different kinds of gift which )Ou
lia\e described to me I understand, O
Uharaia, lhat the gift of food is especially
praiseworthy and superio'.

2 What, however, are the great merits

of making gifts of drink. I wish to hear
of tins III full, O grandfather, I

Bhishma said

3 I shafi, O chief of Qharata's race, |
relate to )Ou ihis subject Listen to me.
O )ou of unbafHed prowess, as I speak to
)0U.

4—5 I shall O sinless one, describe to
)on gifts beginning with lhat of drink
Ihe merit lhat a man wins by making gifts
of food and of drink is such that the like of
II, 1 think, IS incapable of berng acquired
by any oilier gift 1 here is no gift,
supenor to that of eitfier food or drink It
Is from food lhat all living creatures are
able to exist

6. ] lierefore, "food is considered as a
very superior object in all the worlds
From food the sireiigili and energy of
living creatures coiiiinuHUy increase.

7. Hence, the master of all creatures
has himself Slid that the gift of food is a
very superior gift You have heard, O son
of Kunii what the auspicious words are of
Saviiti lierself.


8 You know why those words were safdf
wlial those words were, and how they were
said jn course of the sacred Mantras O
)ou of great mtelligence A man, by
making a gift of food, reall) makes a gift
of life Itself.

9 f iiere is no gift in tfiis wortd which 1*
sup“rior to the gift of life You are not
unacquainted with tins sa)i-ig of Lomasha,
O you of mighty arms.

to The end that was attained to former*
ly by king Shivi on account of hn having
granted life to the pigeon is acquired by
him, O king, who makes a gift .of food to a
Brahmana.

II. Hence, we have heard lhat they
wliJ give life ailaiii to verj superior regi m
of happiness tn after life Food, O best of
the Kurus, may or may not be superior to
drink.

: 12 Nothing can exist without the help

I of what conies from water. Ihe very lord
' of all llie pfsnets, vtb , the illustrious Sonw,

I lias originated fiom water.

13 Ambrosia and Suddha and Swadhi
and milk, as also every sort of food, ilia
deciduous lierbs O king, and creepers
originate from water.

14 From these, O king, tlie vital aira
of all living creatures flow, ihe denies
have nectar for their food. Ihe Nagas
have Sudha

15 Ihe departed manes have Swadh*
for theirs Ihe animals have herbs mid
plants for their food. Tlie wise havesaid
tl at rice, S.c , form the food of human
beings

|6 All these, O king, onginte from
water Hence, there is nothing superior
the gift of water Or drink

17 If a person wishes to gel prosperity
for liiinseif, ha should always make gifts o*
drink Ihe gift of water la considered as
very laudable U brings on great fame
and bestows long hfe on the giver

18. The giver of water, O son of Kunti,
always stands over the heads of Ins enemies.
Such a person obtains the fruition of ah
his desires and acquires everlasting fame

19 The giver, O hing. becomes purged
of every sin and obtains unending h»pp'*
ness hereafter as lie proceeds to the celesiiai
region Oyon of great splendour Manu
himself has said that such a person acq 1 rc»
regions of endless bliss in the oilier ivvrid.


AtJUSlIASANA PAKVA


»55


CHAPTER LXVHJ.

(ANUSMASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.

YiidhislitUira said;—

t. D« jou dtscfihe lo me once ajjain, O
grandfather, tl»e inentt el Die (»»fls of sesame
an i of Umos f‘>r liKlitiiig darkness, as also
cf food and cloDies,

Bhishma said

2 Rcijardimf It, O ViidinsUifura, w
recited ihc discourse Dial look place lormcrly
betireeo a Bralimana and Varna

3. In Ibe region 1)111); hetvieen the fivers
Cin^a and Yamuna, attliefootof the hills
cdli-d Yainuni, there was a Urge town
peopled by Uralimanas.

4 llie town wss known by the name ol
ParnashaU an 1 was very clianniii^. O king.
A Urge number of learned {jrahcnaiias
lived in It.

5— d. One day, Vama, the king of the
dead, commanded a messenger of Ins, wko
svss cUd in black, b iving blaod*red e)es
nnd liatr siRiiding erect, and possessed of |
(ecl, eyes, and nose all of wlucit resemhUd
<liose of a crow, sa)ing, >-Go you (o (he 1
town tnkabiied by lUalimanas and bring
fiere the person known by the name of
Slurmin and. born in (he race of Agasiya.

7, He IS intent on mental tranquillity
nnd ydied with teaming He teaches the
Vedni nnd his practices are welhknown.
Da not bring me another person belonging
(o the same race and living in the same
liciKhbourhOOd.

8. Tins oilier man 1 want is equal to him
in virtues, study, and birlb. As lor children
nnd conduct, tins other resembles the mi*
telligent Sbatmin.

,9 Do )Ou bring (he individual I want
He should be adored with respect — llie
messeinier, going Ihere, did the very re-
evvriruv' w.V-v.tvr .twd Awiv .tnjlf.

to. Attacking that person, he brought
I lin who had been lorbiddeii by Yama IP
t>A bcoiiglit. Endued with great energy.
Yam* rose up an seeing tlj« tSraimana
and adored him duly.

It— 11. The king o( (be dead then
Ordered bis messenger. sa)ing,— !..«( this
cue be taken back, and let the other one be
brought (0 me.— When (he great fudge of
the dead (said these words, that Drahmani
addressed him and said.— I have finithcil
my study of the Vedas and am no longer
atiactved to the world. Wtiaiever period
may Jet rcmaui af my I'fe. 1 mth to pass,
IiMi'g I ere, O jcu et uidadn g Rirrj.


Yama said —

13. I cannot determine Hie exact period,
orrbiined by Hme, of one’s life, and lienee,
wiiurged by lime, I cannot allow One to
live here. I lake note o( Die acts of virtue
(or otherwise) that ono does m the world.

14. Do you, O learned Brahmain of
great splendour, return fortliwith to your
house I cH me what also IS III tjour mind
and what t can do for you, O you of uu«
fading glory,

Brahmana said

15 Do you tell me what those acts arc
by doing which one may acquire great
merit. O best of all beings, jou are
(he foremost of authorities 111 the three
worlds.

Tama said:—

I t6. Do you hear, O twiee>born Rishi,
(he excellent ofdinsiices about gifts, ‘llie
gift of sesame seeds is a very superior gift.
It yields everiastiug inerit.

17. O foremost of twice^horn ones, ena
should make gifts of as much sesame as one
can. By making gifts of sesame every
day, one is sure to acquire the /ruihoo of
lus desires.

<8. 'J he gift of sesame at Shraddhas is
highly spoVeii of Ihegiftof sesame is a
very superior gift. Du you make gifts of
sesame to the Brilimanas eccorduig to the
rites laid down in Die scriptures.

19 One should, on the day of the full
moon of ihe month of Vaisliaklia, make
gifts of sesame to (he Brahmanas. I hey
should also be made to eat and to toucti
sesame 011 every occasion (hat one can
afford.

70. They, who are desirous of seeing
llieir well-being, should, with their nhotu
minds do this in their houses. Forsooth,
men should likewise make gifts of water
and set up resting places for the distribu*

I tion of drinking water.

I 21. One should make tanks and tales
I and wells 10 be excavaied. Such acts are
rare m Ihe world, O best ol tnice>boin
persons.

31. Do you always make gifts of water.
This act IS lull of great merit, O best of
(wice.faorn persons, for'makmg (such gifts
you slioutd put up resting places along the
roads tor the distiibunan vl water,

23. After one has eaien, the gift to one
I sfxMild cipccully be made cf water lof
drink.


' MAHAUIIARATA.


150

Bhishma said

24. After Yama liad said these vrords
to liinif the messenger who had borne him
from his house conveyed him bach to it>
The Brahmana, on ins return, obeyed (he
■nslruclions he had received.

23. Having thus conveyed him back to
his abode, the messenger of Yama (etched
Sharmm hIio had really been sought by
Yama. laking Sharmm to him, he m*
formed his master.

26. Endued with great energy, the judge
of the dead adored that pious Brahmana,
and having conversed witli him for some
time dismissed him for being talecii hack
to his house.

27. To him also Yama gave the same
instructions Sharmm too. returning to the
Morld of men, did all that Yama had said

cS. Like the gdt 0! water, Yama, from
desire of doing good to the departed manes,
applauds the gift of lamps to heht daik
places, (qt \t w considered as bcuefiung the
departed manes.

29. Hence, O best of the Dharatas, one
should always give lamps for lighting dark
places, 1 he giving of lamps increases the
power of vision, of the deities, the Funs,
and one's own self.

20. It has been said, O king, (hat the
gilt of gems IS a very great gift, llie
Urahmana, who having accepted a gift of
gems sells the same for celebrating a
sacrifiee, commits no sin.

3t. The Brahmans, who having accepted
B ydt o( gems, makes a giU o( them to
Bralimanas. wins endless merit fumsetf and
confers endless merit upon him from whom
he had oriitmally received them.

32. Knowing every duty, Manu liimself
has said that lie who, observant of proper
control makes a gift of gems to a lira*
htnsna observant of pioper restraints, wins
inexhaustible merit himself and confers
inexhaustible merit upon the recipient.

3J Ihe man, wfio is eonienl with lus
own married wAe and wyio makes a gilt ol
dressess, acquires an rxeellent complexion
and excellent dresses for himself.

3t I have loM you, O foremost of men,
what the metiis are of gifts of kme, of gol I
and of sesame, according to various pte*
cepts of the Vedas and (lie scriptures.

33 One should marry and procreate
cflrpring upon one's married wives. Ol
all arqmrtions, O son of Kuru’s race, (hat
ot sons IS esnsi Jcrcd the foremost.


CHAPTER LXIX.

(ANUSIIASANIKA PAUVA) —
Continued,

Tudhishtliira said —

I. Do you, O foremost one of Koru's
family, describe to me once again the excel*
lent ordinances about gifts, with especial
reference, O you of great wisdom, to the
gift oi earth.

3 A Kshatriya should make gift$
earth to a pious Brahmana , such a Brah*
mana should accept the gilt wilh due tiiex.

None else, however, save a Kshatriya can

make gifts of Earth.

3 You si ould now tell me what those
obyecis are that persons «if all classes can
freely give if acluated b) the desire of ac*
qutring merit. You should tUi> tell m®
what lias been said in the Vedas on ibis
subject.

BbisliTaa said

4. fherc are three gifts that p»s«by
the same name and that yield equal merit).
Indeed, these three confer the fcuiliun of
every desire J he three objects whose gifts
are of sucfi a character are kme, earth, anJ
knowledge.

5. iliat person, who tells his disciple
words ol good mesitg drawn from lie
Ved4S, aeq nres merit equal la Ihxt which
IS acquired by making i^iUs ol earth and
kme.

6 . Likewise are kme praised { There Is
no object of gift hi,;her than they.

are supposed to confer merit lorihwith-
1 hey arc also, O Yinlhishtlurs, such ihst a
gift of them cannot but yeild great merit.

7. Kme are the mothers of all creatures.
They grant every sort of happiness fh®
person, who seeks his own prosperity, should
always make gilvs of kme.

S No one should kick at kme or
through the midst of kme. Kme are god*
dexsess and buinex, til. ajiM^iciousneSS.
1 licrcfore they always deserve worship.

g. Formerly, the deities, while tillmg
(he earth whereon they celebr.sied a saeti*
lice, used the goad for unking (lie bullocks
yoked to (he plough. Hence, in cutiivaung
cailh for such a purpose, one may. wuh*
out incurring censure or sin, apply the
goad to bullocks. In other acts, however,
tiuUodts should never be stru.k with ih*
goad ol the whip.

10. Whrn kme are graxing or lying
down, no one should tease them In any
way. W hen thirsty and they da not grt
aatcr, kmr, by merely looking at such*


ANUSHASANA parva


»57


person, can destroy Inm with all lus rela-
tives and friends

1 1 Wl'at creatures can be more sacred

tlian’lone when wuh ibe very duiiR cf kine
altars wl.ereon Slitad ll.as are performed in
hon^r of the departed manes, or those
whereon the denies are adored, are cleans-
ed and sanctified t

12 lliat man who, before eating him-
self, Rives every day, for a year, only a
handful of

another, is considered as practising a vow
or observance winch bestows the fiuilion
of every desire

13 Such a person acquires children and
fame and wealili and prosperuy. and re-
moves all evils and bad dreams.

Yttdhishthira said:—

u What should be the marks of those
tone that deserve to be given away’ What
arc lliose kine that should be looked over
the matter of gifts? What should be
the characters of those persons to whom
should kine be given? Who, again, are
those to whom kine should not be given?

Bhishma said

15 ‘A cow should never be giver* to one

who IS not pious in conduct, or one ll at is

sinful, or one that is covetous, or one who is
a liar, or one who does not make offerings
to llie departed manes and celestials.

16 A person, by making a gift of ten
kine to a Bnhmana learned in die Vedas
poor III earthly riches, possessed of many
children and owning a domestic fire, attains
numerous regions of great happiness

17, When a man performs any menterl
oils act assisted by what he has got m gift

from another, he acquires a portion of that

merit. ,

18 He who procreates a person, he who
rescues a person and lie who assigns the
means of livelihood to a person, are con-
sidered as the three falhecs.

ig Services dutifully done to the pre-
ceptor destroys sin Pride destroys even
great fame. 1 he possession of three chU
dren removes the reproach of childlessness,
and the possession of ten kine removes the

teproach of poverty.

20 21, lo one who is devoted to the

Vedania. who is gifted with great learning,
svho has been filled with wisdom, who has a
complete mastery over his senses, who ob-
serves the restraints laid down in the 5«ip-
lurcs. vrho has withdrawn himsell from all

worldly aliachmenls, to him who sa^
agreeable words to all creatures, to him
who would never do an evil act even when
actuated by hunger, to one who is mild or


wives, assign the means of hvehliood.
22 I he merit of the E'ft

and lus wives kept at a distance.


CHAPTER LXX.
(ANUSHASAXIKA PARVA)-

Continued.

Bltislima said —

, Regarding it. O “Va “ “

Kjra on Iccount of Ins taking what had

belonged to a Brahmana.

. Semelime belose certain '"“ll" '<
Vudu's race, while seardnng for
came 10 a Urge well covered with grass and
creepers

3 Desirous of drawing water frorn it,
thev woiked hard for removing the creepers

pr. Se I'l'r^B

Mscuing the hasrd from that ph,»hl.

c Resembling a very hill in siae, the

l.r^rd was sought 10 be freed by cords and
leathern tongs. Not succeeding 'J' *
attempts, the joulhs then went to Janard

6 Addressing him they said —Covering
Mie entire space of a welt, there is a very
the enure sp ^ Despite our best

'we have not succeeded in rescuing it
iiiat piigiit. n™ »“ "'>« "‘'i'
to Krishna

, V.tcde.a ti.ea went there and took

;■ Sd^-g‘ S c:.eS'l;r.r-

fices. ,

8 To the heard that said those words,

Hadlxava spoke — , ^ ^

Vou had done many pious deeds. You

Do >0** **

It been caused ?


158


maiiadiiarata.


9 We liave neard lliat yfij did repeatedly j
make c'lt* lo Rratimaiias iiumberable I
ktne Why, therefore, liave you come by
this end

!o. Nnga then replied to Krishna, say-
ing, — On one occasion a cow belon8>ing to-
a Bralnnana who re^iiUrly adoied Ins
domestic hre, cscapnn; from the owner's
house wtiile he was absent from home, eii*
tered my flock.

11. The heepers of my cattle included
that cow III their list of a thousand In
time that cow was given away by me lo
a Brahmana, wishing (or happiness in
heaven.

12. The true owner, relurninp home,
soughl lor his tost cow amt at tasl (wunJ n
III tlie house of another rntdini' her, tlie
owner said,— 1 Ins cow is mine —

1^. Ttie other person contested t is claim,
till both, growing wroth came to me Ad*
dressing mo, one of tliem a iid — Vou gave
this cow —TI'C other one said —You have
robbed me of this cow because she is
mnie

14 I then liegged tlie nrahmans to
whom I had given that cow. (0 return the
gift in exchange for hn<idre<is and hundreds
nt other kine Witliout yielding to my
eiriieit sulicitsiions. he addressed me
saying,— llie cow I have got is well suited
lo time and pi ice S>ie gives profuse mdk,
heiiJes being very quiet and very fond of us.
The mile she gives is very sweet. She is
lauded in nty iiuuse.

16 She IS noirishing, besides, a weak
child of mine (hat has pvl been born
I csniiol, tlierefore, pari with her —
Having Slid (liese words, the Urahniana
went away

17 I then bagged the other Rrahmana
oflenng him an exctiange, and siymg, — Do
you take a liundrcd thousand kmc (or tins
one cow.

iS. The Brahmana, however, replied lo
me saying,— 1 do not accept gills from
Kshatriyas. I Bcn able lo support rnyseif
wnhouV aid Do yon Oten, {loiitiwuh, give
me It. at very cow winch was mine. Ihnt.
O flayer ol Madliu, dij that Brahmana
speak to me.

10 I then cfferetl to malie gifts lobim of
go'd and silver and horses and ears 1ltat
ioremoM of Brahmanss etfu'ed to accept
any of lltese gifts and departed.

ja Meanwl lU. urged by Time's irrrsif
^Ue poser, I had tn depart from Ihts woeld
IVnng to It « trfien of ilie drpaiird manes

wav taken bcleic Yatna ihek og cl the


71 Adoring me duly, Yama addressed
me saying, — I he end cannot be determined,
O king, of your righteous deeds.

22 There is, however, a little sm winch
was unconsciously committed by you Do
you siifTer the punishment for that sin now
or aftei wards as you hke.

23 You had sworn tint you would pro*
tect (aH persons in tlie eiijoj ment of their
own) lilts oath of y ours was not riiitdl/
kept by you You took also what belonged
to A Brahmana 1 his has been the twofold
sm you f avc perpetrated,

24 I answered, saying— ! shill first
suffer the distress of piinisliinent, and when
that IS over, 1 shill enjoy the happiness that
vs til store (or me, O lord 1— After I had
said these words to the king of the dead, I
dropped down on the Cirth.

2$ Though (illen down I sldl could
hear the words that Y.imi svid to me very
loudly. Ihose words vvere, — Janarddana
the son of Vasudeva, will save you

26. Upon the completion of a full ihou*
sand years, when your sin will be diivi*
paled yon shall then attain lo many regions
of unending happiness that hive been ac*
qntretl by you through your own pout
deeds.

2/ RilhngdownI found myself, with
held downwards, within this well, clnngcd
into A cieatnre c( the mteirntdiile order*
Memory, however, did net leave m«.

28. By you I .hive'been saved to diy*
What else can jt testify thin the power of
your peninccs 7 I et me have your permis*
sion, O Krisl na. 1 wish lo Ascend to
llie ceieslMl region.

29 Permuted then by Krishna, kmg
N'lga bowed his head to him and thm
mounted a celestial car and went to
Heaven.

3 «. After Nnga had thus proceeded to
she celestial region, O best of the Bhantar.
Vasudeva {recited tins Verse, O del ghier.of
iJie Kurus,

3tv No one should knowingly misspr'®*
priale anything belonging to a Brahmana*
Ihe property of a Brahmana, if taken, del*
troys Ihe liker even as the Brahmana ’» c®*
desuoyed king Nnga!

J». I tell you, again, 'O Pariha, that A
rneeting wtih (he good never proves fuililr.
bee, king Nnga was rctcued from M‘fl
through A meeting e( his with cue tli*t
good. ^

37 As a gift yields merit, to an art ff
t^Uaiion linngt on 10 demrtii, ller’rf
I a'**** O Vndhiihthira, one should arviJ
I dopg t, y. injury ie kine.


ANl/SNASAKA FARVA.


^59


CHAPTER LXXh

{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Continued,

Yndluslithira said j—

I. O Sinless one; do ^ou describe to me
more fully Uie merits of making .gifts of
kine O you of miglity arms, I am never
satiated mth your ivordj.

Bhislima said —

3. Regarding it Is Cited the old discourse
between the Rishi Uddalaki and Nachi-

3. Once on a time the Rishi Uddalaki,
gifted with gfeat intelligence, approaching
his son Nacliiketa, said to him,— Da you
wait upon and serve me —

4 — 5 , Upon the completion of the vow be
had observed, the great Rishi once more
said to his son,— Engaged in performing my
ablutions and deeply busy w«b my Ved'C
study,! have forgotten to bring wiih me the
fire>woad, the Kusha blades, the (liwers,
he uater>]ar, and the pollirrhs I had coi*
ected Bring me those things from the
iver bank.

6 The son went there but found alt tlie
irticfes washed away by tl e current Re«
urningtoliii father, he said — "t do not
ee the things ” >

tT* Strtetten as he then was by liunger,
hirst, and fatigue, the Rislu UddaUki of
treat ascetic merit, i« a sudden anger
ursed his son, saying,— meet with Yama

8 “'Thus struck by his father with the
hunder of tns speech, the son, with |oined
Oands said — " De pleased with me —Soon,
lowever, he dropped down on the earth
dead.

9 Seeing Naefuketa prostrated npoti the
rarib, his failier became sriiseless wjib grief
He, too, exclaiming —Alas, wliat have 1
done '—dropped down on the earth,

to. Pilled with grief as he bewaited for
his son, the rest of that day passer) away
and night came

II, Then NachiVeta, O son of Kuru’s
race, drenched by the tears of his father,
showed signs of returning life as he lay on si
mat of Ivusha grass His regaining of life
under the tears of his father resembled (he
sprouting forth cl seeds when drenched wttlt
Eo6d showers.

13 The son, just restored to life, wasstiH
Weak. His body was smeared with scents
and he tooked like one just awaking from a
de*p sleep. The RiiUi asked him, saying —


13 Have joir, O son, acquired auspici-
ous regions by your own deeds? By gooif
luck, you have been restored to me. Your
body does not seem to be human.

14* 1 hus asked by his great father, Na«
cinketa wlio had seen every ihme with Ids
own eyes, answered thus in the midst of the
Uisliis —

iS fn obedience to your command I
proceeded to the vast region of Yama which
IS possessed 0! a charming effulgence.
There I saw a palatial mansion which ex*
(ended for thousands of Vojanas and emU*
ted a golden splendour on every part.

16. As soon as Yama saw me approach^
ing with (ace towards turn, he ordered Ills
attendants, saying, — Give him a good seat.
— Indeed (he king of the dead, for youf
sake, adored me with the Arghya and
other ingredients.

17. Thus adored by Yama and seated in
the midst of his counsedors, I then asked
him mildly, — I have coins to your house,

0 judge of the dead. Do you assign
me those regions which I deserve (or my
acts.

t8 Vai-*! then arswered me, Myfng,—
You are not dead, O amiable one. Gifted
with penances, your father said to thee—
Rte et^-w nh- Varna — The energy of your
father is jike^hat of a burning fire. 1
I could not possibly (aliify that speech of

1 IS.

19 You tiave seen me. Do you go
hence, O child "H e author ol jour body
■s bewailing for you You are my dear
guest What wish of yours shall I fulfill 7
Sohcit the fruition of whatever desire you
may have.

so Thus addressed by Inrn, I replied
to the king of the dead saying — ! have
arrived witf in your territory from whrcli no
traveller ever returns If I am worthy of
your attentions, I vMsh, O king of the dead,
to see those regions of great prosperity
and happiness tliat I ave been reserved (or
doera of virtuous deeds
SI Thus addressed hy me, Yama made
me mount a vehicle effurgent as the Sun
and to which were yaked many excellent
horses Taking me on (hat car. lie showed
me, O foremost of twice born ones, all tfiose
charming regions that are reserved for the
pious.

31 1 saw in those regions many eflul-

ent palaces intended for great persons,
hose mansions are of various fi>rms and
are adorned with every kind of gems

33 Bright as tie lunar disc, they are
Otnan-enied with rows of tinkling bells.


«MIAB 1 !A*»ATA. •


iCu


Hundreds amon^ lliem are many storied.
Witlun them are cliarmmg groves and
gardens and tra isparent pools o( water.

24 Edutgent like lapis latuli and tlie
Sun, and made oi silver and gold, their
color resembles that of the morning Sun
Some of them are fixed and same movable.

25 Withm them are mail} hills of foods
any enjoyable articles, and dresses and
beds in abundance. Within them are
many tress capable of granting the fiuition
of every desire.

26 There are also many rivers and
roads and Spacious halls and lakes and I
large tanks I liousands of cars with rat(> :
ling wheels may be seen there, having
excellent horses yoked to them

27 Many rivers of milk, many hills of ,
cUnfied butter and large pieces of trans* '
parent water are there Indeed. I saw
many such regions, never seen by me
before, of happiness and joy, approved by '
the king of the dead

28 Seeing all Ihos* objects, I addressed
the ancient and povierfiit judge of the
dead, saying— For whose use and enjoy,
ment have these rivers wuli eternal currents
of milk and clarified butter been ordained?

Yama s%ld —

2g these riven of milk end clarified
butter are (or the enjoyment of those pious
persons who make gifts m the world of men.
Other eternal world* there are «vl ich are
filled with such palaces free from every sort
of sorrow' llie«e are reserved for those
persons who make gift of kme.

30. The meTe^giil nf'Wine is not tau
dabfe 1 here are cunsideraiiuns of fitness
or otherwise about the person to whom kine
should be gisrii the nine for making those
gifts the kind of kine and the riles that
should be observed in making the gifts
Gifts of kme should be made after knowing
the qualifications of bvili Orahmtnas and
the kme themselves. Kme should not b*
given to one in whose house they are likely
to suHer from fire or the sun.

3t. 1 hat nralmiana, wlio Is endued with

Vedic learning, who is of austere penances,
and who celebrates sacrifices is c nsiJered
as worthy oi receiving kme in gift lliose
kme wl ich have been saved from distressful
situations, or which iisve been given by
poor iieutehol lets from want of snlficieni
means to feed and cherish them, arc, lor
these reasons, counted as ol great satue.

35 Abstaining from alt food and sub*
Sisimg upon water alone (or three nigt is
and steeping the while on the naked earth,
one should, having properly led the kine


intended to be given away, give Ihcnt W
Brahmanas after having pleased tliein alsj
(with other gifts).

33 The kme, given away*, should be PC-
coinpanted by their calves They should,
again, be such as to bring forth good t
calves at the proper seasons They sh <uld ’
be accompinied w'ltli other articles Hav* (
ing completed the gift, the giVer should hvo,
for three days Oil only milk aud abstamingi
from food of every oilier kind. *

34 He, who gives a good cow that
brings forth good calves at proper time,
and that does not fly away from the owner'*
house, and accompanies such gifts with a
vessel of white brnss for milking her, enjoys
the divine happiness for as many years
as are -measured by the number of hairs
on the animal's body. He who gives a bull
to a Orahmana, that is welUbroken and
capable of carrying loads, strong and young
in years, disinclined to do any mischief,
large sued and powerful, enjoys those re-
gions. approved of the righteous, that are
reserved for givers of kme.

3 S— 3 ^ He IS considered as a propel
person for receiving a cow in gift who •*
known to be mild towards kme, who takes
kine for his refuge, who 1$ grateful and
who has no means nf livelihood assigned
to him When an eld man becomes iH
or when a Jamme takes place or when »
Bralimana intends to celebrate a sacrific'i
or when one wishes to till for agricoltuf*'
or when one gets a son through the efTivsey
of a Homa performed for the purpose, or
for the use of one’s preceptor, or forth*
sustenance of a child, one sliould give away
a loved cow. these are the considera-
tions that are spoken highly of about place
ami time. 1 he kme worthy of being 81'*”

away are those that give profuse milt, or

ibos- whtcli are well-known, or iliose ihst
have been purchased (ora price, or those that
liave been acquired as honoraria for learning,
or lliosetfiat have been obtained m exchange

by offering other living creatures, or those

that have been got by prowess of arms, r*r
those that have been got as marriage dow*^'

Nachiketa said

3 ^ Hesrmg these words of Vaivtswtlx,
the Regent of the dead, I once more addre**'
ed him, saying,— What are those ebjrcts
by giving which, when kme cannot be had,
givers may yet go to regions reserved Uf
: men making g,((, oj jfme.

38. Accosted by me. the wise Yams
; ■"*w«r*d, explaining further what tic end
i '• which one wins by making gifts of km* 1
; 'le said,— In the absence of kine, a person j
i by making gifts of the subsiitule of ki"«t I
Acquires the metii of making gifts el kme. ’


AtniSIfASArfA PARVA.


Sg It m Ore absence ot kine, one make*
ft gilt ot a cow msde ol clafified liBUer, ob-
servant of a vow the wtnlc, one Rets far
one’s nse these rivers of clarified huuer all
of wliicli approach one tike an afTectionale
tnolher Bpproaclnng her loved child.

40. If, in the absence of even a cow,
ni;ide of clarified butter, one makes a Rifi o|
a cow made of sesame seeds, observinR a
vow tfie Willie, one succeeds with the hdp of
that cow to Rct over all calamities in this
svoildandto enjoy preal happiness liere-
afier from these rivers ol mils tliat >oa
see

40. If a cow made of sesame seeds,
IS not available, one makes a Rift of a cow
made of water, he succeeds tncomini;to
1) CSC happy regions and enjoyiiiR lh>s river
ol cool and transparent water, that can
grant the fruition of every desire

4a 1 he kin^' of the dead explained to
me all this while I was his guest, and, O
yon of unfading fjlory, areal was the joy
that { felt on seeing all the wonders lie
showed me.

43. t shall now tell you what would
certainly be agreeable to you. I liave now
got a great sicrifice whose perfo/manc©
does not require much riches 1 hat seen-
Tee may he said to originate from me, O
cire Others Will obtain It alto. It is not
eiuite of a piece With iiie ordinances of the
Vedas

44, The curse that you had imprecated
«n me was no curse hue was m sooth a
blessing, Since it enabled me to see llie
great king of the dead f firre ( have seen
wtiat the rewards are of gifts 1 sImII
brnLcforth, O yon nl great soul, practise
the duly of gift without any doubt about us
rewards

45 And, O great Risln, the rigf teous
Vaina, filled witli joy, repeatedly toll.me —
One who, by making repealed gifts tws
succeeded tn acquiring purity of imnd
should then make gifts of kine iii parti'
cular,

46 T his subject IS fraught with sanctity
Do you never disregard ilie duties of gifts.
Qifts, again, should be made to wnrlliy
persons, when lime and pUce are suitable
I Do yon therefore, always make j,if«s of
^ (due Never entertain any doubt about 11.

47. Devoted to the path of gifts foimer.
ly many great persons used to make gills of
tune Fearing (0 practise austere penances,
they made gilts according to their power.

4S In lime they shook off all sentiments
of pride and vanity, and purified ibetr soiils
Engaged in performing bhraddhas tn honor
of {tie departed manes and m all relgtaas


iCt

I sicii of nghteonsness, they used (n make,
ftcrardutg to their power, gifts of kine,

I and as the reward of (hose acts they liav''
; aiiatiied to the celestial region and ace shm-
I ing »i» effulgence for such Virtue.

49 One should, on the eighth day of die
moon that is known by tire name of Ks-
myasiitami, mske gifts af kine. property
got, to the Erahmanas, after determining
the fitness of tlie recipients. After making
the gift, one should then live for ten days
logeilier upon only the milk of kine, (heir
dung and their urine.

5« The merit that one acquires by
making a gift of a buff is rqiitl to that of
the divine cow. By making a gift of a
couple of time one gams, js the reward
thereof, a mastery of the Vedas. By
making a gift of cars and vehicles with kmc
yoked Iberelo^ one wins the merit of baths
tn sacred waters By making a gift of a
cow of the tCapifa kind, one becomes paryvd
ol all Ins sms

51. Indeed by giving away even n single
cow ol (he Kapila Jiind that has been ac-
quired by Isir means, one becomes purged
of all Ins sins Ifiere is notfniig tiigher
than the milk winch is given by kine. 1 he
gift of a cow IS truly considered as a very
superior gift.

5S Kine, by giving milk, rescue alt the
woills from cnlamity. ft is kuie, agsm,
(hat produce the food upon which creatures
live. One who, knowing the extent of the
service that kine do, does nit entertain in
Ins heart love for kiiie, is a Sinner who is
sure (0 sink m Hell

53 If one gives a thousand nr a hun-
dred or ten or five kmc, indeed, if our
gives to a plo IS lir-l iiiaua evin a single
cow which bfuigs lorili pood calves at
proper seasons, t e is sure in see that cow
approach Inm in Heaven in the form of a
river of sacred water cspabic of griming
the fiuiuoil ol every desiie

54 About prosperity and the growth

I that kine confer. Ill the matter also of the
protection mat ‘Kine grant to alt creatures
of the Larth, kine arc eq lal to the very
rays of the Sun that fall on the Earth.
Ibe word that signifies the cow means also
tf e rays of (fie Sun I lie giver of a cow
begets a very larg» progeny miMbitinga
Urge part of the Edrih. Hence, he wlio
gives a cow shines hke a second Sun in
eflulgcnce

53. Tlie diiciple should in the matter of
making R'fl* of kine, select his precef tor.
Such a disciple is sure to go lo Heaven
everytime, 1 ire selectum of a precept »r is
constdered as a high duty by persons know,
mg tlK ordt laiiccs. This is. rndeed, the


MAlIAQHAltATyS.


iG2


initial ordinance. All oilier ordinances de*
p«nd upon It.

56. Selectmcr, nTter cxaminalioni a Tit
person nmon^ the Dralimanaa, one should
make to him the gilt of a cow that lias been
acquired hy fair means, and having made
the gift make him accept it Ihe deities
nnd men and ourselves nlso, m wishing
gnod (o others, say,— Let the merits of gifts
be yours on account ol your virtue ?

57. Thus did the judge of the dead
speak to me, O twice horn Rishi. I then
bowed my head to the ii^hieons Yams.
Getting his permission I left hts kingdom
and have now come to the sole of your feet.


CHAPTER LXXII.

’ (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Continutd,

Tudhislitliira said:—

t. You have, O grandfather, describe to
me the topic of gilts of kme in speakmg of
the Risl I Nadnketa You have abo, related
O powerful one, the efRcacy and pre*emin«
ence of that act.

2. You have also told me, O grandfather,
of great intelligence, the exceedingly pain,
(ut character of itie misfortune that befell
the great king Nriga on account ol a single
transgression ol lus.

3 He had to live for a long time at
Dwaravati (in the form of a mr.;hty hzard)
and how Krishna became the instrument
of his rescue from that miserable con-
dition.

4 1 have, however, one doubt. About
the regions of kine 1 wish to bear parti*
cularly about those regions which are re.
served for the residence of persons who
make gifts of kme.

Bhishma said —

S, Regarding it is Cited the old dis.
course between Him who sprang from the
primeval lotus and him who peiformed a
iiundred sacrifices.

Shakra said

6 I see, O grandfather, that those who
live in the region of lune transcend by tl eir
effulgence the prosperity of the celestial
dwellers and pass them by. This lias
created a doubt in my mind

7. Of what kind, O holy one, are the
regions of kiiie I *1 ell me all about them,
O sinless one. Indeed, what » liie nature


of those regions tint are Inhabited bygirers
of kmc T I wish (0 know ihis.

8, Of what kind are those regions f
What fruits do they yield 7 What is the
highest object Ihere which the mhab tanis
thereof succeed in acquiring? What are its
virtues How also do men, shorn of anxiety,
succeed m going to those regions?

9 Tor wlnt period does thegnerof a
cow enjoy the friiiis of Ins gift? H nv mav
persons make gifts of miny kiiie and ho v
miy they make gifts of a few kine?

10 What are the merits of th* gifts of
mony kine and what those of the gifts of a
few only. How olso do ptrsons become
givers of kine withoiil reilly giving any
kmc ? Do you tell me all this.

It. How does one making gifts of even
many knie, O powerful lord, become the
equal o( one who has made gifts of only a
few kine? How also does one wlio has
made jtifta of only a few kine equal one who
has made gifts of many kine ?

la What kind of present is considered
as distinguished for pre einneiice in the
matter of gifts of kine? Von should O
holy one. describe to me all this accordii'ff
to truiti.


CHAPTER LXXin.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-'
Continued,

The grandfather said

I. Ihe queslioris you have put to nw
about kine, beginning svnh their gifl, "re
such that there is none else in tlie three
worlds, O you of a hundred sacrifices, who
could put them.

7. There are many kinds of region', O
Shakra, which are invisible to even you
Those regions are seen by me, O Indra,
as also by those women wlio are chaste
and who have been devoted to only one
husband. >

3 Rishia observe excellent vows, by
means of tlieir deeds of virtue and piety
and Brahinanas of righteous souls, sue*
cecd m going there m even their human
bodies. t

1 4 Men who perform excellent vo"*'
see those regions winch resemble the bngl I
creaiions of dreams fielped by their purified
minds and by that (temporarj) hbcratiou
which succeeds the loss of one’s conscious*
ness of body.


AHUSKASANA PARVA.


5, O you of a itiousand eyes, hear me ,
81 1 lell \ou -what i)ie attributes are of I
those rct>ions I here the very course of I
t line IS stopped Decrepitude is not there,
nor Ftre wind) IS Ofoiiipresent in the ufti*
verse 1 here is slightest transgression does
not talie place, nor disease, nor weakness
of any sort

6 1 lie Icioc which hve there, O Vasava,
acquire the {riiilion of every desire winch
they cherish in their hearts 1 have direct
experience of what I s<y to you

7 f'apab/e of going' everyi^-^fenf at wiff
and actually going from place to place wiih
ease, they enjoy the fruition of desire after
desire as it arises in (heir minds f atces,
lanUs, rivers, forests of diverse kinds,
mansions, lulls and all kinds of dclighifut
objects, — are (0 be seen there fliece is no
ret.ian of happiness that is superior to any
of these of wl ich I speak

g All those foremost of men. O Shabra,
wlio are forgiving to all creetures, who
rnditra everything, whp are full of love for
all things who render dutilul obedience to
their preceptors, and wlio are freed from
pride and vanity, go to those regions of
supreme happiness.

to— tl lie wlw abetams from every
kind uf flesh, who is possessed of a pure
heart who ts gifted eocli nghceonsness. who
worships his parents with resp*ci. who is
endued with truthfulness of speech and
conduct, who attends with obedience upon
tl e Urahmsnas, who is faultless in coitdncl,
who never behaves wuh anger towards kine
and towards the nfi^hmanas, who perfornis
every duly, who serves I is preceptors wnli
reverence, who is devoted for his wliole life
to (ruth and <0 gdte, and who iswiw-ijs
forgiving lowards all transgressions agaiilst
lumsell, who IS mild and self contiolled, wli<^
IS (dll of reepecc for the ccleeCTHls, who rs
hospiuhle in dll guests who is gifted wiih
miicy,*^nidced, he who is adorned with
llesc atifihutcs,~siicc«eds nr attaiiiuis **
tl e clciiul region of kme

13—1 ( He who IS sullied with adiillery,
secs nol siich ft re ^.10 1 1 nor tic mliu m 1
deslrojer of I iS preceptor, n r he wlo
Speaks faintly or iiniii1^.e5 in nlte v units ,
nor he who alw-iys disputes wicli olhers ,
itif fie who acts niifi Inttrlii) (on^rdsifc
Ural manas Indeed, that w eke i man wlio
IS Sullied with such fatihs cannot even see
these regivns of fiappmess , norfewloin
jiires ) IS friends I I or lie who is gndeful ,
■inr he who IS ungrateful , nor he nlxi is a
cheat , nor he w) o is crooked in cond >cl ,
nor le who is a di'iegnrder of leli^ion,
nor le who is a slayer of Ur^bm mas
Such rocn canro: >ec in even imogmation


163

(fie region of kine lliat is the abode of only
tfie pious.

15 I have toIJ joa every thing parti-
cularly about the regions of kmc, O king of
the celestials Hear now, O you of a hun-
dred sacrifices, the rneric of persons who are
erigaged iti making gifts uf kine.

16 He who makes gifts of kme, after
purchasing them with money obtained by
Ktlientence or acq fired by fair means, at-
tains, as the fruit of sudi an aci, to many
regions of endless happiness

17 He who makes a gift of a cow,

' iiavicig acquired it with ntoney, won at dice,

. enjoys happiness, O SliaUra, for ten lliou-
sand celcstui y ears

16 He who acquires a cow as his sfnre
' of ancestral riclies is sard to acquire her legi-
: tim4te(y Such a cow may be given away.

they who m-rke gilts o( kite so acquired.

' oht4i(i ininiinrrable endless fgioiis of
I eternal happiness

I tg lhai person who fiavmg arq tired a
I cow m giU makes a gift of her witli a pure
heart, succeeds, forsooth, O lord of Sachr, iii
obuiniug eternal regions of beatitude

30 *)hat person who with eniiirollei
s*nses speaks the truili front hts birth ami
who endures everything at the hands of his
I preceptor and o( the Drahmanas ant who
practises forgiveness, gai is an end liiat is
' eqiitl to that of khie,

3(. Improper word> O lord of Sach;,

I sliouid never be addressed 10 a UrAluiiana,
One again should not, lu even I1K mind,
do art mpiry to a cow On- sl>o d i i» his
conduct, imitate the cow, and show in'rcy
towards tfie cow.

27 Hear, O Shatcra of (he ftiius «vh ch
Irutidn) persons enjoy If 5 luh a person
giies away n sinu.le \.o\v, (hat uiiecuw be-
comes a ttioumiid-fotd.

23 ff ft Kshatrrya endired with such
; niuhrications. m»Ue» a gdl of a single Cow,

bis merit cqiiU lhai of a UrAhtnana s.

' /ArCCim.Arcvrr; tfsleff, wA-xrAr

sucli a Kshairiya gives awav profuces as
tniKh merit ns llie si igle cow ihal a flrafi-
mvni cues aivAy dies niiJer similar cir-
cuinsUnces 1 Ins is the issue of Ific scrip-
tures.

24 If a Vaishya, endued with sun Ur
accomplishments, were to make a gift of a
s, igle cow Ihat Ciiw vrftiild eq lal five l■■lll>
dred htne If a u fra endued with hitmihty
were to make a gift of a cow, such cow
wouM be equal to a hundred and twenty
Cte kirte,

35. Given to pensnees and truth, versed
tn scriptuics throuj,h dutiful services done 10


filAllABfMRATA. .


j64


lib preceptor, gtfted wlili forgrviitg nalitre,
engaged ni the adoration of the deilm,
possessed of a irai qiiil soul, pure, enligh
tened, observant ol all duties, and freed
from eveiy sort of egotism, that man who
tT>.4)<es a gift of a cow to a Brahmtna, for-
sooth, acquires j-reat merit through Um act
of his, vie , the gift, according to proper
riles, of a cow giving profuse milk Hence,
one, with singleness of devotion, observant
of truth, Mini engaged in humbly serving
Ins preceptor, should always make gifts of
Line

27 Hear, O Shakra, what the merit is
of tliai person wlio, duly studyni^ the
Vedas, shows respect for kine, who always
becomes glad on seeing kine and who
since his built always bows Ins head to
kine.


28 The merit which one wms b> cele-
Lraling tlie Ka}isuya Sicrifice tlie merit
that one acq nres by nuking gifts of heaps of
geld, that high merit i» ncquired by a persm
wlio shows such respect for kine. Virtuous
Kishis and great persons crowned with sue
Less have said so<

39 Civen to truth, possessed of a tran-
quil soul, free from cupidity, always truth-
fill in speech, and beliaving witli respect
towards kine with the steadiness of a vow,
the min who for a whole year, before him-
self taking any food, regularly presents
some food to mne, acquires (lie merit, by
such an act, of the gift uf a tliousand kine.

30. lint man who takM only one meal
a day and who gives away tlie enure quan-
tity of Ins other tneril to kine,— Dial m«n,

who thus respects liine with the steadiness
of avow and shows such mercy tiwaid>
them — Eiijiys for ten years Uiihmiied
happiness.


31. 1 hat man who takes himself onlj

one meal rf day and with tlie other mea
saved for soine time purchases a cow aiu
inikesat.ift of it, acquires, through Ilia
gilt, U you <n a hundred sacrifices, tin
ciernal ineril nl the gift of as many kine a;
there arc hairs on the body of that smgh
cow so given away.

3* 'I hrse are sayings about the ineriii
iJrahinaiMs acquire by making gi(u ol
Kite. LJUen now to ihe meriis that Kslia-
Itiyas m-y aiqiute It Ins been said i<iai
u Kshauiya. Oy purchasing acowi.lhii
inaimtr ami making a gift of it to a Urah
iniiu, acoitres gieat happmes for fi,
years A Vaishja.by such 1
c ity Inlf the mem of 1 K>1,
biiudra, by such conduct, i
•iieiil tlial a Vaishya does
‘11 Ihal msn sUio Sell,

Wttli the ptvccsdj thcieuf p'


half tin


andgives them away to Brahmanas, enjoys
haf^rness ir» Heaven (or as long a period as
Kine are seen on Earth.

34~"35 It has been said, O highly
blessed one, that a region of eternal happi-
ness exists in every hiir of such kine as are
purchased with the proceeds obtained by
selling oneself. 1 hat man who hawing ac-
quired kine by battle makes gifts of them,
allures as much merit as he who makes
gtfts of kine after having bought the same
with the proceeds of selling oneself I hat
man who, 1 1 tlie absence of kine, makes a
gift of a cow made of sesame seeds, con-
trolling his senses tlie wlule, is saved by
such a cow from every sort nf caUmiiy or
distress Such a man sports in grejt
iiappiness


36 f he mere gift of kine is not fniight
with rneiit 1 he considerations of worthy
recipients, of time, of tlie kmd of kine and
uf the riiuil to be observed sh luld be seen.
One should deiermine llio proper lime (or
making a gift of Uine One should also
determine the distinctive q laliReali >i>a of
^lUBrahmmas and of kme lliemselvei
Uin» should not be given to one in whose
ou>c they are hkely to suffer from fire of
the sun.


37 One who is rich in Vedic fesrning,
whoisof purebifih, who is gifted with a
tranquil soul, who is given to the celebration
of sacrifices, who fears the perpetrat. m of
sm who is gified with vanid kiuwled^e.

«ho IS compatMointe towards kine who «»

mild 1.1 conduct who gives protection to alf
who seek H of him. and wli .lias no mean*
of hvel.Imod assigned to him. IS cons.deied
person for receiving a gift of


a Brahmans who has no mean*
of liveldmod, i, him while he is want 0/ foid
lor purposes of agriculture, for a child born
on account of Hoina for the purposes of Ins
precept w, lor il e sustenance of a child born
shoud a c.w be given Indeed, the gift
Slould be made at a proper time and in a
proper place.


19 Tl ose kme, O Shakra. whose dispo-
sitions are well known, which liave been
Won as boiioraria for knowledge, or winch
have been bought m cxclMiige for oihef
ammaU (such a, go^ls. sheep, etel . or
wfiKh have been got by prowess of nnns or
obtained as marIM^B dower, or whiUi litve
been acquired by being rescu-d from sit n-
Iton* of .tniiger, or which, their panr ownrrr,
•eing iiiubte la «nai Ham (hem. have troen
made over by careful keep is one's huuse
with the wish of tem-iini ig iiere, are, for
^?^lft '**”"** i«oper cbjitl*


ANUSnASANA PAKVA


165


40. Those hine which are slronj; of body,
which Jiave good disposHwns, and which
emit a sweet fragrance, arc lii<h»y spoken
of m the matter of gifts As G-< ga is the
foremost of all rivers, 90 la a Kapila the
foremost of all Wine.

41. Abstaining from afl food and sub>
sSsling only upon water for three nights, and
sleeping for the same time upon the naked
earth, one should make gifts of kine to
Qrahmanas after having pleased them with
Ollier presents. Such kmc, freer! from
every vice should, at the same lime, be ac
companied by healthy calves llaviot;
made the gift, the giver should live lor the ^
next three days successively (ori food con*
sisimg only of the products of the cow.

43 Dy giving away a good naiurcd .
cow, that quietly allows herself to be milked, '
that always brings forth living and healthy
calves and that dc^s not fly away from the
owner's house, the giver enjoys happiness
in the next world for as many years
as there are hairs on her body

43 I ikewise, by giving to a Qrahmana
a bull that is capable of carrying heavy
loads, that is young and strong and quiet,
iiiai quietly ^ars the yoke 0/ the plough, ,
and that is possessed of such energy as is
siiflicient to undergo even great labour, one
acquires such regions as are his who gives
away ten kine.

44, That person who rescues tone and
Brahmanas in the forest, O Kaushika. is
himself rescued from every sort of danger.
Hear what his merit is,

4; Ihe merit such a man wins is equal
to the eternal mem of a ffar$e*sacrihce
buch a person acquires whatever end he
desires at (he hour of death.

46, Tor such an acr a man acquires
many a region of happiness,— in fact, wivat*
ever happiness lie seeks in hts heart.

47. Indeed, such a man prrmiited by
kitie, lives honoured in every re|,ion of
happiness. 1 hat man who follows kiiie
cvciy il,<y in the fotrst willi tins intention,
tiimsell hviiii; liie wiiife on grass and cow*
dung and leaves of trees, Ins heart freed
Iroin desire o! fruit, his senses controlled
from every improper object, and his mmd
pu'ifled,— that man— O >ou cf a hundred
sicrifices. lives happily freed from (he con*
trol of desire in my regiori or in any other
retcion of happiness that he wishes, lit (he
company ol the celestials.


CHAPTER LXXIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
ConUnutd.

Indra said

1 1 desire to know, O Grandfather,

what the end is of his who consciously
ste-ifs a cow or who Sells one from motives
of cupidity ~

The Grandfather said —

2 Hear of (he consequences that befalf
(hose persons who steal a cow for killing her
for food or selling her for money, or making
a gift of her to a Bralimana

3 He who, wiiho It being governed by
ihe restraints of the Scriptures, sells a cow,
or kills one, or eats the fl'sh of a cow, or
they who, (orRhe sake of money, allow a

I person lo kill Ici'ie,— mU these, he that

kills, he that eats, and he that allows the
' destruction,— r ot in liel f for as maay years
I as there are hairs on tfie body of the cow
so killed,

' 5 O you of great power, those sins and

; those kinds oi faults that have been said to
attach to one which obstructs a Brahmana's
I sacrifice, are said to attach to the. sale anti
I (he theft oi kme. [

, 6 ‘Iliac msn who having stolen a cew

makes a gilt of her to a Bralimana, enjoys
happiness in Heaven as the reward ol the
gift j>ui suffers misery in {Jell for the Sin of
theft for the same period.

7. Gold lias been said to form ihe pre*
sent, O you of great splendour, i» gilts of '
kme. Indeed, gold has been said to be j
(he best pre,«nt m all sacrifices.

8 By making a Eifl of kme one is san) ^
to rescue his ancestors to seventh decree as
also Ins desceniiisiils to ihe seveiith degree.
By giM ig away knie with the presents of
gold, one rescues his ancestors and de« <
scendants of double llie number.

9 Ihe gift ol cold IS the best of gifts.
Gold IS, ai>ain, the best present Gold is n
great purifier, O Shakra and 1$, indeed,
Ihe beat of all purifying objrcis.

10 O you of a hundred sscrifices, gold
has been said to be the piinrier of ll e
enure (amity of turn who gives it away I
have tius O you of great splendour, lolJ
you III brief ol Daklisina

Bhisbma said:—

11 lliis was said by the Grandfather to {

Indra, O chief ol Dhiraia's race Indra I
delivered It to I) tsharaiha, and Uasharailia |
III bis lutt) to Lis son llama. 1


i66


r . MAHABIIARATA.


1 2. Rima of Ragliu's rate gave it to hts
dear and illustrious brother Lakshmana.
While liviiig 111 the forest, Lakshmana im-
parted It to the Rishis.

13. It has then described from genera-
tion to generation, for the Rtshis of rigid
vows held it amongst themselves as also the
pious kings of the Earth

14. My preceptor, O Yudhislithira,
communicated u to me. That Brahinana
ivho recites it every day in the conclaves
of Brahinanas m sacrifices, or at gilts of
kine, or wl en two persons meet together,
acquires hereafter many regions of unend-
ing happiness where he always lives with
the celestials as Ins companions

16 Tlie holy Brahman, the supreme
Lord, had said so.


CHAPTER LXXV.

(ANUbHASANIKA PARVAj —
Continuti,

Ttidhiahthira said —

1. 1 have been greatly assured, O you
o( power, by you thus discoursing to me of
duties, I shall, however, express the
doubts 1 have. Explain (hem to me, O
grandfather.

3 What are tlie fruits, described in (he
scriptures, of the vows that men observe
Of what nature are the fruits. O you of
gieal splendour, of observances of other
hiiidsT What, again, are tlie fruits of one’s
Vedic studies.

i 3 What are the fruits of gifts, and what
those of keeping (he Vedas in memory?
1 What are the fruits of teaching the Vedas 7
• 1 wish (0 know all this.

4. What, O grandfatl er, are the merit*
of the iion-accppljiice of gifts ii> (ins world.
Wlial fruits does one enjoy who makes gifts
of knowledge 7 -■*“ "**"

5 What merits do persons enjoy who
perform the duties of their order, as also
do heroes who do not retreat from the
battle field Wliat are the fruits of the
observance of purity and of the practice of
Brshmacharya?

1 6, What are the merits of serving the
parents What also .are the merits of
serving preceptors and teachers, and what
the merits of mercy and kindness 7

7. 1 wish to know all this, O grand-

Inther, in sooth and in particular, O you,
who are conversant with all the sciiptuics
Great is my curiosity.


Bhishma said ’

S He enjoys eternal regions of happi-
ness, who, having properly commenced a
Vrata (vow) completes its observance ac-
cording to the scriptures ,

I 9 {be fruits of restraints, O king, are
visible eseii in this woiid Ihese rewards
that you have acquired are those of Nija-
mas and sacrifices

10 The fruits of the Vcdic studies are
seen both m this world and the next. The
person who is g veil to the study of the
Vedas is seen to sport happily both in this
world and 111 the region of Brahma

11 Listen now to me, O kmg. as I tell
you in detail ivhat tlie fruits are of self-
control Ihe self-controlled are happy
everywhere The self controlled always
enjoy that liappiness which results from the
absence or subjugation of desire.

12 The self-controlled can go every-
where at will file self-controlled can
destroy every enemy Forsooth, the self-
controlled succeed in getting everything
they seek.

13 *1 he self controlled, O son of Pandu,

obtain the (ruiiion of every desire. Ihe
self-controlled and tlie fnrgiviiig share
the liappiness that men ehj ly in Heaven
through penances and prowess, (in arms},
througli gilt, and tliroueh various sacri-
fices- ,

14 Self-control Is more meritorious than
gift A River, after making a gift to
the Brahmanas, may yield to the 1 infliienCO
of anger A self controlled man, however,
never |,tves way to anger flence seif con-
trol IS superior to gift l|iat man who
makes gifts wilhout y leldliig to anger, sin.*,
ceeds in acquiring eternal regions of happi*
ncs'>

16 Anger destroys tlie merit of a gift-
(Icuce self control is superior to gift

17 Ihere are ten thuiisand iniisibfo

plac-» O innnarch, in Heaven rxi^lmg
III all (I e regions of Heaven ti>e<e pl-ces
btio « iuhe Kis! is Persons, leaviiii. thi»
wo«ld attain to them and become changed
into deities, '

18 O king, the great Rishis repair
there, helped only by i)i,.ir sell control, and
as the end of tlieir efforts to attain to a
region of superior happiness, Hence, self-
control is supeiiup to gift,

19 1 lie person who becomes .a precep-
tor, and wtio duly adores the flieiakiig
leive of all hi* miseries >■ tin* woiU.
eujiys enjle-s hippmos, O l-ing, m Ihc
region of Brahma.


ANi;Sf!A 5 AnA‘ PARVA.


20. That man wl)0, having liimseJf read '
the Vedas imp^tls a tnowledge Uiereof to !
TigUteoiis disciples and who praises the acts
o( Ills own preceptor, acquires great honors '
in Heaven i

21 That Kshatnya whe IS given to the
studies of the Vedas to the celebration of
sacrifices to tlie making of gifts, and who
rescues the lives of others in banle, similar
Jy acquires great honors in Heaten

22. Ihe Vaisliya who, observes the
duties of his caste, makes gifts, reaps as the
frint of those Rifts, a crowning reward
Ihe Shudra who duly observes Ihe dulies
of Ins order, acquires Heaven as the reward
of sucli services

23 Various kinds of heroes have been
spoken of Listen to me as 1 explain to
you what the rewards are that they attain
to. (he rewards are fixed of a hero be*
longing to a heroic race
* 24 There are heroes of sacrifice, heroes
of selLcontro), heroes of truth and others
equally entitled to to the name of hero
1 Here are heroes of battle, and heroes of
gift or liberality among men.

35. Ih^re are many persons who may
be called ihe heroes of the Sankhya faith,
there are many ethers that are called
heroes of Voga. There are others who are
considered as jieroes in the forest'iife^ of
domesticity, and of renunciation. '

i 6 Likewise, there are etfiers who are
called heroes of the intellect, and also
heroes of forgiveness there are other men
who live in tranquillity and who are const*
tiered as heroes of virtue.

27 There are various other kinds of
heroes who practise vatioos other kinds of
vows and observances there are heroes
Riven to the study of the Vedas and heroes
devoted to the leaching of llie^same.

28. There are, again, men who come to
he regarded as heroes for the devotion with
wliiuh they wait upon and serve their pre
ceptors, as indeed, heroes in respect of the
respect they show for their fathers 1 1 ere
are heroes in obedience to mothers, and
I erocs III tlie life of mendicancy they lead

2Q Tl ere are heroes in the matter of
hospitaluy to tnesis, wl rihcr living as
heiiniis or as house holders All these
leroes oll»in to very superior tenionsof
fiappiness which are, of comse, atq iired by
them as the rewards of their own deeds.

” ^0 Keeping all the Vedas m tnemory
or ablutions performed in lU the sacred
waters, nn^ or may not be equal to telling
the 1 rmh every day in one’s life.


1S7

31. A thousand Horse sacrifices and
Irulfi Were once weighed 111 the balance.
It was seen that 1 ruth weighed heavier than
a thousand Horse*sacrifices.

32 It IS by { ruth that the Sun is giving
heat , It IS by 1 ruth that fire burns tipt it is
by Irutli that the winds bluw , 1 ideed,
everything rests upon 1 ruth.

33 It IS Truth that pleases the deities,
the departed manes, and the Orahmanas.
Triiih has been said to be the highest
duty therefore, no one should ever
twwgfess Iruth.

34 Ihe Mums are all given to Truth.

1 heir prowess depends upon truth. 1 liey
also swear by Irutli. Hence truth is
pre.eminent All trutldul men, O chief ef
Uliarata's race, succeed by their trutfi/ul-
ness III acquiring Heaven and sporting
ifiece 11^ happiness

35 Self.control is the attainment of

{he reward that attaches (o Truth. I have
described it witfi my whole heart. 1 he
man of humble heart who ss endued with
selLcontrof, forsooth, acquires great fionors
in Heaven. <

36—37. Listen now to me, O king aa
I explain to you (he merits of Drahma*
charyya , Tiiat man who practises (he vow
of Brahmacharyya from his bfrih to the
time of his l>eath, know, O king, 'has
nothing unattainable I Many millions of
llishis are living m the region of Brahma.^

38— *39 All of them, while here, were
given to Irulh, and self eotilrof, and had
(heir vital seed drawn up Ihe vow of
Orahrnacharyya, O king, duly observed by
a Brahmana, is sure to dissipate all his
sms I he Brahmana is said to be a burn*
mg fire In those Brahmanss that are
given to penances, the deny ol fire becomes
visible.

40 li a Drahmeharin Rives way to
anger on account of any slight, the cliief
of (be deities himself trembles in fear,
tins IS the visible fruit of the vow of Brah*
(Hdcharyya (hat is observed by the llishis.

41— 4» I isien to me, O Yiidhishthira, |
what (he merit is of the worship of the /
father and the tmiher He who dutifully/
serves hi» fatlier wilhout ever provokn g him t
in anytlniig or similarly serves Ins mutheri
or (elder) brother or oilier senior or precep.l
tor. U si ould be known, ly king, acquires ai
residence in Heaven Ihe m-ni of purifiedj
soul, on account of such service doiie to hiS
seniors, has never to even see Hell.


i 63


MAflABlIARATA.


CHAPTER I XXVI.

tANUSHASANlKA PARVA)— .

Ceiitiunetl.

Yndhisbtliira said

1. 1 nisli, O kiii^, (o hear ] ott discourse
in detail upon those hi|;h ordinances winch
regulate Rifts of kine, lor (t is by makin}>
Rifts (of kme) according to those ordinances
that one acquires innumerable rcRtons of
elernul happiness

Bhisbma said

2. ihere is no gift, O kiriR, that is
iiigher in point of merit than the Rift of
hue. A cow, Uv.fuUy acquired, if given
BwA), immediately rescues the entire family
of tlie giver,

3. That ritual which sprang for fhe

benefit of the pious, was subsequently
declared forilie sake of all creatures that
riuial has come down from piimevat time.
It existed even before It was declared. In-
deed, O king, listen to me as I recite to
vou that ritual which affects the gift of
Kine. ^ j

A, Formerly) when a number nf ktnewas
brought (before him), king NUndliatri,
filled with doubt about tlie riiual iie''snould
observe, property qnestiencd VriliaipTn'ror
EU» explanation of that doubt.


Vtlbaspati said:—

5 Duly chserviiig restraints alt the while,
the giver of kine tlio ltd, on (he previous
day, properly honor ihe Or-hmanas and
appoint the time of Rift. As for the kme
to be Riven away, they should be of the
class called Roluni.

' G. The ki le also should be addressed
wiih the words^SainaiiRc and Valiule—
Eiiteting the fold where the kme are kept,
the following Shrutis shonld be uttered —

< 7. The cow IS my mother. The hull is

• *’'y faiher, (Give me) Heaven and E.iith 1 y
\ prosperity. I he cow is my refuge— Eo-
lermg the fol^ and acting thus, the yiver
should pass' the night there He should
« again utter the formula when actually rivini;
^ away the kine.

"S The giver, thus living with ih* kme in
the fold wiilioul doing 811) ihing to co> irol
their freedom, aid l)mg down on the naked
eailh, becomes readily cleansed of all Ins
sms on account of his bringing himself down
lo a condition of perfect similitude with the
kme.


0 'Vhfn the Sun rises in the morning,
)ou slmuld Rive away Ihe cow, accompanied
hy ter call and a bull. As the rewaid of


such a Meed, yeti Will surely allairt to tliB
celestial region. Vou will also enjiy the
blessings shown by the Mantras

10 Ihe Mantras contain these refer*
ences to kine ‘ Kine are gifted witli stien,>lh
and energetic exertion Kme are also wise
Ihey are the root of tiiat immortality which
sacrifice yields They are tlie root of all
energy. They are the steps by which
earthly prosperity IS gamed. Ihey are the
eternal course of the universe. I hey multi-
ply one’s race.

II. Let the kine dissipate my sms.
They have in them the nature ol both the
Sun and the Moon. Let them lielp me m
the attainment of the celestial region. I et
them come to me, as a mother takes to her
children. May I enjoy all other blessings
which have not been named in the Mantras
I have uttered.

12 For alleviating or curing phthisis
and otlier wasting diseases, and for achiev-
ing freedom from the body, if a person takes
the help of tlie five products of the cow, kme
cooler blessings upon the person like the
river Saraswaii — -Ve kme, ye are always
conveyers ol all sorts of merit . Pleased
with me, do ye assign a desirable end lor

13 1 have tO'day become what ye are.
By Riving \ou awty, I really give mj sell
away.— Ye do not belong to him wtio gives
you awwy. Ye have now become mine.
Possessed of Ihe nature of both the Sun and
tl e Moon, do yc cause both the giwr and,
the receiver to shine with all kinds ol pros-
perity.

; 14 The River should duly niter the

vmrds found m tile first part of the above
I Verse Ihe twice born recipient, cnnvrr-
, sant with tlie ritual regulati ig the Rift
\ kine, should, when receiving tlie kme m
gift, utter tlie words found in the latter half
of the above Verse,

15 The man who, instead of a cow, Rives
away the usual value tliereof or cloths or
gold, IS considered as the giver of a cow.
Ihe River, when risihr away ihe usimI
^lue of a cow, should utter the words,—
I his cow will) (ace upturned is being givert
away. Do you accept her — The man who
Rives awaj cloths shoulf utter the word*.
— Dhsviiavja— (tins should be fe,aiJed
as representing a cow). The man wInj
Rives laway gold should utter ihe word —
Vaistmavi 1 e , ihe gold is ol the form and
nature ot a cow.

t6. These are (he words that should be
uttered according to the kind of gift men-
tioned above. Ihe reward that was reaped
by making gifts of kine is residence in the
celestial region (or SIX and thirty thousand


ANU&HASANA fARVA , iCo


Vear5. \litfu«ri<l y'ears, and fWehty

{tiausaod yrars fespectively.

(7. llm^ are Hie itientS|>e5^ecttve1y> oE
cifts of tlifngg as subsitiutes of Vine
WhiieT^aboiif him’vuho gives an ac\tial cow
all tlie rnerits tliat oltach to gifts of kme
becoiYie Ills at ooty tl^e eiglith step of ttie
recipient.

18. Ife wire gives ati actual cow he-
roines gifted with righteous conduct in this
v/urld He wlio gives the value of a cow
becomes /tWd from every sort of fear. He
Vvho gives a cow never suffers from sorrow
Alt the lliree, as also they who regularly
perloim their ablations and other actsat
eaily dawn, aird he who is Well Conversant
Will) the Mahabharaiai it^is well ftnowo
attatn to the regions ol Vishna and Soma.

19 Having given away a cow, (he giver
Should, for three nigiils, adopt the vaccine
Vow. and pass one night with kiner 'Degin-
lung again Irom that iunation, numbetmg
the eighth named Kamya, lie shontd pass
tiree living exclusively on inilk and

the urine and dung of the cow

30. By giving away a bull, one acc|uires
the merit ol Brahmacharyya By giving
nway two kine, one acq nres the mastery of
the Vedas that man who celebrates a
sacrifice and makes gifts of kine according
lo (he ritual laid down, attains to many
great regions 1 hese, however, are not at«
tariiabla by the person who does not know
that ritual

31. That man who gives away eVen a
single cow. which gives profuse mdlt. ac
q nres the merit of giving away all desirable
oujects on Eerlhcullected together tVhal
more should be ssid of tl>e gift of many
such kine as give Havya and Kavya on ac-
count of their frill udders T 1 he merif winch
bc{ons,s to tlie gift of superforosems greater
than that of tlie gift of kine.

23 One should not, by giving a know-
ledge of l\ IS ritual, benefit a person who is
not Its disciple or who does not observe
sows or who IS bereft of faith or who is
possessed of a crooked Understanding
indeed this rd gton is a mystery, which
many people do not know. On« who
knows it should not speak of it everywfiere

3j There are, in the world, tnany men
who have no lailh. 1 liere are among men
many netso is who are mean and Who
resemble Kakshasas 'Ills religion, iJ
given lo them would lead to evil It would
produce equal evil if given to such smful
men as are aiheisu

34 Listen to me. O king, as I recite to
sou the names of those pious kings wlio
i ave attained lo regions ol great happiness
as the reward ol those gilts of kmc winch
33


they made according to the insirucuons oE
Vribaspatj. ,

35. Ustiinara, Vishwagashwa, Nrtga,
Bhaguatha, the celebrated Mandhatri the
son of Vuvanashwa, king M ichukiinda,
Bhoftdyamna, Naishadha bonaka Puru-
ravas, emperor Bliarata to whose race
belongs all the Dharaias llie heroic Ruma
iha soil of Oasharatha and 01 1 ly oiher
celebrated kings of great deeds, m d mI>J
king Difipa of widefy-linuwn deeds alt,
on account of their gtfis of kme accordn - to
the ritual, attained to Heaven. King .Mnn-
dhatn^ was always observant of saenfi^,
gifts, penances royal duties, and gifts uf
kme.

t8 Therefore, O son of Pntha, do you
also keep in mind, those instructions of
Vnhaspatt which 1 have recited to you.
Having obtained the kingdom of the
Kurus, do you, with a ciieerlui heart, make
gifts of good kme to foremost of Drah-
manas.

'/aishampafana saiii

39. 1 bus addressed by Dhishma on (he
subject ol properly making gifts of kme,
king yudbishihira did all that Dhishma
desired Indeed, king Yudlnshthira bore in
mind (he whole of chat retigio > wtiieli (he
preceptor of the gods imparted to the Kojal
Mandliairi

JO. Vudhishihira from that time began
to always make gifts of kine and to tnaiiu
camfmnrelf hkIi grams of barley and cow-
dung as both tils food and drink. 1 he king
also bryaii to sleep from that day on the
naked earth and possessed ol Controlled
soul and resembling a bull m conduct, he
became the loremost of monarchs

31 The Kuru king from that day be-
came very altentive to kuie and always
adored them, smemg their praises From
that day. the k ng give up the practice of
yoking kme to his Cars Wherever le had
occasion lo go he proceeded on cars drawn
by horses oi good Dreed.


CHAPTER LXXVn.
(ANUSIIASANA PARVA) —

Cen/iHiifi/,

VuIsbumpayaDH tald •—

S. King Yudlilshlh ra giftrd B1 I b jm.
Iiy. once again asked th-
Stmntinu cn Uie subject of gdu cf k u* ,

full.


. 17 °


MAllAOUARA^A.


Ihe king: said

2 Do you, O Bbarala, once more des-
cribe to me in fnl! the merits ol gtvni^ away
Uine. Indeed, O hero, I have not been sa-
nded vnth \ieattng nectat-hke words

iraishaiMpayana said

3 1 lius accosted by king Vudhishihira
the ]ust, Shaiitanu’s son began to describe

< to him once again, in full, the merits of the
gift of kine.

Bhishma said ■—

4 By giving to a Brahmann a cow
‘liaving a calf, gifted with docility and other

virtues, young >n years and covered round
‘ with a piece of cloth, one is purged of all his
sms. I -■ 1 '

5.'* There are rnarly regions which Iwtve
no sun One who makes the gift of a cow
has not to go there

6 that man, however, who gives to a
Drahmana a cow that cannot drink or eal,
that has her milk d'led up, that* Has
weakened sensesand that is diseased and
overcome with decrepitude, and tliat may,
thereforei be compared to a tank whose
water has been dried up —indeed, the man
who gives such a cow to a Braiimana and
thereby mil clS only pain and disappoint- '
ment upon hint, has certaiuly to enter into
dark Hell. ^

'' 7* IJiat cow wliich is wralhfut and vici-

ous or diseased, or weak, or which has been
bront,ht will out t1 e price agreed upon
having been paid, or wl tch would only
rifU ct the tw ICC born recipient with distress
and disappointment, should never be given,
n e reeions such a man may acquire would
not giie him any happiness or energy,

S Only ?uch kine as are strong, gifted
with good behaviour, young in yeals, and
possessril of od >ur, are highly spoken of by
.tU Indeed, t*! Ganga is the foremost of
^ ell livers so IS s Kapila cow the foremost
of all kinc.

Tuinuslitlura eaid'—

9 \\ hy O grandfather, do the righte-

ous 1 ighly sp'ak of the gift of a K^piia cow
wlrnolt good kine that are given away
•lioiild he considered as equ4l f O you of
grent poWer, I wish to I ear what ll>e
SI prim, tv IS of a Kapila cow. You are
I 'red competent to discourse to me on
I' IS subitet. .j

Dilislima said •—

lo. I have, O si>n, heard old men recite
0 <« 1 istorv about the circumsianccss under
winch the KapiU cow was created, t shall
tccile that old history to you.


ti- Formerly the Self create Brahmal
commanded the Rishi n.ilvsln, saying,—

00 sou create living creature-.^— For doi 'g
good to creatures, Daksha, first of all
created food.

IJ. As the deities live upon nectar, so
nlMlving creatures, O powerful one, hvs
up III the food assigned by Daksha.

13 Among all objects mobile and immo-
bile, the mobile are superior. Among ino*
bile creatures, Oral manas are superior,
(he sacrifices are all set upon them.

14 It IS by sacrifice that Soma is gn't
Sacrifice has been fixed upon kine If®
gikls become pleased through sacrifices.

1 he means of livelihood were created first,
creatures came next.

1$ As soon as creatures were bom.
they began to cry aloud for food All**
them then approaclied''(lieir creator wlo
was to give them food, like children ap*
proaching their parents

x6 Approved of 'the desire of all I"*
creatures, the huly^lord of all creatiireh
via I Dabsha, for the sake of his creaturch
himself drank a quanht^ o^ectar.

17. He became pleased wiifi the neeiari
lie drank and lliereupon an erucalion c«<iie
out. spreading an excellent odbur*klt areuinj
Ihat erucalion, Daksha saw gave birth to s
cow which he named Surabhi. Tins burs-
bin was thus a daughter of his, that lio^f
come out of his mouth.

10. Tliat cow called Surabhi gave
to a number of daughters who became tli*
mothers of the world They weregold-fiuav*
and were all Kapilas 1 hey were the mta\ 9
oI ItveUliood tor alt creatures.

19 As those kine, whose complexion re*
sembled that of nectar, began to pour milk,

the foith of that milk arose and began

spread on alt sides as when the waves of *
running river dashing against one another,

sullicictu froth IS produced that spreads oir

all sides.

*0 Some of that froth fell, from the |
mouths of the calves that were suckmif'l
upon the head of Mdhadeva who was ll*’*
sitting on the Eartli. Ihe powerful Mda*l
deva thereupon, stricken with anger, lovkeo'
at those kine.

2I. With that third eye of his
adorns hit forehead, he seemed to born
those kine as he espied them Like the So**
Imogmassesof clouds with various colors*
the energy that, came out from the third ey«
of AJahadeva produced. O king, vatioir*
cornplexions in those kine. Those among**
them, however, winch succeeded «" **"
capmg from the looks of Mahadeva by
entering the region of Soma. , remaineu


anuskasana parva.


the same color with which they were born,
Jorno chanfje was produced jn Ihett color,
beeing that Mahadeva had become highly
wroth, Oaksha, (he lord of all creatures,
addressed him, saying — Yon have, O great
deity, been drenched wuh nectar, I he
milk or the froih that escapes front the
mojlhs of Calves sucking tlieir dams is
vever considered as impure, Tlie Moon,
after drinking the nectar, pours it once
more. It is not, therefore, regarded as
impure.

25. Likewise, the milk that these kine
give, being born of nectar, should not Jie
considered as impure. The wind can never
become impure Fire can never become
impure Gold can ‘fiever become impure
llic Ocean can never became Impure

26 1 he Nectar, even when drunk by

the gods, can never become impure. I ike*
Wise, ttie milk^of a cow, even when her
udders are suckedby tier calf, can'*nevi.f'
become impure ' 'Itiese kine will support
all these woilds with the nnik they will
give and the clarified butter that wilt be
made from d

97. All creatures wish to enjoy the
sacred wealth, at one with nectar, lliat kme
possess -otlaving said these words, the lord
of creatures Dakslia made a present to
M fhideva of a bull with eert.«in kme.

sS Daksha pleased Rudra, O UUarala,
With that present Mahadeva thus plea>e I.
made that bull Ins career And it was nlier
the form of that bull that Maliadrva adopt*
ed the emblem on the standard fl la/ing on
his battle Car. flierefore it ts that Rudra
came (9 be known as the bull'bannrred
deity. ' " ' - 1 ^

39 It was on that occasion also that the
celestials, in a body, made MsliAdeva the'
lord o( animils. Indeed, the great Rudra
became the Master of kino and >5 named as
the bull. emblemed deny.

30 fience^O king, the gift of (tine is
considered as primarily desirable of Kapila
kine which aie endued with great energy
and possessed of unchanged colour.

31. Thus are kine the foremost of all
crestiires in the world. It is from them
that ttitifood ol all tlie worlds lias emanated.
They have Uudia For their lord "^ey
yield (nrcur) jn the form of mtJa. Tircy
are auspicious and sacred, and grsntors ol
every wub and pners of hfe A person by
making a gilt ol a cow ss considered as
making a grtt of es-ery arlrcle that fs to be
enjjycd by men,

3J. That marl who, wishing to acQuirc
prorperitj. reads with a pure hesrt «,id
boOy.ihoc Versci on the ctlfcin of kmr, bc>


171

I comes purged of all his sins and acquires
I prosperity and children and wealth and
j animals. i

■*33 He who makes a gift of a cow, O
, king, always succeeds in winning (he merits
of gifts of Hsvya and Ravva, of (he ofter ol
' obUlwns of water to the departed Af^nes -of
' religious acts whose perfoimance brings
peace and happiness of (I e gift of velucf'^s
and cloths, and of cherishing of children
and the old

Vaishampayana said t—

'si i leafing these war Jt of his gram?*
father, I’ritha’s sou, t le the royal Vu Ihiih*'
tbira of Aismida’s" race i(iii(irrg wiiii his
brothers, began to make gifts of both bulls
and ktne of different colors to foremost of
Orehmnnas. <

35 Indeed, for gelling regions of felicity
in the next, and acquiring great (.luie king
Viidliishtiitra celebraied mk ly' ..irnfii-es
and as sacriRcinl presents, g>rve away Inin-
dreds of thousands of kine 10 >uc)i O'ah.
manas


, CHAPTER LXXVlIf, . ^
(ANUbliASAStKA PARVAf-."

' Confinue/ ^ « «' t

Bbislima saiJ ‘ ^ "

’1—3. I'orineil), king Sauda'A born of
Ikshafcu's tace ifiat foremost of efiqient
men, on one occasion approached Ins family

f inest, ri$ , Vasluslilha, tliat foremost oC
lisliis, crpwned with ascetic success, espa*
ble of passing llumigh evrry region, the ,
receplacie of Dralmia, and gifint wiili^
eieriial life, and put to him tlie lollowuig
' qrrestioti t

Sandasa said : — ’

3 O holy one, O sinless e>ne,whai m
that nr the three worldswhich is s-icre I nn I
by rccHiog which at all lini'‘s a tn «i may
win fngfi merit f ’

BWsbtua said —

4 Having first bowed fn krne and pun-
fled himself, the learned Vasliishihs des*
Citbed (i> king Ssiidvsa who scoidbefory
bun with head bent in reverence, tl e mystere
atwut kme. a aubicci that u fraui;( t with
results highly benehcul to all persons.

Vasliislitha said

5 Krnr. are always fragrant The per.
lame cf stie Amyris agsllochum comes out
of llicir bodies, Rme are (tie g'eat tcluge


172


MAHABHARATA.


o! all crealurts Kme fotnv greet
source o{ blessings to all-

6 Kine are llie Past and the Future

Kme are the root o( eternal growth Kine
are the root of Prosperity. Anything giveiv
to kine IS never lost, »

7 Kme from the highest food. Tliey
are the best Haw for the celestials Ihe
Mantras called Swahe and Vaslmt are for*
ever established in kine-

S Kme form the fruit of sacrifices Sac-
rifices are established irv kme Kme are
the Future and the Past, and the Sacrifices
rest on them.

5 Morning and evening kme give to
the nishis, O foremost of men, Havi
for use in floraa, O you- oi great eCul*
gcnce.

10 Tliey who make gifts of kme suc-
ceed m gettmg over all sins which they may

committed and all kinds of dangers
Into which they may fall, Q you of great
power.

II. The man possessing ten kme and
making a gilt of one cow, one possessing a
hundred kme and making a gift of ten kme,
and one possessing a thousand kme and
making a gift of a nundred kine, all acquire
the same measure of merit.

13 That mars who, having hundred
kme, does not establish a domestic fire for
daily worshipftthat man who (liough pos-
sessed of a thousand kme does not celebrate
sacrifices, and that man who thougli having
riches acts as a miser, are all three consi-
dered as not worthy of any respect

12 Tliose men who moke gifts of Kapila
kme with their calves and with vessels of
white brass for milking them —kme, wl Kh
are not vicious and wlndi while given away,
are wrapped round with clotlis,— conrpier
both this and the next work].

14— -IS Such persons as make gift of a
young bull, that has all its senses, strong,
wnd may be ctmaidtTTd aaWie fo»*Tft*»s\
one among liundreds of herds, that has
large horns adorned with ornaments, to a
nrahmana endued with Vedic lore, succeed
O scorcher of foes, m acquiring great pros-
perity and riches each time (hey are born
(he world.

t6. One should never go tn bed without

reciting the names ol Vine Nor should one
I rise from bed in the morning without simi-
[ larly reciting the names of kme. Morning
and evening one should bend one’s head
I respectfully to kme As the result of such
I deeds, one is sure to acquire great pros-
\ Petity.


tj One should never feel any repuj"
nance for the urine and the dung of (hr
cow. One should never eat the meat of
kme As the result of this, one is sure to
acquire great prosperity

i8. One should always recite the names
of kme One should never show any dis-
regard for kme in any way If evil dreams
are seen, men should recite the names of
kme

iqt One should always bathe, using cow-
dung, One should sit on dried cowduiig
One should never pass urine and excreta
and otiier secretions on cowdung One
should never obstruct kme ii> any way
30 One should cal, sitting on a cowhide
purified by dipping it tn water, and then
look towards the west Sitting with con-
trolled speech^, one should eat clarified
butler using the bare earth as his dish
One reaps, orv account of such deeds, that
prosperity ol which kine are the root.

21. One should pour libationson the fire>
using clarified butter for purpose O”*’
should make Brahmaoas utter blessings
upon one by presents of clarified buttrr.
One should make gifts of clarified buKtr-
One should aho eat clarified butter A>
(he reward of sucli deeds one is sure to
acquire that prosperity which kme grant.

97 That mao who inspires a- cow's forn>
made ol sesame seeds by uttering the Vedic
Mantras named Gomati, and then adorns
that form witli every sort of gems and
makes a gift of it, has never to suiter a ly
grief on account of ah his- deeds of omiS'
Sion and commission.

23 Let kme which give profuse m Ik
and which have hotns adorned with ttold.*”
kane r**.. that are Surabhis or thedaiigl lers
of Surablus,— approach me even as rivera
approach the ocean

24. 1 always look at kme Let kme
alwa>s 1 ook at me Kine are ours.

are theirs We are there where kme are

25. lliHs, at night or day, m weal or
woe.— ax times ol even great lear — bhimVi
a man exclaim By uttering such word*,
he IS sure to become freed from every
fear.*-

CHAPTER LXN:tX,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued

Vashishtba said —

i the kine which had been created in

a former age practised the hardest pena”*
ces (or a hundred iliousand )eais nit'>


ANUStmSANA PARVA


173


the object of acquiring a positMn of great
pre-eminence

7 Indeed, O scorcher oi enemies, they
said to themselves —We shall, m this
\vorId, become the best o( all kinds o(

f iresents in sacrifices and we shall not be
lable to be sullied with any fault-
3 — ^4 By bathing in water mixed wiih

our dung, people shall become purified { the
celestials and men shall use our dung for
the purpose of purifjtng all creatures
mobile and immobile They also who will
give us away shall acq tire those regMns of
happiness which will be ours
5 Appearing to them at the termination
of their austerities, the powerful Brahman
gave ihem the boons they sought, saying,—
your desire will be fulfilled Do you rescue
all the worlds

6 Crowned with fruition of their desires,
they all rose up— (hose mothers of both
t1 e Past and the Future Every morning,
people should bow respeafully to kine. As
tlie result of this, they are sure to acquire
prosperity.

7 At the termination of tlieir penances,
O king, kme became the refuge of the
world It IS therefore that kine are said (a be
hwhiy blessed, sacred and the foremost of
all things It it therefore chat kine are said
to slay at the very head of alt creatures.

8 Dy giving away a Kapila cow with a
caU resembling herself, giving profuse
milk, free from every vrcious liabrt, and
covered with a piece of cloth, the giver
acquires great Ixinors in the region of
Brahma.

0 By giving away a red cow wnha
call that resembles herself, giving rmlk,
free from every vice, and covered with •
piece ol cloth, one acquires great lionors in
the region of the Sun.

lo By giving away a cow of variegated
hue, with a calf similar to herself, gnme
milk, tree from every vice, and covered
With a piece of doth, one acquires great
honors in the region of Soma.* ^

It. By giving away a white cow. with a
call simiUr lo bersell, giving niilk, free
from every vice, and covered with a piece
ol ctoili, one acquires great hmors m the
region of Indra.

13 By Riving away a cow of dark hue,
with a call similar to herself, Riving milk,
free from every vice, and covered with a
piece of cloth, one acquires great boners
>n the region of t iie*G<>d.

•3 By Rivmg away a smoke<cetorcd
cow with a call similar to l>ciseU, giving I
niifk, free from every vice, and covcrctl j


With a piece of cfoifr, one acquires great
honors 1(1 the region of Yama.

*4* By giving away a frothy-coloured
cow,wnh a call and a vessel of white brass
for milking her, and covered with a piece
of doth, one acquires the region of Varuna.

tS giving away a dust-coloured

cow, wiih a calf and a vessel of white brass
lor milking her, and covered With a piece
of cloth, one acquires great honors m the
regron of the Wind God

t6 By giving away a gold hued cow,
having eyes of a tawny ci^or, with a calf
and a vessel ol white brass for making
her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one
enjoys the happiness of tlie region of

Kuvera.

*7 By giving away a cow of the hue
of the smoke of straw, with call and a vessel
of white brass lor milking her, and covered
with a piece of cloth, one acquires great
honors in tlie region of the departed Manes.

l8 By giving away a fat cow with the
flesh ol Ms throat hanging down and ae*
compamed by her calf, one acquires easily
llie high region ol the Vishwedevas.

}p By giving away a Goun cow, with
a call Similar to her, erring milk, free from
every vice, and covered with a piece of cloth,
one acquire the region of the Vasus
ko. By giving away a cow of the hue
of a white blanket, with a calf and a vessel
of whKe brass, and covered wnh a piece of
cloth, one acquires the region of the
Saddbyaf.

Tt. By giving away a bull with a huge
hump and adorned wnh every jewel, the
giver, O kmg, acquires the region of the
Maruts.

n By RTvrrtg awa^ a bfoe-cofoured
bull, that islull-grown in years and adorned
wnh every ornament, tlie Rrver acquires the
regions of the cetesirat musiciana and
wymplts.

ay. By giving away a cow wnh the
6esh of Iwr throat hanging down, and
adorned with every ornament, the giver,
shorn of grtef, acquires the region of
ri«}apau hwnseU.

24 . That man, O king, who habitualty
makes gifts of kine, proceeds, passing
I rowifli tlie clouds, on a smmy car to the
celestMl region and shines tliere in
splendour.

> 5 . That man who habiluafty makes
Rifts of kin- IS considered as the foremost of
kw kind When thus proceeding locelestial
region, he is received by a thousand celes.
tml damsels of beauiifui hips and adorned
with handiome dreues and ornaments.


*74


MAIIaBUARATA


TJese Rifls serve liim ihere *nd minisier
(o liii dehi'lit t ,

36 lie sleeps tliere m peace And is
aw;)kene(l by the musical laiiglxer ol those
|:;azeUe eyed maidens the sweet notes of
Ihrir Vmas the soft strains ( f tf eir lutes,
and the sweet ti ikle of their Niipuras
27 Ihe man who makes gifts of kine
lives in the celestial region and is honored
there for as maity years as |l ere are Itairs
on the bodies of the ki le he gives away
railing off frim the celestial rek.>on (upon
the lermiiialion of his merit) such a man
IS born as a man and, 1 1 fact, in a superior
family among men. , "


CHAPTER UXJvX. "*1 ‘I
"(ANUSH ASANI^A PA^VA) —

-> Coiiimutdn

Vaaliialitlia said — ' ’

t Kine give clanRedi butler and
millc I hey are U e sources of clarified
butter and they have originated from
clarified, butter 1 hey are rivers of clarified
t utter and eddies of clarified butter. Let
itiiie ever be 1 1 my house

3 Clanged butler is always tn my heart.
Clarified butter is even established in my
navel CUnded butler is m ever^ hmb of
mine Clarified butter lives in my miiid.i.

^ Kine aro always at my front.^ Ktne
are always at my tear. Kine are on every
side oi my body. 1 live in the midst of
kmc 1 ^

4 Having purified oneself by touching

water, one si ould, morning and evening
recite these Mantras everyday By this,
one IS sure to be purged of all the sms one
may commit in course of the day. '*

1; Ibey wlio make gifts of a thousand
Vi.'R,, O.i.v tn, »Jj«,

regions of the Gandharvas and (he celestial
nymphs wliere there are many palatial .
buildii gs made of gold and where the |
celestial Ganga, called the current ol Vasu,

6 Givers ol a thousand kine go there
where run many rivers 1 avng milk' lor
ilieir waier, cheese for tl eir mire, and curds
for their floating moss.

7 That man who gives hundreds ol
thousands of kine away according lo'‘the
ritual laid down 111 the scriptures acquires
gieat prosperity (here) and grSai hoftots in
ti e ceiesiidl regiun.


8 Such 3 man causes both his paternal
nnd materiial ancestors to the tenth degree
acquire regions of great happiness, and
sai clifi'S his whole race.

9 Kine are sacred They are the
foremost of all things in the world They
are indeed tiie refuge of tiie universe
1 1 ey are the mothers of the very celesliiU
n ey ate indeed incomparable They
should be dediC4ted 1 1 sacrifices

10 Wt en going on journeys, oneshould
leave tbe kine to I is lelt Determining tl e
proper lime, they should be given away to
worthy persons

It. By giving away a KapiU ciw
having large horns accompanied by a calf
and a vessel of wt ite brass for milking
her, and covered with a piece of cloUi one
fre^ from fear, enters the palace of Yama
that IS so difliwult to enter.

13 One should always recite this sacred
Aianira, tie, — Kine are of beautiful form
Kjite are of various forms. Itiey are of
universal form Ihey are tie mothers of
the universe O, let kine approach me
tj There is no gift more sacred than
that of kine There is no gift that yields
more blessed mem 1 1 ere has been nolhi ig
cq lal to the cow, nor will there be anything
tlut will eg lal her.

14. With her skin, her hair her horns'
the haw ol bet tad her millt, and her lal —
with tail tliese together, —the cow maintains
sacriBce. What thing la there that is mofe
bsefu! ihaq the cow ? „

I 15 Bending my head to her with res*
pect, I worship the cow who is the motlier
of both the^ Past and Future, and by whom
the entire universe of mobile and immobile
creatures is sust,sined

16 1 O best bf men, I have thus rwiied
toyou o ily a porn >n of llie great merits of
kine lhere|js,no,giri in this world (hat is
superior to that ol kine There is also no
refuge m this world i(i*( is higher than
kuie. ,

Bbisbma said : —

17. Considering these words ol ihe
Rwln jVashislnVia ash glly important, that
great giver of land king Saudasa, tl en
made gifts of a very large number of kmc
to the Bral manas co ilrolling his se ises all
the While, and as the result of those gih*
the k ig succeeded m acquiring many
regiona of happt less in the next world 1


At 4 USffA 5 ANA PATCVA


*75


CMAPTPR LXXXI.

(ANUSHaSANIKA PAHVA).—

C'Onttittted I

Tndbislithira Baid * *

I I ell me, O granHIatlrer, tuliat fs that
^xliicli llie rno 5 t sacred of all satred ilimgs
p> (lie ivorlJ other ih»n ll>at ivli/cl> has beert
already meinionsd, and which is tlic great*
est of all purifying ob|ect3 ' '

iBhiabma said:—

a Ktne are the foremost of all objects.
They are highly sacred and theysuve men
With Iheir millc and wtih the ilavl menu*
factiired therefrom, liine sustain sil creatures
jn the universe. ^ ^

3 O best of the Bharatas, there is no*
thing (hat IS more sacred than kme. Ihe
liiglest of all things in the three worlds.
Itine are themselves sacred and capable of
purifying olhsrs.

4 Kine hve ht a region Ihat Is even
creater than the lesion of (he Crletilals
When given away, Diey save iheir givers
Wise men succeed in acq lirhig the celestial
region by tnahing gifts of kiiie.

5 Yuvanashwa Json /ifatidhatrr Yayaii,

and Nahuslia, used always to give away
(tine in thousands. >

6 t At the reward of those gift*, they
have acquired sucli regions as are unattam*
able by the very celestiats Hiere is, about
It, O sinless one, a discourse delivered of
yore I shall recite it to you

7—8 Once on a lime having liitisbed
nis morning rues, the iniellgent Shuka
approached with a controlled mind his
father, that foremost of ft is I is vtg , the
Island born Krishna, wl o knows lUedis*
linclion between the superior andtiein'
fenor, ami saluling him said, — Wjiat is
that sacrifice which appears to you as the
foremost of all sacrifices 7

9 What IS that act by doing which wise
men succeed in acquiring ifie fiiefest
region 7 What is lha( sacred deed by irWh
the celeslials enjoy divine happiness?

to What forms the character of sacri*
fice as sacrifice ? What is that upon which
sacrifice rests? Wlat is that whtcO ts con
sidered as the best by the deities ? What
is that sacrifice winch is above the sacrifices
of this woild? Oo >ou also tell me, O
lather, what is that whicli is the most sacred
of all things,

tl. ffaving heard these words of his
son O chief of Bharata’s race, Vyasa, t> e
foremost of all persons knowing duties, said
ps folloivs to llJUl,


Vyasa said 1 '

ta, Kine form the support afl crea*
tur'5 |{ine are the re/iige of all creatures.
Ktne are (he embodiment i>f virtue Kine
are sacred, and. kine are purifiers of all

13 formerly kme were hornless as wi-
have heard Pat getting horns they adored
the eternal and powerflil Drahman^

14 Seeing the kine paying their ado-

rations to him and sitting wiihout food,
the powerful Brah nan granted to each of
them what each desired. ,

15. Hiereafler tficfr horns grew and
each got what each wished Of various
colors, and gifted with lionts, thfey began
to shine beautifully, O son i '

16 Favored fay Brahman I imself with
boons, kine are auspicious an I givers of
llavyaand Kavya. they are ilte embodi-
ments of virtue, 'lliey are sacred and
higl iy blessed" They have excellent form
and qualities.

17—18. Kine form higS and excellent
energy. The gilt of kine is hiiilily spoken
of. 1 hose good men wlio shorn of pride,
make gifts of kme, aie considered as doers
of righteous deeds and as givers of all
articles Such men O unless one, ae*
quire the higfily sacred region of kine.

19 Hie trees ttiere yield sweet fniitt.
Indeed, those trees are always bedecked
with excellent Rowers and fruits iliose
(iowert, O best of twice born persons, have
celestial fragrance.

*0 The entire soil of Ihnt region is
formed of gems 1 he sands (here are all
gold Ihe chrnale there possesses the
excelfencies of every season 1 here is no
mire, no dust It is, indeed, highly sacred.

Tl, Ihe rivers there shine in resplen-
dence for the red lotuses blossoming upon
their bosoms, and For the jewels, gems and
gold (hat are On their banks and which
display tlie effulgence of the morning Sun

T2. There are many lakes also on wliose
breasts are many fotHseS, mrired here and
(fiere with NympI cca stellala, and having
tiieir petals made of cosily gems, and
(heir fiiaments gold hued

23 Ihey are also bedecked wiili flower-
ing forests of the Nerium odoiuin with
thousands of beautiful creepers twin ng
round tliem, as also with foiesls of Santa-
nakas bearing flowers

24 There are rivers whose banks are
I variegated with many biiglit pearls and

I shilling gems and gold.

25 Parts of those regions are covered
with excellent trees iliat are decked with


MAUAfiHAttAtA.


l>6

|ewels attd IVc^y Sort. Some o!

tliem are made of gold and some ol ihctn
ate effulgent iike Rre.

aO. lliere stand many modniataa made
of gold, and many liUU made of Jewels and
gems, t hese slitne in beaOty on account of
llieir Urt summits made ol all soils of gems.

87. The trees that bedeck those regions
always put lorth flowers and fruits, and are
always covered with dense foliage. The
n iwets always yield a celestial fragrance
and the fruits are greatly sweet, O Chief of
Dharata's race. i

28 The righteous persons, O Vudhish*
IhirS) always sport there h.<ppily. Treed
from grief and anger, they spend their time
there crowned With the fruition of every
desire,

89 Tious and Illustrious persons sport
there happily, moving from place to place,
O Bharata, ort delightful and highly beaUtU
lul cars.

30. Bevies of celestial nymphs always
amuse there, with music and dance Indeed,
Yudhhhlhira, a person goes to such re*
ions as the frUit of his making gifts of
me.

Those regions which are owned
by Pushan, and the Maruts of great power,
are acquired by givers of knie In riches the
royal Varuna is considered as pre eminent
lie giver of Ume acquires riches like that
of Varuna liimself. One should with the
steadiiKSS of a vow, dally reCite these
Mantras sung by Prajapaii himself via •
Yugandharah, Surupali, Vahurupah, Vi*
shwarupali, and Matara.

33 He who serves kme with respect and
who follows them with humility, succeeds
in gelling many invaluable boons (roiti
kine who become pleased with Inm

34, One should never, even hi his heart,
injure, kine One should, indeed, always
confer happiness on them One should
always respect kine and adore them, by
bending low his head

35 He who does this Controlling hfs sen*
ses all the while and filled whh cheerfulness,
succeeds in acquiring that happiness whidi
IS enjoyed by kine One should for three
days drink the hot urine of the cow For
the next three days one Should drink the
hot milk of the cow.

36 Having thus drunk far three days
hot milk one should next drink hot clarified
butter for three days Having thus drunk
hot clarified butter for three days, one
should live for the next three days on air
only.

37< That sacred thing by whose iielp tlie


celestials enjoy Regions of happiness, Ihdt
svfiich IS the in >st sacred of all sacred things,
tit , clarified butter, kliould ih^n bd carried
on the head.

38 With the help of clarified butter,
one should pdilr hbaiions on the sacrCd fird.
By making gifts of clarified butter, one
should make the Brahmanas utier bene-
dictions on oneself. Une should eat clari-
fied butter and make gifts of clarified butter.
As the reward of this conduct, one may
then acquire that prosperity, which belongs
to feme.

39. That man who, for a month, lives
upon the grile! of barley picked up every
day from cow-dUng, becomes purged df
sins as heinous as Bralimanlcide.

40. After their defeat at the hands of
the demons, the deities practised this ex-
piation. It was on account of this expiation
that they succeeded in regaining their
position as celestials. Indeed, it was
through this that they regained their
strenglli and became successful

4t. Kine are sacred. Ihey are em*
bodimi^ts of virtue Ihey are high and
most efflcaeious purifiers of all By making
gifts of kine to the Drahmanas one acquires
the celestial region,

4) Living in a pure stale, hi llie midst
of kine one should mentally recite thosd
sacred Mantras named Oomati, after toutli*
ing pure watei* By doing this, one be*
comes purified.

43—44 Brahmanas of righteous deedSi
who liave been purified bj knowledge, study
of the Vedas, and observance of vuws,
should, only in U e midst of sacred fires or
kine or conclaves of Brahmanas, impart lO
iheir disciples a knowledge of the Gomali
Mantras which are in every way like a
sacrifice One should oh erve a fast for
three nights for receiving the boon formed
^ a knowledge ol the meaning of tli#
Oomati Mantras,

4S» The man who wishes to pet a son
may obtain it by worsliippi ,g these Mantras.
He who wishes to acquire riches may have
Ills desire fulfilled by worstiipping these
Mantras, The girl desirous of havn'ij *
good husband may have her wish fulfilled
by the same means In fact, one mxy
acquire the fruition of every desire 1'*
may cherish, by Worsliipping these sacred
Mantras

46 When kne are pleased wJlh ih*
service one renders them they are, forsooth,
upable of granting the fruition of every
desire Even so, kme are highly blessed,
they are the essential articles of sacrifices
1 hey ace grantors of every wish. Know
Uikt there is nothing superior to June.


said :—

47 Thus addressed by hu great father.
Si <ika, gifted w'tli great energy, began
from that lime to adore kihe every day
\>o you also, O son act Urns.


CHAPTER LXXXII
{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).*-
ConliHdeit

Yudhishithra said —

1, 1 have I eard that tbe dong of tire
caw IS gUced witb-prospeniy t wish to Rear
1 ow this has been occasioned t have doubts,
U grand father which you should rerRove

Bhishiiia eaid:-^

2 Regarding it is cued the old storj, O
Ving of the conViTrsattan between Vine and
goddess of prosperity O best of ttie
Uharatas

3 Once on a t me assuming a Very
1)631111101 forhi.Vii goddess Shree enlefed
V herd of kme Seeing her beauty the
kliie became filled with wonder,

1?he kine said —

4 Who are you O goddess 1 Whence
have you become nonpariel on Earth for
beauty t O higl ly blessed goddess, we
have been ^lled With wonder at your
beauty

5 We wish to know who you are
Wla, indeed, are you? Where n/IJ you
'proceed T O yott at very great beaOty, do
tell us in detail all we wish to kiio4r ’ —

Shree said —

6 Blessed be ye 1 am dear to all
creatures Indeed 1 Mtn kiioivn by the ,
name of S! ree Forsaken by me, the
demons have been lost lor ever

7 t he ceiesTials «>» . fndra, VivasWat,

Soma, Vishnu Varuna and Agm, having
ol tai led me, are SportKig happily and will I
do so far ever, I

8 Indeed, the RisTiis and the belestials I
only when they are endued with me become
successful Ye kme, those beings meet with
destruction inlu whOm I da not enter,

5 Virtue, Prosperity, and Pteasare
Only wlieii endued with me, became sources
Of I appmess. Ye kme *iho are givers of
happiness know that 1 am gifted with siAb
tnerty.

10 I wish to always live in every one
nf you Qoing to your presence, 1 solicit
VoU Be all of you ^ fled with bhree.

\ 23


The kme said ‘

tt, Votr are ficHe and resf/ess. You
sftow yourself to be enjoyed by niaby per.
sons We do not wish to have you *
OfosteJ bt yotf go wherever you like,

12 As regards ourselves alt of us have
good forms What need have we with
you? Go wherever thou like You have
already pleased ds gTeatfy

Sbree said — -

13 Is It proper wilh you ye k ne that
you do not welcome me? lam difficult ol
being attained. Why then do you not
accept me t

14 It appears, ye creatures of excellent
vows, that the popalar proverb is true vis
that It IS certain that when one comes to
andllier OT his own accord and wiihout
being sought, he is not much respected

Ihe gods, the Danav..s tl e Gan«
vfharvas, the Puhachas, (I •• l/r^g a (h*
Uaksliasas. a id human bein4S succee 1 11
getting me only after practising the severest
ausrerities,

16 Ve who have sBCh energy do ye
I take met Ye amiable ones I am never
dishonored by any one m tlie three worlds
ol mobile and inifflobUe creatures

The kme enii—

1} We do not disregard you O gad>
dess' We do not sTight youl You are
fickle and of a very restless heart ft is for
Ihis only that we take leave of you

tS What need of much talk t Co
Wherever you Iikt All ns have ex>
cellent forms What need have we with
you, O sinless one ?

Shree said —

Ip Ye givers of honors tehounegd by
you thus 1 shall certainly bean obj-ct of
disregard With all the world I Do ye show
me grace

20 Ve are all lilgl ly hleised Ye are
ever ready to grant protection to those who
seek yoUr protection 1 have come to you
solKuung your refuge 1 have no fault.
Do yoli rescue me,

31. Know that I shall always be de-
voted to youl 1 wish to live 111 any part
of your bodies, however repulsive it may be
indeed 1 wish to hve even in your rccium,

22 Ye* sinless cries I do not s-e tliat
^e have any part in your bodes that may
be considered as repulsive, for ye are sacred
and putifyi g and I ig dy blessed 1 Do je'

I owever, grant my prayer Dose lel] nie
In wiikh part of your bodies shall X five


MAIIABHARATA


i3§

Bhishma said

23 Hiiis dddrcssed by Sliree. lh« Icine,
alwd)s aujpicnus and bent sltowing
kindness to all who are devoted to lliem,
pulleyed with one another, and then
addressing bliree, said to her, O kin^,
these words

The kine said — ’

24 O you of fame, it is certainly

desirable ll at we should honor you ' Do
yon live in our urine and dung Both
these are sacred, O goddessc

Shree said

By good luck, yr have shown me
much favour Let it be eve 1 as you say !
Blessed be you all, 1 have realty been
honored by yon, ye givers of happiness

Ehishma said —

it Having, O Bharata, made tits
contract with kine Shree, lliere and then,
before tliose kme disappeared
27 1 have tl us told you, O sen the

glory of the dung of kine 1 shall once
again describe to you the glory of kine
Do you listen to me ,


CHAPTER LXXXni,

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

ConUnued.

Bhishma said —

1 ri ey wlo make gifts of kme and
who I ve upon the lemnanls of things oher
ed as libations on ll e sacred dre are con*
sidered O Yiidl shti ira, as always per
forming saCTifice»ol kind

2 No sacrifice c n be performed with
out the I etp of Cinds and clarified butter
I he very character as saciiRce wl ich sacri
Tices have, depends upo 1 Clarified butler
Hence clanfied bt tier is considered as the
very toot of saciifice

3 Of all kinds of gifts, tl e gift of kine
IS spoken 1 ighesi of Kine are ilie foremost
of all things U>emselves sacied, they are
the best of purifier,

4 I’eople should cherish kine for getting
prospetity and even peace The milk,
curds and clarified butter that kine yield
are capable of 'puiifying ©ne from every
kird 0! sin.

5 Kme are said to represent the htgh*
energy both in tl IS world and the next

Tliere is netli ng that is more sacred or


purifying than kme, O chief of the Bha*
ntas j

6 Regarding It Is recited the ancient
discourse between the Grandfatlier and
chief of the celestials,

7 After the demons had been defeated
and Shakra had become the lord of ll e
three worlds, all creatures grew prosper*
Otis and became devoted to the true reli*
Igwn

8 — to Then, on one occasion, the
Rashis, the Gandliarvas the Kinnaras ihe
Uragss, the Rakshasas the Deities, tlie
Asuras the winged creatures, an^ llie
Pr»]apatis, O you of Kuru’s rafe all
assembled together and worshipped tl e
Grandfather There were Narada and
Pirvaia and Vishwavasii and Haha Hu!u,
who sang celestial songs for worsliippng
tliat poweiful ford of alt creatures H'C
god of wind bore lliere the fragrai ce of
celestial flowers

11—13 The Seasons also, m
embodied forms, bore the fragrance of
flowers peculiar to each, to that assemblsgB
of ceiestals that gathering of all cresturss
of the uiiverse, where celestial maidens
danced and sang m accompaniment with
celestial music In the midst of ihs^
hssembly, Indra, saluting the Lord of all
the celestials and bowing his head to hm
with respect, asked him, saying —I with, 0
Grandfather, to know why the region of
kme IS higl er O holy one, than tlie region
of Ihe celestials themselves who are ths
lords of all the woilds

14 What austerities, what Brahma-
cliaryya O lord, d d kine perform on ac-
count of wl ich they are able to live happi-
ly m a region Ihat'is even above tliat of
the celestials.

15 Thus addressed by Indra Brahman
said to the destroyer of Vala —You have
always, O destroyer of Vala, disregarded
kine

16 Hence you are not acquainted with
glorious pre eminence of kme Listen now
to me, O powerful one, as I explain to you
the great energy and glorious pre-eminence
01 kme, O king of the cetestiais.

17. Kme have been said to be the hmbs
Of sacrifice They represent saciifice itseih
O Vasavaf Wiilioul them there can be
no sacrifice,

18 With their milk and tl e Havi pfo*
duced therefrom, they sustain all creatures.

19 Their male children are engaged in
helping the cultivation and thereby produce
vartous kinds of paddy and other seeds


ANU&HASAMA P^RVA.


20. From ^hem orJgTftate sacrifices snd
Itavya and Kavya. and mdk and curds and
clarified butter. Hence, O ebUf of the
ceJesiials, kine are sacred. SlrkUen wtlh
hunger and (hirst, they carry Vktloiis bur*
thens. I

31 . Kine support ascetics. Tliejr 'sustain
atl creatures by various acts. O Vasava,
kine are guileless in Uteir conduct on ac*
count of such conduct and of many well*
performed acts, (hey are able to live always
in regions that are even above ours.

l». I have thUs kspUIned (o you to-day,
O y6u of a hundred sacrifices, the reason,
O Shairra, of kine living In a place that is
high above that of the celestials.

3^ Ki»e got many excellent formi^O
Vasava, and ire themselves givers of boons
They are called burabhis Of sacred deeds
and gifted wiili many auspicious marks
they are Inghly pUnfying.

24 listen to me Mso, O destrojeroi
Vala, as t tell ><>u in full the reiison why
kine,— the elnldrett of Snrablir, — have
descended on the Earth, O best of tl>e
cele«(ials « 1

aj— 25 Formerly, O son, nlieninthe
golden age the great Uanavas became lords
flf the lliree worlds Adnt performed (he
severest aiistertlies and got Vishnn withm
her wumb Indeed, O chief of the celestials,*
she had sto d upon one leg f<ir many long
years, aesirous of liaving a son.

37—33 Seeing (he great goddess Adiii
thus pracdsing the severest aiirterroes, (lie
daugiilrf of Daksha, trie , the illustrious
Surabhi herself ^tven ^0 virtue, hicewise
practised very severe austenites upon the
breast of the charming mountains of
Kaitisa that are resorted to b) boih (he
eelesUiIs and the Gandhatvas
39 Established on the highest Voga,
she also stood upon one leg for eleven
thousand years. , ^

30, 1 he celestials with the Rishisniid
the great Nagas all became scorched with
t'lie seventy ol "ner penances Gnng fncre'
with me, all of them began to worship that
Busptcious goddess.

31 I then addressed that goddess
gifted with penaaces, and said.— O god
dess, O yon of faultless conduct, lur wliai
purpose do jou practise such severe
austerities

32 O Wghly-bfessed one, f am pfeased
v/tili your penances, O beautiful o< e ! D,
yon O goddess, beg what bom ym, wish
to liave ! shall grant you wliateveryoii
may ask I licse were my words to her, O ,
Porandara,


179

33— 3S Tlius addressed by me, Surabhi
answered me, saying,— i have no need, O
grandfather, of boons. O sinless one, tliat
yoo have been pleased with m' is a great
boon to me. To the ilhi Inons Surabhi, O
chief of (he celestials whn said so to me.

0 (ord of Sachi, I answered ilms, — O
goddess, ! have been highlyr pleased with
this your freedom (ram cupidity and desire,
and with these penances of yours, U you
of beautiful face. 1 therefore, grant you
(lie boon of Itnmortahty.

36. You will live in a region that is
higher than the three worlds, through my
favour. I hat region shall be known to all
by (he name of Goloka.

37. Your odiprtng, .ever engaged in
doing good deeds, will live tn tiie world of
men In fact, O liighty blessed one, your
daughters ivtii five (tiere

33—39 You will readily get alt kinds
of en|oymeiit cefesital ««d liirmiit, that
you may think of. You wiU get wliatever
iMppmess exiits in the celestial revun, O
blessed one! Ihe regions, O you of a
hundred eyes that.ate SurabliPs are re-
plete With means for the saltsfaciion of
every desire, Neither Death, nor Deere*
piiude, nor Rre, can overcome its hiliabi*
taiits I

40 No ill luck, O Vastva, exists there.
Mmy charming forests and delightful
ornaments and objects beauty may be
seen (here ,

4t— 43 Tliere may he seen many
beauidul cars, all excrileiiily eq tipi and
witch move at the will bf iliv iider, O
Vasava O you having eyes h«e lotus
petals. It IS only by celibacy bv penances, hy

1 ruth, by self control by j,ifis bv various
hinds of rigtiieous dee is, by soyiirns to
sacred waters, in fad, liy severe Hilsteiilirs
and righteous deeds well performed, (hat
one call attain to Gvlok.!

43 Vou had askeil m* O ‘vlialcra ami
I have answered you III full O devtrnyer
of Asuras, 30U should rievr dttre^^.u.d.
kine t

Bbielima said ' r

44 Hearing these words of ihi self,
create Brahman O Yn llnshtlnra, Sliakra

I nt a Uiousand eyes began Irnm ih^l time to
I adore kme every day ,i«J to slwiv them tfie
greatest respect.

45 — 47 / have tins ral4 you everythn g ,
about llie puidymg character i,f kioe, O
you of great splend .iir I have eap-nmded
to you the sicreil and high pre eminecce
and plory of kine Itist is C'pable of purify,
jng i/re from eierj sii, (J c! rei of m«n


{CtANAmiARATft


iSo


Tbai man wJhi wFiTt senses withdrawn front
every other object will recite tins accoimt to
Brahmanas, on occasions when Havya and
Kavya are oflered, or at sacrifices, or oir
occasions of worslfippinf; the departed
manes succeeds tn conferring open his an<
cestors an endless happines fraught with
the fruition of every desire. . ‘

48 The man who is devoted to kme
succeeds in grtling the fruition of every
desire of his Indeed, even those women
who are devoted to kme succeed tn securing
the fulRIraent of every desire of theirs

49. He who wishes [or sons obtains them
He who desires daughters obtains them
He who desires riches succeeds m acquir-
ing wealili, and he who desires religious
merit succeeds in winning it.

50. He who desires knowledge acquires
it, and he who desires liappmess succeeds
in acquitiiig I appmess fndeed O Bharata.
there is| nothing which one devoted to kme
cannot oblauv.


rilAPTER LXXXIV,


god? \Vliat are its fruits Wiy is il
considered as the foremost of all things?

8. VVliy do wise men- applaud the gift
of gold 7 \Vjty IS gold considered as the
best of presents m all sacrifices? ^ I
9- \Vlty also 11 gold considered as a
purifier superior to earth- itself and km* T
Why, indeed, is it considered so superior
as A sacrificial present T Do you, O’ grand-
father, describe to me alf this, t

Bhishma said' — * -7; 3 3 u

10 Listen, O king, with raptiattenlion
to me as 1 recite to you in detail the cir-
cumstances connected with the origin of
gold as understood by me i <

ti. Wlien my highly energetic fsiher
Shantanii died, I proceeded to- Gangadwara
for performing his bhraddha-

la Arrived there T began the Shrad-
dha of mv father My mother Janhavr
coming there, gave me great assistancei
13. Inviting many asceties crowned
with success and making tliem take tteif
seats before me, I began the priliinmary
nie» consisting of gifts of water and olotlief
things.


(ANUSHASAmKA PAftVA) —
Conltnutti,

Tadbishtbira said —

t You have O grandfather, eapoiinde<
tome the highly meritorious gift of kme
In the case of kings performing (henr duties
that gift IS most meritorious

7 Sovereignty is alway» paitifa? It,
incapable of being borne by persons o
impure souls Generally kings fadloac
quire auspicious ends

3 By always making however feifis o
earth they SBCCeed m pofify'mg lliemseUcs
You have, O prince of Kuru'^s race, des-
cribe 10 me many duties

4 You hare described fn me lire gifu

Ml ‘’y

Jhe Uisl I Nachikets tn ancient limes, had

described the merits of this act

5 Jhf Vedas and the Upanisliads also
have laid down that in all sacrifices —m
fact, in all sorts of re! giotis riles — the
sacrificial present should be earth or kme
or gold

6 The Shrubs however, declare that of
all presents gold is very snpenor and is
indeed, the best, 1 wish, O era idfail er.
to 1 ear >ou describe truly this s»i jeci.

7 , '? sold? How did itsprme

\Vi^ •' e*i.tetlteT

What IS us esse irv 7 Who is us presidiig


14 Having witli a eoneentraied mind
performed all preliminary riles as laid •So*’*
in ilie scriptures, I began t» duly offer the
obsequial eake

15. I then saw, O king, that a beaiUiru?
arm, adorned with armfetaand other nrna
inenis,rose up, piercing the ground, through
the bUdes of Kusha grass- which I had

l6' Seeing that arnr rise from the
eround, I became stricken with wonder-
Indeed O chief of Bhsrata’» race I
tlioughi that my father had come himself
tor accepting the cake 1 was about to
offer.


17— KeHe-lmg then- by the Ight of
ine scriptures, I became convinced tiiat t e
o^mance is m the Vedas that the cake
sliould not be presented to the hand of liin>
whose Snraddha is performed My con-'
viciKuv was tliat the obsequial cake should

Mver be presented tf» this world by a maw

to the Visible hand of the man whose obse-
^lal rues are pei formed Hie departed
Aianes do not come in iheir visihfe forms for
taKing the cake On ilie other hind, the ,
ordinance lays down that it slnjiilJ be pre- '
sented on the blades of Kusha grass spread

onthe earth for the purpose. 1 then dis-

egardmg tl,at liand wliicli was the mark of
mv lamer s presence, and recollecting tlie
e ordinance of the scriptures regarding
mode nj presenting ih- cake o fferrd II 0
entirecake O chief of the Uiiaratas. upon


AHCSItASATfA PAHVA.


iKose bUi 3 e» o( Kusita grass that were
spread before nie> i

it Know, O king, that what I did was
perfecity consistent with tlie scriptural
ordinance After this, the arm of my
failief, O monarch, vanished m out very
sight. f

22— 7^ On that night as 1 slept, Ihede*
parted Afanes appeared to me in a dream
Pleased wUli me they said O chief of
liharata's race, these words ^VVe have been
pleased with you, for the raarh you have
sli >wn to day of your adlierence to the
ordinance It has pleased us to see that you
have not deviated from the injunetwiiis of
the scriptures The scriptural ordinance,
followed by you, has become more autbori*
tative, O king

* 4 — 35. By such conduct you have
honored and maintained the authority of
yourself, the scriptures, the Vedas, the
Puns and (he Rislus, the Grandfather
nrahm^i^ himself, and those elders, vit , the
Fraiapatis Adherence to the senpinres
has beeri upheld You have to day, O chief
of the tiharaias, acted very property.

36 -> 3 S. You have made gifts of earth
and kine. Do you make gifts of gold,
lie gift of gold IS very purifying O )OU
that are well. conversant with duties, know
that by such acts both ourselves and our
fere fatl ers wilt all be purged of all our
sins Such gifts rescue k^h ancestors,
and descendants to the tenth degree of the
person who makes (fiern I hese were ilie
words that ray ancestors, appearing to me
}> a dream, sard (g me J tiien awoke, O
k ng, and become filled with wonder.

39 Indeed, O chief of OharaCa’s race 1
determined upon making gifts of gold.
Listen now, O king, to tins old history.

30—33 It Is highly praiseworthy and
It gives longevity to a man who listens lo it
II was first recited 10 llama lie sorr of
Ja nada(.ni Formerly Jatnadaeni's son
Itam* eaisied With great anger, rooird out |
Atu- JishaAcyiM imw ^0 M\r .tarw ^ jilir
Farih for twenly«one limes I] iving sub>

I utaied the entire n-sciU, tiie heroic
tama having eyes like lotus petals
heean to make preparations for celebrai ng
n Hnrse*Saeiirice, O king that is landed
by alt Biahmanas and Kslvstriyai and ilial
IS cspsblcol graniing the Iru tion of every
desire

It TJiat facriOce purifies aherralwres
and increases the enerey an i splriidnir of
It atr mhit succeed In Celehramirf »l Gifted
s»iih great enerey, Ita n». hy ttie eelebra-
lion oi that lacrifi.e, ^•eCa'oe snlesi

3 t Having twvxeser, celehcalel tl at
erctiijjt ct i4vri'ii4» tfe K'**t Rama


iSi


could not acquire petfect Tightness of
heart

3 S '^37 Going to Risliis conversant with
every branch of iearni< g as also the celes«
bats. Kama of Blwigu’s race questnnrd
them Filled witli repentance and mercy,
he addressed them saymg,— -l> highly
blessed ones, do ye declare that which
purifies men engaged in lerriRe deeds ?—
Thus addressed by him those great Uishis,
tally read rn (tie Vedas and the scriptures,
answered him, saying -~0 Rama/ gutded
by the authority of the Vedas, do you
hoitor all learned Brahmanas Acting
thus for soreetiree, do you once more ask
the twice born Rishis as to what should
be done by you for purifying yo irsclf.

3S — 39 FoJJow the advice which those
highly wise persons would give! Going
(fen to Vashrthfha and Agastya and
Kashyapa, that dehgliter of the dingus,
gifted witfi great energy, asked tfiem tfie
very question— Ye foremost oi Brahmanas,
even chts is (he wisli (hat has ongmated in
my head How, indeed, can 1 purify
myself.

40 By what acis and rnes may this be
engendered T Or, if by gifts what is that
article by giving away which thiswialiol
mine may be satisfied, O foremost of nghte*
oi» persons, d you are bent upon doing
me a favour, then do tell me, ye who have
S«celicism for wealth, w)>ai s that by which
I may succeed in purifying myself

The Kisbia said

41 O dehghier of the Bhrigns, th^
mortal that hns committed sin becomes
purified by making gifts of kine, of earth,
and ol ncl es I his is what we have
heard

43 There is another gift that is const*

. dered as • great purifier Listen to us, O
I twice born Rishi, as we discourse on it*

' ( hat articfe IS excelfent and rs wonderful
' to tools at and is, besides, the oflspring ol
' fire

4j F .rmeily the god Agni burnt alTife
world We have tieard (I at| from hrs
seed spriiiiit got 1 of briglit cemplrxion.

It passed by the name ol the gocM com*
ptexivned By making gilts of gold you are
sure <0 have your wish hilfilled
j/ Then tt e .11 istnous VasI ishihs in
especial of iii,>d vows, ad Uessm^ I im.
said— •Hear. O Itama. how gold winch IS
*f( like file, first cauve into being

45. That gold w.lJ Crt/ifer me'it on you.

In matters €>l (.tils gold is Hetty spoken
,4 } shall aliolelt yrMiw'.ai h gold, whence
•t has come, nn i l.ow rt luis come tg be
<m|j d wn‘» lupetisr .iiDihu'rs


MAflABHARATA.


46 Listen in me, O >ou of migfity *rms,
as I describe these subjects Know this as
Certnin that gold is of the essence of Fire
and Moon.

47— 4S The goat is Fire, the sheep is ;
Varuna, the hnrse is the Sun | etcpliants '
are N-igas , buffalos are Asuras ; cocks and !
boars are Rakshasas, O delighter of the
Bhiigus, earth is sacrifice, kine, water,
and Soma. These are the declarations ol
the Smntis.

49 Churning (he entire universe, a
mass of energy was found. *I hat energy
IS gold. Hence, O taice burn Rishi, com*
pared to all these objects gold is surely
superior. It is a valuable thing, high and
excellent.

50 It IS therefore that the cetestial dnd
Gandharvas and Uragas and Rakshasas
and human beings and Pishachas hold it
with care.

51. All these beings, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, shine in splendour, wiili the help of
gold, after converting it into crowns and
armlets ind various ornaments.

53 It IS also for this reason that gold
is consideted as the most purifung ol alt
cleansing things such as eartti and kine and
all other kinds of rtches O king

53 Hie t^ift of gold O powerful kine,
IS the highest gift It is superior to the
gift of eaith, of kiiie, and of ail otlier
things.

54 O }ou who are effulgent like an
immortal, ^old is an eienial purifier Do
)ou make gifts of it to (he foremost of
Brahmaiias as it is the foremost of puiifjing
things

55 Of all kinds of presents, gold is the
best They who make Rifts of i,old a«e
said to be gitefs of all il mgs,

56 Indeed, (> ey who make gifts of gold

are considered as givers of celestials Ar< i
IS all the deities in one, and gold has Agiii
for Its essence ,

57 Hence 11 is tlal the person who
makes gift of gold gives away all liie Ccles
Hals. Hence, O lung, there is no gift
higlier tlian the gift of gold,

Vaslitsbtlia said —

58. Hear once mo'e, O Iwice I orn Rishi
as I describe ll e siiperion(> ot gold, O
foremost ol .<11 wiclders ol ue-«pofis

39 I heard lUis formerly in the Parana
O son of Dhn,.u’s race It repieseits tlie
speech ol P(a]-ip'«li tnmself

60— fit Alter the marriage was over of
the ilhistiiaus and gir^t Kuora aime I with
he tndeni, O, son ol b) rit,u s rate, sirth


ihf* goddess who became his consort, oir tfnr
breast of that foremost of mountains, vtit
Himavat, (he illustriom and great deity
wished (o unite himself with the goddess
Ihereuponall (he celestials, stricken with
anxiety, approached Rudra Bending their
heads wrth respect and pleasing Mahadeva
and hn boon>giving consort Lima, both of
whom were seated together, they addressed
Rudra, O perpetiiator of Bhngu's race,
saying,— Tills union, O illustrious and
Sinless one, of you with the goddess, is 3
union of arr ascetic with another. Indeed,
K mile umhn, O lord, of one energetic
person with another equally so Vou, O
illustrious one, are of irresistible energy.
The goddess Uma also is gifted with energy
that IS equally irresistible j

A4 The offspring that will result from a
union ntle (Ins, will, forsooth, O illustrious
deit), be gifted with tery great might*
Indeed, O powerful lord, tliat offspring will
consume all things In the three worlds wiih-
out leaving a residue. *

65 Do you then, O lord of alt the unf
verse, O yon having Urge eyesi grant ic
t> ese celestials prostrated before you 3
boon from desire of beneRlitig the
worlds

66 Do jou, O powerful one, rrstraiu
this grent energy of yours which may be*
come the seed of offspring

67 I ndeed, that energy is Ihi essence of
all forces in the three worlds Ye two by
an act of congress, are sure t6 scorch the
universe.

68—69 Your ftfT>prT g w II certainlj liu
able to afllici the celestials Neiilierlle
goddess Earth, nof ll e Sk>, nor Heaven,
O powerful one, nor all of them to,;elli*r,
will be able to bear j ir energy , we firmly
believe Ihe entire un verse is certain
to be burnt tliroiigli the force of jour
energy

70 You slionld, O powerfoT fine slo**
us favour O illiisinous deit) That favo<
consists in your not begeitiiig a son O
(rtremosi of the celestials, upon the goddes*
Uma,

71 Do you palienit) govern your firry
and po verliil energy — To lie deities thst
sanJ so, t’ e t olj M-<I>3iieva*having the bull
for I IS sj»n, O iwic" bon. Ibslii answered
saying — bo be il * — Having said so. ilm
deity thst I as He bull for his vehicle, drew

up his Vital seed

73 From that lime I e passed by llie
name of Urddharclas (one lhat has drawn
up tile viul seed) Al tins attempt of the
ceIrsliaU to Stop procreati >n, the consort cf
Rudra became higl U wroth.


AnUSIIASANA PARVA 183


On iccoitm of tier bnn^» of the
opposite sex, sfie used hxfsli words 1 — Since
■ye hi<ve opposed my ford m procrextiutf aii
oDipring when lie was desirous of procreai*
sng one upon me, as the resuft of thfs act,
>e celesttalsf >e «U sh-iU become sonirss
Indeed, since ye have opposed the birth aI
nil cflipring from me, Dterefore, )e shall
have no onspnng of your own >— WIten tins
'curse was imprecated, O petpeiuaior of
Uhrigu’s race, the deity of fire w«s not
tliere

77. ft IS on account of flits curse of the
goddess that the deities have become cMd*
less Uudra, begged them, held in Imnseii
his energy of incomparable power.

7S. A small quaruity, however, ttui
came out 0 (i is body dropped on the Earth
*ihats*ed, lalling on llie Earth, leaped into
a burning Tire and there began to grow most
wonderfully.

7p— 8». The energy of Rudra, coming in
contact with anollier energy of great power,
became one with it in essence. Mean*
while, all the celeilials headed by tndra
were scorched by the Aiura 'lamcd rarakft.
Ihe Adiiyas, the Vasus, the Rudras. t>>e
Maruls, the Ashwms and ilic baddhyas
all became greatly afflicted on account of
the prowess of that son of Out All llie
regions of the celeiiials, fiinr brauiiful
ears, and their palaces, and (he asylums
of the Rislifs, uere snatched away by (lie
Asuras. I hen the celestials and the
ttistiif, With depressed liearls, sought the
protection of (he illutinous and poweiful
Uialiman of uiifading glory.


CHAPTCa LXXXV.
tANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
CeiiiiituiJ.

The Deities taid

S> Jbe Asura named Tsraka who has
received boons from you, U powerlut one,
is assailing the cetesiuls and (lia lUsiiis.
Let his death be ordained by you,

3. O Grandlaiher. we fear him greatly
O niustcious one, do you Mve us! Wc
have no other refuse than you

BrahmRa taid t—

3. 1 tieai all creatures equally, I cannot
(lavever, approve of sm, Lee laraba,
that enemy oi the crUttials and ItisliU,
b« speedity destroyed.

4. The Vedas and the eternal duties
sfuul not be rootrd out, ye' laremost of
celestials. I luic ordaa'cd whjt IS proper.


Ml this inatier, “Let the anxiety of your
hearts be removed.

The Celestials said i—

5 For yoiif having granted him boons,
that Sou of Dill lus been proud of his
power. l}e Is incapable of being killed
by (Its denies flow (hen will Ins death
be engendered 7

6 Ihe boon which, O Grnnfather, he
has obtainad from you is tf>a( he should
not be killed by celestials or Asuras or
Itakvhasas

7, ihecelescralf liaveniso been cursed
by the wife of Kudra ^on account of their
attempt to stop prupagatton The cuise
imprecated by her has been, O lord of
the universe this, vie , that they are not to
have any ofTipifng.

Bmhnian said . —

8 — |n Ye foremost of celestials. Agnl was
not there at the time she curse was I'ueii
by the goddess lie will beget 1* child for
the destiucHon of the enemies of the gods.
Superior to all the deitier, Daiiavay,
Raksliatis, Ini nan beings, Gsndharvas,
Nagas and leathery creatureSi the son «t
Agni with Ins dart, which in Ins hands,
wilt be a weapon incapable ol being bafned
if otce hulled at ihe enemy, will destroy
taraka whom you fear. Indeed, all other
enemies of yours will also be Killed by him*

tl. Will IS eternal rirat Will fs
known by the name ol Rama and is at
one with Itiidra’s seed a portion of nhieli
fell Into the burning form of Agnu

13 . that energy, which is a powerful
substance, and which resembles a second
Agni, Will be cast by Agni into Ganga
far pruducnig a child upon her in order
to bung about the desliuciion of the ene*
mies ul the gods.

n Agni d'd not come within Ihe range
of Uma's curve. Ihe eater of taenricial
ttbanons was not present there when the
cuise was imprecated.

14. Let ihn god of fire, therefore, be
searched out. Ln him now be set to this
lavV. Ye smims ones, I have told you
die means for (he destruction of Taraka.

15 Tt>e curses of the energetic cannot
produce any effect upon (lie cntrgelK.
kofces, wlien itiey come mto contact with
a stionger lo'ce. become weakened.

l6> Tf>«y who are endued with penances
can destiny wen the boon.cmng dex^s
«h 0 arc indesuuciibte ill. or like,

«e ‘Oesiee sprang In former llmri and m
the mesi cleinai «i all creaiutes.


184

<?> Agni !s die Lord 'Of the universe,
flels Incapable of being apprehended or
described Capable of going everywhere
and present ni all things, lie is the Creator
t>( all bemgs. lie lives iti the UeaVls of
ail creatures Oilted null great power.
He IS older than lludra himself.

t8 — 19 Let that eater of sacriRcial hba*
Irons, who is a mass of energy, be found
out lhat illustrious deity will fulRlI this
desire of yo\ir hearts. Hearing these words
of the Grandfather, the gteat gods then
proceeded to find out the god of fire wUh
cheerful hearts on atcount of their purpose
having been crowned with success.

So. llie gods and the Rishts then
searched every pariian of the three worlds
their hearts being busy with the thought
of Agni and eagerly desiring to see him.

21. Gifted with penances, possessed
of prosperity, celebrated over alt the worlds,
those great ones, all crowned with ascetic
success, sojourned over eve^ part of the
universe. O foremost one of Bhrigu's race ,
S 2«>*34 They could not find out the
eater of sacrmcial libations who had
concealed himself by merging Ids self into
self. At this (ime. a frog, living in water,
got on the surface from the nethermost
regions, with cheerless heart on account
of having been scorched by the energy of
Asm the little creature addressed the
celestials who hsd become stricken with
fear and who were all very eager to see
the god of fire, saying,— Ve gods. Agm is
now living in the netl ermost regions
Scorched by the energy of that god and
unable to bear it longer, I have come here.

35. The illustrious bearer of sacrificial
offerings, ye gods, ts now under the waters
He has created a mass of waters nitiun
which he is living All of us have been
scorched by his energy.

76 H. ye gods you wish to see him.—
ilyou hare any business With him, — goto'
him there. j

37. As regards eurseircs. we shall fly |
from this place, O celestials, from fear of
Agnil— HaVink Said (his much, ilie frog
dived into the water,

33 The cater of sacrincial libations
came to liaow of the treacliery of the froB
Coming to that animal he cursed the wliole
race, saying —Ye will be deprived of llie
organ of taste.

39 Having made tins curse on the Frog
he left the spot immediaiely for living else
w»,ere Indeed the powerful Celestial did
I ot show hi nieh.

3«, See og il*e condition to which the
Itogs were rcOu.cd lor having done ibcaa


service, the Ceiestials. 0 be^l oT the
showed favor to those creatures 1 sh-ill
tell you everything about It. Do you hear
me, O mtghty-arnled lierO.

The Deities said •—

31. Ihough deprived of tongues through
the curse of Agni and, therefore, of the
sensation of taste, you will be able to uiter
variiMss-kiiids of words.

33. Living withih holes, deprived of
food, shorn of consciousness, wasted and
dried up, and more dead than alive, thS
Eaiili Will yet hold you all.

3t. Ye shall also be able to nioVe aboilt
at night time when everything is covered
with thick darkness * — Having said this tO
the frogs, the celestials once more journeyed
over every part of the Earth for finding out
tl e god ol fire. Despite all their endeavours
however, they could not find him out.

34' Ihen, O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s
race, an elephant, as large andpowerliil
asthe elepliaiit of Shakra. addressed t>c
gods, saying— Agm is now living willu'i
this Ashwoilha tree *

35 Worked up with anger, Agni cursed
all the elephants, O descendant of Blirigui
saying,— Your tongues will be bent back,

36 Having been pointed oUl by the
elephants, the Q>d of Pire cursed til ete*
phsiitsthus and then went away and entered
the heart of the Sharrli treO for living wichnl
It for sometime.

37. Listen now, Opoverful herd what
favor was shown to the elephants O fore*
most one of Blirigu's race, by the celestials
of unbaffied prowess who were all pleased
with (he service one ol their representatives
had rendered them.

The Deities said:—

33 With the help of even yoilr tongues
bent inwards you shall be able to eat all
tl ingt, and with eVen those tongues ye
sliall be able to utter cries which will
be Indulinct.

37 Having blessed the elephanls ih i*i
the mhabiianii of the celestial reelo» o'
more began to search Agni Indeed, having
CMTie out of llie Ashwaitlia tier, the Cui
ol Eire had entered tlie heart of Shamt

40 Tl If new residence of Agni
made known by a parrot. Hie god* there*
upon went there Enraeed wiit» the to*'*
diet of the parrot, the G»d of I ire cur*e 4
the whole parrot race, saving.— Yc shall
from tint day be deprived of t' e powtr


Am/StUSANA fARVA


4V— 4?. FrtSretJ, llie iSJer'of
'<^eiings lurntd up the tongues of all the
p-irruo. Seeing Agni at ihe place pointed
out by the parrot, and beholding the carse
imprecated upon hitnt the gods, moved by
Vnercy (or the poor creaiure, blessed him,
ssyfng, Dll account of your being a parrot,
you sliaH not be wholly deprived llie
power of speech. Ihough your tongue
has been turned backwards, yet you will
only be able to speak the letter K«

43'~'44 Like that of a child or an
old man, your words shall be sweet and
indistinct and wonderful ~-Having said
these words to the parrot, end seeing the
god of fire within the heart of the Shami,
the gods made Sliami wood a sacred foel fit
^for producing fire in a{( religious rues. It
was from that lime that fire is seen to live
in the heart of the Shami.

43. Men began to consider the Shami as
a prnper means (or producing die (in sacri-
fn.es) 1 he waters that are m the nether-
most fOLims had come Into contact with the
god of fire.

46. 1 hose heated waters, O you of
bhrigu^s race, are vomited foith by the
moiintehi springs. On account, of Agn/a
having fived in tliem for sometime, they
bcume hot throngh ho power.

47. Meanwliile Agni, seeing the gods,
became grieved Addressing the celestials,
he asked thetn,~Why have you come
here?

4$. To him the celesiiaU and Ihe great
Rishis said,>-\Ve wish to engage you
m a paittciifar work. Vou should pit-
form It ,

4p When done, it will redound greatly
to your credit.

Agnisaid*—

$0. 1 ell me what yoor business is. 1

bIihII, O gods, accomplnh it. I am always
Willing to do .mylliKig for yon. Du not,
hesitate, therefore, to command me.

•Tbo celestials said

St. Iherc IS an As Ira of the name ol
, Tanka ivlio has bee > filled wuhpinleoi
nccoutit of (>•« boon he has oblainet from
Drahman. Ity his power he is ahte to op-
pose and discoinfii us. l>o yon bring about
his destruction.

5? O Sire, do you reirue these celestials,
these l*r»{spatis, and these Itisliii, O highly
blessed l‘av*ka

St. O pawetfil one, do you beget «

I era c tin psssetted of yo«r pntecr, who
Will remove O bearer of saciiricul libatio«tt,
«ui tears from tl at Asurs.


>8S

54 i We have been cursed by the ^reit
goddess Uma there is notlnng eUe tlun
your power which can be our refuge now.
Du you, therefore, O powerful deity, rescue
os all.

55 Tims' addressed, the iJlustrinn? and

{rresistibic bearer of sncnricial libitions
answered, saying — Be it so ' — tod he then
proceeded towards Ganga oilierwisc called
Bhagiralhi, • ,

56 Me knew her and canted her to con-
ceive. Indeed, in the womb of Ganga ttm
seed of Agm began to grow even as Agm
himself grows.

57. With the energy 6( that god, Gang's
bccain» greatly moved at heart,) Indeed,
she suffered great distress and became un-
able to hear tt. !

5% When the deity of fire ca't his seed
Killed with greatenergy into Ihc womb of
Gaiiga, a certain Asura uttereii a terrific

59 On account of that drcsdfnl roar
uttered by the Asura lor purposes of Ins
own, Gangs became very much ternrieil and
her e^es rolled in fear, and betrayed her
agiuiion.

60. Shorn of consciousness, she eduld
not bear her body end the seed wubm tier
womb. The daughter of Janhu, carrying
the energy of the illustrious god, began to
tremble. ^

6t. Overwhelmed ivitli the energy of (he
seed she held in lier womb, O learned Brnh*
mans, she then addressed the god of fire,
saying,— I cannot any longer, O iVasinaux
one, bear your seed in iny wjinb

67. Indeed, I am overcome wllh weak-
ness by this seed of yours. Ihele-illltl
had in days before, is no longer mine, (
bave been greatly agiuied, U ilhiunous
one, and my heart is dead within me, O
sinless one.

63 O foremost of all persons gifted with

J r^iiiiuU Jie-tr fOttr .seed jieyr
lunger. I shall throw 11 off induced by the
distre<s that has befallen me, and not by
caprice.

64 There has hern no ni-tnsf contact
of my body wnh your s-rd (J ,1lusiriout
deity of fire. Our iiiiion, liaving (or ns
cause the distress that (iss beUfleu ihe
celestisls, has been Subtile and not of ihe
flesh, O highly iflulgent one.

65 Whatever merit or othemtse tt ey
may be m this deed. O ettrr of sacrificial
offerings, must belong IS yo 1 Indeed, 1
think, you will be visited by virtue or sin of
this deed.


MAHADHARATA.


i8C


66. To her Ihe pod ol fire said, — Do you
carry the seed D >, indeed bear the foetus
endued with niy power. It wiH produce
great results

67— Vou are, indeed capable of
bearing the entire Barth You will pain
nathniii by not holding this energy ihat
foremost of rivers though thus dissuaded
by the deity of fire as also by all the other
cel'stals cast oft the seed on the breast of
Meru, that foremost of alt mountains.

69 Capable of bearing that seed, yet
oppressed by llie power of Rudra, she
could not hold that seed longer on account
of Its burning energy,

70—71. Alter she had cast it off
through sheer distress that burning seed
having the splendour of firet O perpetuater
of BhriguS race, Agni saw her, and asked
that foremost of rivers —Is it all right with
the fcetus you have cast off 7 Of what
complexion has it been, O goddessT Of
what form does it look 7 With what energy
does It seem to be gifted? Do you tell
^me all about it.

Gangasaidj— *

jra Ihe fosius la of gold hue. In energy
It IS like you, O sinless one I Of an excel,
lent color, perfectly stainless, and burning
with splendour, it has lighted the enure
mounuiii

73 O foremost of all persons gifted
with penances, (he fragrance of it resem.
hies the cool perfume that is scattered by
lakes adorned with lotuses
74. With the splendour of that fcetus
everything around it seemed to be changed
into gold as all thii ga on mountain and
low land seem to be changed into gold by
the rays of the Sun

75 riie splendour of that foetus, spread,
ing far and wide, falls upon mountains
and rivers and springs

76 It seems that the three worlds,
with all their mol ile and immobile crea.
tures, are being l■,,hled up by it Such
IS your chitd O illustrious bearer ol sacri.
ficial offeimgs.

77. Like the Sun or jour blazing self,
m beauty it Is like a second Soma'— Having
said these words the goddess disappeared

78 The higl 1y energetic god of fire
also, having performed il-e business of
the ccltsilal*, proceeled to the place he
liked, O dehghier cf the Chrigus.

79 It was on account of the result of
this act that the Rishis and the ccteslials
UMtowed Ihe name of Iliranyaretas upon
the gods ol fire.


80 — Si And because the Earth held
that seed she also came to be called by
the name of Vasuiaati Meanwhile it at
foetus, which had ori,>inated from tie god
of fire and been held for a lime by Ganga.
having fallen on a forest of reeds began
to grow and at last assumed a wonderful
form I he presiding goddess ol the cons*
tellation ICrittika saw that form resembling
(he rising Sun

82 She henceforth began to bring op
that child as her son with the milk ol her
breast. For this reason that lighlyenu'*
gent child came to be called Karlikeya
alter her name.

83 And because he gfCtk Uont **«d
that fell out of Rudra's body, he came 10
be called Skanda The incident also oi
his birth having taken place In the

of reeds, concealed from every body *
View gave him the name of Guha It
thus that gold came inio existence a$ ins
offspring ol the god dI fire

84 Hence it is that gold came lotw
regarded as the loremust of all things ana
the ornament of tl e very cods It w**
from this incident that gold came to be
called by the name of Jaiarupam.

8s It IS the foremost of all precioo*
things, and among ornaments also it
the foremost. Hie purifier among S'.'
purifying things, it is the most sacred of
all sacred objects

$6 Gold IS truly the illustrious Agn'i
the Lord of all things, and the forenioit
of all Prajapatis fhe most sacred of all
sacred things is gold O foremost of twice*
born ones Indeed, gold is said to have
lor Its essence Agni and Soma.

Vasliisbtha eaicl —

87 Formerly I also heird this hisMT"

0 Rama, called Brahma. darshana, about
the achievement of the Grandfather Brahman
who is at one with (he Supreme Soul.

88—89 To a sacrifice performed
merly by that foremost of godi, ri/ 1 tj®
Lord ol Rudra, O you of great power, *' ®
on that occasion had assumed the form *'
Varuna, there came the ascetics and all the
celestials headed by Agni Ihere al«
came to that sacrifice all the sacrihci"
limbs (m their embodied forms), and m
Mantra called Vasbal m his embO'f*''
form,

90 All the Samans alio and all
Yarushes, In thousands and in their enj*

1 bodied forms, came there The Rig »«>!

1 also came there, adorned with the rulet®*
1 orthoepy.


AHUSllASMIA PAnVA


gi. Tlie the Sura^i the

Tomas, the Nmiktis, the Notes errattgeei
l» TOW, and the sellable Ou. as also
Ni^raliA and Pracralia, all came there and
lived 111 the eye nl Mahadcva.

os, TTie Vedas with (he l/panMltads,
Vidya, and baviiri, as also, the Past, the
Present, and tlie Future, alt came there and
were held by the illustrious Shiva.

gj Tli« {lawerful Lord of All then
poured I hatioiis himself into l>ts own sell
Indeed, the holder of Pinalia caused that
Sacrifice of muhtlanous form to look highly
beautiful.

gt. lie IS Hesven, Sky, Canh, and the
Welkin He is called the Lord of like Ixrth
He 15 tl e Lord whose rule is acli«>nwledged
by all obstadrs He is Kilted with Shrce
and He is at one with the God of Tire
95 That iITusirious pnd is called by
Various name* He H Bral man. S'nva
Kudra, Vninna, A|;niand Prajspati He
is the au picious Lord of all creaiures
95 — 97 Sacrifice, Penance all the rites,

the goddess llusha burning wiih rigid ob>
•ervanccs the *everal Points with the pre
sidn g denies, the consorts of all (he denies
llieir daughters and the celestials motUrrs,
all came to Paslmp^ii O perpelualer ol
Uhngu’s race, together 111 a body
93 Seeing iImI Sacrifice of the great
Mahadeva who had assnned the form of
Varuna, all of ll ein became htuhl) pleased
Seed g (he ceiescianadrei of great bemty.
the seed of Qraliinan came uut and droppM
upon the Earth '

95 Os account of the serd harme WUn
CK) the dust, the Sun inoh up that du<t
mixed wiih the pirticles <f seed fro o the
Railh With Ills funds and cast i( >n(o the
sacrificial fire

too. Meanwhile, the sscrifice wiih the
Sacred fire of burning flames was com
tnenced and it went on Brahinaii was
pouimj* hbauons on ll e fire Whifr thus
engaged, the Giandfathcr became worked
up with desire

101 As soon as the seed came o it, he
took It up with the aacrificul ladle ami
pmired It as a libation of clarified butler, O
^rliglKer of (he Dlirigus, wrdi tlie necessary
Mantras, on the botni ig fire.

102 From that seed, Brahman of great
power caused the lour orders of creatures to

• come into being. That seed of the Grand-
father was enotied witli the three qualities
ol Goodness. Oaikness, and Ignorance
From that element m it whidi represented
the qual ly Of Goodness, sprang alt mobile
creatures gifted with the principle of actron.


1S7

103 From the clement cf Ignoran a
in It. sprang all nnmohifecreitures. Hie
quality of Goodness, liowcver, wtncli lived
in that teed, entered both kinds of existence.
That quality of Goodness fs of (he nature
ol Lrght. It tt eternal and of it is unending
Space. •

t04 In all the creatures the quality of
Goodness is present and is at one with tl at
light which shows what is right and what is
wroctg. Wtien the seed of Drahmaii was
thus poured as a hbatlon (}n (hat sacrificial
lire, there came from i(, O powetiul one,
three bcingt into existence.

ir>5 Tliey were three male persons,
i,if(ed ateh bodies that part wk of the riadire
ol the circumstances fium whicli they res-
pectively oriKinxted One arose first from
Wk /ire fcaf/ed Ohritc) and /lence fie passed
by the name of Iliirigu A second came
Irons the burning charcoil* and hence lie
passed the name of Angiras

I06 Ihe third originated from aheap
of extinguished charcoals and he passed
by the name of Kavi ft has been already
said that |lie first cams out wnh flames
issuing from Ins body and hence he was
called 6Iin),u

loy From the rays cf (he sacrificial fire
originated another called Mariehi Prom
MarKht (afierwsrds) sprang Kashjapa.
I( has been already said that from the
(hnrniiig) charcoal* erutnated An^iras.
thedwarl Uishis called Valikhiltyas origi>
nated from (he blades of Kusfus grass
spread out in that saerKe

inS—ing Prom the same blades ol
ICnsh* grais, O you of great power origi-
naied Alii Prom the ashes ol the fire
nnguiated tlie twice born Hishi*, ris the
Vaikhanashas end leil with penances and
i.ive« to VrdiC hsaninig and all of excellent
qualtiies

no Tom the e>esof Agni originated
Ihe twill Ashwini en Jued with great he^iiityi
At last, from hi» ears, otigmaied llie
Fra) spalls,

HI— (t7 The Risfiis Originated the
pwesof Agmabodj. From ins sweat ori-
),iiaied Cl liandas, and from Ins sirengili
originated Mind. 1 (lerefure Ago, has beeri
said to be all tl e celestiah rn his mdrvidual
self, by Kishii endued with Vedm learning,
go ded by (Ire audiority of the Veda* I Im
pieces of wood th <t keep alive the fl imes
of Agni are considered as the Mmihs.

I lie juices Ihe fuel yields form the Turt.
pighU.

ti3 The liver of Agni is called the
Day and Night, and his fierce lii,ht is
called (he Multurlas, The blood of Agni


i88


'MA»AD»ARA7A.


considered as the source of the Rtidtas
From Ins blood orismaied the gold>tmed
celestials c-illed tli& Maitradevatas.

* 114 I From his smoke ongmatccl (he
Vasus. From hn flames originated (he
Fudras as also the (twelve) Adityaa of
great eflulgeiice

115—117 lire Planets and ConstelK*
lions and other stars that have been set in
their respective orbits in the sbj, are con-
sidered as the (burning) ehareoak of
Agni. 'the first Creator of the universe
declared Agni to be Supreme Brahma and
F-temal, and the giver oi all desires 1 iiis
js, indeed, a mystery. '* After all these
births had taken place, Maliadeva who had
assumed tl e form of Varuna (lor Ins
sacrifice} and who had Pavaiia for his
soul, said,— I Ins excellent Sacrifice is mine
I am the Grahapati in it i he three beings
that first originated from the sacrificial fire
are mine' Forsooth, they should be con-
sidered as my children. Know tins, )e gods
who range through the skies ^ 1 hey are

the fruits of this Sacrifice.

fl3 ■•_Algni said,— These clnUren
have originated from my Innbs Ihey
fiave all depended upon me as the cause of
their being they should, therefore, be
considered as my children. Ma'tadeva in
tlie form of Varuna has erred m tins
mailer.

ilo After this, the Master of all the
worlds, the Grandfather of all creatures,
vts., Brahman, then said,— these children
are mine ' 1 he seed which I poured upon

the aacnficial fire was mine


130. 1 am the performer of this Sacn-
(ice. I poured on the sacrificial fire, ih«
seed that cnme out of myself, fie who
has planieil Uie seed always en|oys the
fruit, ihe principal cause of these births is
my seed.


!2i — 134. The celestial weni to the
Graiidfalher and having bowed llieir
heads to him and joined > llieir lutnds in
respecl, they said to him. — All of us, O
illosirious one, and the entire universe of
mobile and immobile creatures are your
oflspi mg O ‘irr, let Agni of bun int; flames,
and the illustiims and powerful M^hadeva
who has. for this sacrifice, assumed the
form of Varuna, have their wish At these
words, altiingh born of Brahman, tlie
powerful Mai adeva in the form of Varuna
the king of all aqiutic creatures received the
fi. t born one. vie . Dhngii effufRenl as the
Sun, as Ins own child l|ie Grandfather
t eninle.dedlhatAng.fas should become
the son of Agni.


13^ Kiiuwn g the I
fall er then look Kavi


ilh, the Grand-
s I is own sun.


I Busy With procreating creatures for penpF-
Ing the Earth, lilingu who is considered as
a Praj-apati ilieiice cume to be tailed as
Varuna’s offspring.

126. Gsflcd with every prosperity.
Angiras passed as the offipring of Agni,
and the celebrated Kavi came to be known
as the child of Brahman himself Blirigu
and Angiras, who had originated from tlie
fire and theicharcoals of Agni respectively,
became the procreators of ex cusive r^ces
and tribes in the world.

137 Indeed these three, vie. B' figu
and Angiras and Kavi considered as Traja*
pati are lilt progenitors of many races rfud
tribes All are the cl il Iren of these tlitee.
Know this, O powerful hero "

128—129 Bhrigii begat seven sons all
of wtmin became rqual to him in merits
and qualities I heir names are ChjavanSi
VajrHSliirshaiT, SuJn, ITrva, Sliukra, llwt
giver of boons, VibliU »nd Savana.
these are the seven, lliey are children
of Bliiigu and are hence Wiargavas.

I hey are nKn called Vaninas on acciiu it
v( their ancestor Bliiigu liaviog been
adopted by Maliadeva in tlie form
of Varuna. You belong to the race of
Bhn^u.

130— iji, Angiras begot eight «:i»
fliey al>o are* known <is Varuiids llieir
n^esare Viihasp.ti, Utaithyn, Privasva,
Shaivu, Dtnra, vimpa, Samvarta, and
Sudh-i>w..n |)ie eight). l|,«se ewlit -re
omtidered «Uo as (lie tlnliiren of A«na
Fiecd from every evil, they are devoieJ
to knowledge only.

132 1 he sons of Kavi who was adopted

by Bralim^h himself are also known a*
Varuoas Bel.t ... r>n.nl>er all of I'e.n
b'^caine progeniiors of races and tribes.
Auspiaous by natiKe, tl.ey all knew
Brahma,

,, *53 The names of the eight sons of
Kavi are Kavi, K^ivya, Di.iihIkiu U»Imii*9
widued will, great miell.eence, Uhrig h
Viraja, Kdshi, and I7gra knowing every


«3I These are the eight sons of Kavi-
By them the whole wmld has been peipln*.
Ihey are all eallei I’ri, spans, and ihey
have procreated many on^.n.g

>33 thus, O chtef of Bhririi’s rscr'.
.1 been peopled w. b the

children of Angiras. and Kavi and Cl.rifcU.


: Ijsro


*'ie poweiful and supreme
Mahadeva in the form of Va.u.m ......

he had ass.nned for h.s aicrifico had first,
Olctroed Urah.uma, adoplc.l bolt. Ksvl
BndA.,|.„,s Ilenct, ihsvL two au tonsl
dered os of Va.ui.a


AHU5IIASANA f^ARVA.


137. Afier H’at Ibe eater of sacnBcial
libations, VIS , tbe god ol fire, adopted
of An^iras ffence, all the tliddrcn of
Angiras are known as belonging to tlio
race ol Agiii, '

138 The Grandfather Brahman was,
fortneity propitiated by all the deities who
said to him, ‘—I et these lords of the
universe save us all.

13Q Let all of them become firogenilors
of offspring Let all of them become en
dued with penances, 1 hrough your favour,
let all these rescue |he world

140 Let them become procrealors and
extenders of races and tribes and let them
increase your power, > Let all of Uen
become tliorough masters of ttie Vedis
and let them be performers of great deeds

141 Let all of tliem be friends to the
divine cause Indeed, lee all of (hem be*
come gifted with au'piciousness Let them
become founders of exieiisive r^ces and
tribes and let tl>em be great Htshis Let
a)) of them be gilied with treat penances
and let alt ol them be devoted to high
celibacy,

!43. All of ui, as also alt tliese, are
your olTsprIng, O you of great power Voti,
U Grandfatlier, are the Creator of both the
celestiaisiind (lie Orahmanas

143 Marichi is your first offspring. A0
these also that are called Bliarg^vas are
your progeny. Looking at this fact, O
Grandfather, we shad ad help and support
one another,

144—145 Ad these sliall, thus, multiply
Iheir progeny and establish yourself at the
beginning of each roon after tlie universal
deslruciton thus addressed by Oicm
Br,ihcnan, the grandfather of ad the worlds,
S.II 1 to them, — So be it! i am pleased
wi'h you dll'— Ifaving said so (o the
celestials, he proceeded to the place lie had
come from. »

146 *lhis IS what took place tn days
of yore in that sacrifice of the t,'eat

iif'<rr Anwwvc uire oi* a»V cAe
celestials In the beginning ol creaiion |

wl en he lor the purposes of lus saciifice '
had assumed the form of Varuiia |

147 Agni IS Drahiniii, lie ij Pashu- ,

pati He U Sarva He is Uudra. He is
I’rsjapati It IS well-known that gold is
llie offjpring ol Agtii, !

» 148 When fire is not (0 be had, RofJ ;
Is used as a subsiilute. Guided by the
marks of (he auditions of die Veda, one '
who IS conversant with authorities and who
know* die iJciUity of i,old wilh fire, acts ,
drui. I


^189

149—150, Piitiing j» piece of gold on
someblajesol Kushn grass spreidouton
the groiiiid, die satfificer pours libations
upon It If libations are poured upon also
the pores ol an aiitl iH, upon the right ear
of a gnat upon a ' piece of level earth,
upon the waters of a lirlha, or on tl e
nand of a Brahini<>a, the illustrious god
ol fire becomas pleased and considers it
as a source of his own advancement as
also tliat of the celestials through Ins.

■S( Hence, it is ilhat we have heard
that alt die celestials consider Agni as
I their ref ige and sre'devoted to him Agm
j originated ifom Brahman, and frorr. Agni
I originated gold. ->

15a. Hence, we have ‘heard (hat those
I viituuiia persons who make gifts of gold
are considered as giving away all the
i tlciiies.

I * 55 ' i he man- whp makes gifts ol gold
' ar-quires a very high end Kegions ol burn-
ing effulgeiiCe arc his Indeed, O &b r*.
gHva, he becomes installed as the king uf
kings III the celestial region..

154 lhat person who, at sun^rite,
m^kes agiltol gold aecording'to the ordL
nance and with proper Mantras, succeeds
Ml wardiilg off the evils foreshadowed by
ominous dreams

155. the man who, as soon ns the Sun
has risen, makes a gift of gold becomes
purged oLaII his sms. He who makes »
aih of gold at n)id*day desiroys*all Iit»

{$6 He who, with controlled soul, makes
a gitt of gold at the second twilight suc-
ceeds h« living with Brahman and the god
of wind and Agni and Soma in their res-
pective regions

j 157* Such 9 mxn acquires Fame m re-
gions of great happiness that belong to
Indra hiniself Acquiring great fame iiv
(Ills world also and purged of all his sms,
he spur(> Ml j ,y and liappnieSS.

158 Such a msn acq iires many other
r<;gions of 1 a.o.Ainess and becomes .peerless
for glorj and fame His Course perfectly
unobstructed, he succeeds in going every-
where at will

159 He has never to fall down from the
regioiis whicfi {he acquires, and (he glory
he attains to, becomes very great. Indeed,
by making gifts of gold one aeqiitres num-
berless regions ol liappmess all of which he
enjoys for good,

i6a That man who, having lighted a
fire at sunrise, makes gifts of gold jo view
tt( the observance of a particular vow, suc-
ceeds III acquimg tht. fruition of all his
desires.


MAtlABtlARArA.


190


,6.. Il».«been s «‘<5 ” *\eWs

«,th Agn,. I gift of gold. ‘ "

great liappmess. I he gift of go . ,

the possession of those menls and qtialUics
that are desired, and purifies the l>eart.

161. I liave thus told you, O sinless one,
the or.Rh. of gold. O you of
I.0W Kartikeya grew up, O delighler of
Bhngu’s race.

163 After a long lime Kartikeya grew
up He was then. O perpetu^tor of
Bhritfu’s race, chosen by all the celestials
with Indra at their head, as the com*
mander*in'Chief of the celestial forces.

164. He killed the Daitya Taraka as
also many other Asuras. at the command ol
the king of the celesinls, O Brahmana. and
moved also by the desire ol benefiting all
the worlds.


16s I have also, O you of great power,
described to you the merits of making gilts
of gold Du you, therefore, O foremost ol
all speakers, make gifts of gold.


BhUbma said •—

t66 Thus 'addressed by VH«hi$htha,
Tsmadagm’s son of great power tlien made
gifts of gold to the Brahmanas and became
cleansed of his sins.

i6y. I have thus told you, O king,
everything about the merits of t»ie gins of
geld and about us origin also, O YudUisb*
Ihira.

l68 Do you also, therefore, make pro*
fuse gift of gold to the Brahmanas Indeed
O king, by making such s.ifts of gold, you
will surely be purged ol all your sms.


CHAPTER LXXXVl. ‘


Taraka's destruction. Great is my cuii^
sily to hear itie narrative.

Bhisbma said —

5 Ihe gods and the Rishis, O king, re-
duced to great distress, urged the si<
Knuikas to rear that child.

6 Amongst the celestial ladies there
were none, except these, who could by iherr
power, bear flie seed ol Agnt m the'f
wombs.

7. The god of fire became highly
pleased wiili those goddesses for their
readiness to sustain the conception caused
by the seed of Agni which was gifted with
Ins own great power.

8 When the energy of Agnr, O

was divided into six parts and placed
within the channels, the six Knltikas began
to nourish the portion that each held in her
womb.

9 As the great Kiimara. however, begs™

to grow wnhin their wombs, their bodies
being possessed by his energy, they could
not get peace anywhere. '

10. Filled with energy as their bodies
were, the time at last came for delivery*
All of them, it so happened, Optuceot
men. delivered simultaneously.

11. Though held in SIX different wombs,
jet when all Ihe parts as they came e‘»h
united into one Ihe gnddess Earth l e'o
the child, taking it up from a ma'-s of gold ^

12 Indeed, the child, possessed ^ »
beautiful form, shone like Itie god of Fir*.
Of beautifulfeatures he began to g'O*

a charming forest of reeds.

13 Ibe SIX Kniukas saw that clnU of
theirs looking like tfio morning Sun Filled
with affection ifor him,— indeed, loving him
very much,— they began, to rear him with
their milk. ,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA;.— I
1 Continued.

YadhisMhira said:—

1. You have, O grandfather described
to me fully llie merits ol the gilt of koM sc*
cording to the ordinances laid down in the
scriptures and the Veda.

2. You have also described the origin of
gold. Do you tell me now how laraka met
with desiruction.

3. Yoj have, said, O king, that that
Asura had become unslayable by the gods
Do you tell me fully how Iiis destruaion
was brought about.

4. O perpeiuator of Kuril's race. I wish
to hear this from you, I mean the details of


14. On acconnt of Ins having been born
of the Knltikas and reared by them, f’^
was known n* the three worlds by the name
of Kartikeya. liaving onernated from the
seed which had fallen , off from Rudra l«
was named Skanda. and because of his
birth in a solitary forest of reeds he was
called Gulia.

15—17 The lhirty»thrce gods, the poInU
ol the compass together with their presid*
rng deities, and Rudra, Dhatri, VishnO,
Varna, Pushan, Aryyaman, Ohaga, AngsM
Mitra, the Sadhyas, Vasava, ihe Vanish
IhcAshwins, llie Waters, the Wind, ttio
! rirmamenl, Chandramas and all the Cons*
I tcllations and Ihe PUnets and theSun, anU
I all the Richs and Samatis and Va) ishes m
I Uietf embodied forms, came llicte lo s*®


AHUSHASANA PAnVA.


tlial iVort child who was ths son of
Itie god ul Tire

tS. Ihe RIshis sang h^mns ol praise
and die GandliarVas sang m (tanor of that
child called Kumara of six heads, tivefye
eyes, and grealty devoted to tlie Brah>
tnanas.

19 — 30. His shoulders were broad, and
he had twelve arms, and the splendour of
fils body resembled that of fire and Adilya.
As he lay stretched on a clump of heath, the
gods will) the flishis, seeing him became
hlled with great joy arid considered the
great Asura as already killed, 1 he celestials
then began to bring Inm various kinds of
toys and articles that could amuse him
3 t. As he played tike a child, various
sorts of toys and birds were given to him
0«ruda of excellent feathers gave to him a
child of his, vit , a peacock having plumes
of variegated color,

S 7 The ffakshas gave ta him a boar
and a buffalo Ariina himself gave him a
cock of fiery splendour,

33 The Moon gave him a sheep, and
the sun gave him some dattlmg rays of Ins
i he mother of all kine, vse , SurabI 1, gave
film kine by hundreds and thousands

34 Agni gave him a goat having many
ood quahlies Ita gave him profuse
owers and fruits. Sudhanwan gave him

a riding chariot and a car of the great
Kuvara.

35—36 Varuna gave him many ausp!'
Clous and good products of the Ocean wnh
some elephaiils Ihekingol the celrsiisls
gave him lions and tigers and pacds and
various kinds of the birds of the air, and
, many terrible beasts of prey and many um
brellas also Many Bakshasas and Asuras
began to follow that powerful child

27 Seeing the son of Agni grow up,
Taiaka soui,fi(, by various means, to bring
about his destruction but could not do any«
thing to that powerful deity,

21? ?,hr giadf dr cnmr imiesrta' /tgmis
son born a solitary forest with the com*
mend of their army And they also in>
formed him of the oppressions made upon
(hem by the Asura larafca.

29 The commander m,c 1 iief of the
celestial army grew up and became poss
essed of great energy and power. In ume
Guha killed laraka, with ins irresistible
dart.

30. Indeed, Kumara killed (he Asura as
easily as if m sport. Having brought about
the destruction of faraka the re«establtsbed
ttie king of (he celestials in his sovereignty
of flic three worlds.


tgi

31. Gifted With mighty power, the celes-
tial general shone m beauty and splendour.
1 he powerful Skanda became the protector’
nf the celestials and did what was agree-
able to bliatikara

32 file illustrious son ol Pavaka had
a golden form. Indeed, Kumara is
always the leader of the celestial arms.

33 Gold IS the powerful energy of the
god of fire and was born with Kariikeya.
Hence IS gold highly sacred valuable, and
excellent and has unending merit.

34 Thus, O son of Kuru's race, did
Vasfiisilia recite formerly tfiis topic to Kama
of Bhngu s race Do you, therefore, O
king of men, try to make gifts of gold.

35 By making gilts of gold, Rama
became purged of all his sms, and finally
acquired a high place in Heaven that is
unattainable by other


CHAPTER LXXXVn,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-
Conftnutil,

Tudhishthira «aid •—

t You have described to me, Oyou
of ngiitsous soul, the duties of the four
castes Do you, similarly, O king, des*
cribe to me now all the ordinances regar-
ding the Sfiraddha ,

Vaishampayana said

2 'Ihus addressed by Yiidlilsthfra, the
son of ShsiKanu began (o recite to him

I the foliowiiig ritual, consistent with ,lhe
I ordinances of tl e bhraddha.

I Bhisbrna said

I 3 Listen O king, with rapt attention,
: to me as t describe to you the ritual of
' (tie bhraddha 1 1 at ritual (s auspicious,

I taiidable productive of fame and progeny,
and' IS consiaVrea’ ara sacTiifce, t^scorerter
vf enemies, in honor of the departed Afanes.

4 Gods or Asuras or human beings,
Gandliarvas or Uragas or Rakshasas,
Pishachas or Kiinaras, every one should
always adore the departed Afanes

3 It IS seen that people adore (he
departed Manes first and please the cetes-
liats next by offeitngihem their worship.
Hence, one should always adore the depar-
ted Manes with every care.

6 It IS said, O king, tl at the Shraddha
performed in lionor oi the departed Manes
IS performable alUfwatds Out this general
rule lixs a specul resttatnt.


MAilAnflARATA


IfJ 2


■J, Hie (deceased) Rrandfsllicr become
CrrflifKd \Milr llie S)>raddUa lliat maybe
perfoniird on any da), i sliall, tiawever,
lei! you now whal ilie merits and dements
ere of (lie respective lunar days

8 I sliali describe to yon, O sinless one,
wiat Iriiits are aitanird on wliat days by
peibrniini' lie bliraddln Do you listen
to me willi ript alteiutun

9 Dy wcirsli ppiH); ll e departed Manes
on the first day of the li>,l t forlni^l I, one
obtains in Ins abode beautiful wives capable
of producing many cliildien all endued willi
desirable accomplishments

to By performing the Sliraddht on the
second day of il e I g< I form ght, one gets
many dau^^hters By performing it cn the
third day, one acrjJires many horses By
performing it on the fourth day, one gels a
large lieid of smaller animals in his house
tt. Ihey, O king, who perform llie
Shraddha on the fifth day, get many sons
Ihose men who perform the Shraddha on
the sixth day, acquire great splendour.

13 By performing it on (he seventh
day, O King, one wins great fame By
performing it on tlie eiglitli day one, secures
great profits in CAnmercial pursuits

13 fJy performmg it on tlie'nmih day
ene acquires many annnals of u icloven
loots By performing it 00 die tenth day,
one acquires many valuable kme.

14 By perfoi'ming il on the eleventh
day one gets valuable elotlis and utensils
Such a man also gets many sons all of
whom become endued with Brahma
splendour,

15 Qy pcrformine il>e Shraddha on the
twellch day, one always sees il he dc ires
various sorts bi beautiful silver and gold
artcles

16 — 17. By performing llie Shraddha on
ihe tl irteeiilli day 0 ir re yns supreme over
his kinsmen Forsoolti, all the you ig mer
m tl e family of him who performs the
Shraddha on the fourteenth day die Such
a man becomes ei tangled n war By
performing tl e Shraddha o 1 II e da),^f llie
new moon, one gets ll e fruition of every
des re

tS In the dark fortnight all the days
beginning wiih 0 e tenth leaving only lie
foiirieenlh day out are good days lor the
peiformance of the Shraddha Other days
of ll at fortnight are not so

19 Then again, as the dark fortnight is
belter than tt e light one so tl e afternoon
of the day IS better than the forenoon for
the Shraddha .


• cmPTHR r ?:xxviit.

(anusHasanika ,pai{va) —

CoiiUntted,

Tndliishtliira said —

I. O y>u of gr^ar power, tel! me wha(
that olject is winch if dedicated to the
departed Manes, becnnies inrxliaustible !
AVhat iiavi again (if offered) lasts for all
lime? What, indeed, is that which be*
collies eternal 7

Bhishma sauI *

2 Hear me, O Yiidhishthira, whatlho'C
Mavis are wil ch persons cnnversaiit with llie
ritual of the Sliraddhi consider as suitable

Ihe Shraddha and what the fruits are

3 With sesame seeds, rice, barley, Alisha
water, root and fruits, if given at Shraddhas,
the departed Manes, O king, remain pleased
(or a month

4 Manu has said that if a Shraddha is

performed with profuse sesame, such Shrad*
din becomes Inexhaiisiible. Of all eaits of
food, sesame seeds are considered as ilifi
best. ,

5 With fishes off-red at Shraddlias, the
departed Manes remain pleased for two
moiiOis With mutton they remain pleased

(or three mmths and with the fiesli of ili«
liare for four. ^

6 With the ffesl) of the goat O king,
they remain pleased for five monlln, with
bccon (or SI* months, and with the fJssh of

birds for seven

7 With venison got From ihos" deer
that are called Prisl ala they remaii
pleased for bikI t months and with that
obuined from the Ruru for nine monlls,
and With the meat of the Gavaya for ten
raoniKs

8 With the meat of the buffalo they
remain pleased for eleven moillis. With
beef presented at the Sliiaddha, they re*
main pleased for a full year.

9 Payasa mixed wiih clarified butler
IS as much as acceptable to the departed
Manes as beef Wuh the meat of the
Vadhrinasa the Puns remained pleased
for twelve years

10 Tile flesh of the Rhinoceros offe cd

to the drparted Manes on the anrnversanes
of the lunar days cn which they died be-
comes endless Xhe potherb called Kala*
shaka, the petals of the Kancl ana flower,
and meat of the goat also, ihuscffertd,
prove inexhaustible. j


AKUSKftSANA PAUVA.


UecnrJing it, O Yiidliishilura, lliere
^lYe some Verses, orimnally sung by llie
departed Manes, tliat arc now sung (in the
world). SaiMtkiimara coAimuiucaled them
to me in former days

12. He who has fatten btrlh tn our
race, should give us Payasa (mixed (willi
tiarnied holler on ihe tliirleenih day (of
tlie dark forlntghl), tinder the consteiia^iOR
Magha, during the ban's soulliward coarse.

13 One born in our race, should
Under ilie constellalion Magha, as d In the
observance of a vow, oRer the meat of
goal or tlie pelafs of the Kanchana flower.
One should afso oRer us, With due rites,
Fayasa miVed wiih clarified butler, dedtca<
ting It on a spot covered by the shadow of
an efephant.

14 Many sons shoutd be coveted so that
even one may go to Gayi, ivliere stands the
banian that is celebrated over Ml the worlds
Olid iliat maUes all ofleongs made under its
branches endless.

15 Cven a fdilc of water, roots, frUits,
Tfitat, and rice mixed with lioney, if offered
on the anniversary of the day of death,
beLOiues endless

CllAPTtR LXXXlX.
fANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-*
Coniintted,
said:-"

I. Hear me, O Yudhishthira. as 1 tell
you what <h ise optional Shraddhas are that
should be performed under the different
Constellations and that were first spoken of
by Varna to king Shasfiavindu.

a llial man who always performs the
Sliraddha under the conscdlalion Krillifca
IS considered as performing a sacrifice alter
establishing tlie sacred fire Such a person,
freed from fever, goes to Heaven with Ins
children,

3 He who IS desirous oi children should
perform the SI raddha under the conslel 1 a>
ti m Kohn i wfiile he who is desirous of
power should do !( under the coosteilaiion
Mugashiras. By performing the Shraddha
under the ccnsieltalion Ardra, 9 man be-
comes (he doer of terrific deeds,

4 A man ,hy performing (he Shraddha
under Punarvasu, makes much gani by
agriculture the man \vl o Is desiiousof
t^ruvvlh and advancement should perform
Iht. Sfiraddha under Puihya,

5 Uy doing it under the constellaiion
Aslleshaone begets heroic childten. by


^ 93 ,

doing It under the M.tghas one gains
superiority over Icinsmeti.

fl By doing it tuider the (prior) Phal-
gnnis, one gams good fortune. By doing
the Shraddha under the later Phalgunas
one gets many clnliireii , while by perform-
ing It under Hasia, one gets the fruition of
Ins wishes.

7 By performing it Under the constella-
tion Chitra one gets beauttfuf children.
By doing it under the constellation Swati,
one makes much profit by trade.

8 ihe man who desireschildren, acquires
the frutiion of lits desire by performing the
Shraddha under the Consteffalion Vishakha.
By domg It under Aiiuradita, one becomes
an Emperor.

9 by making offerings tn honor of the
departed Manes under the constellation
Jeslithya, with devotion and humility, one
acquires Eoveceigtiiy, O {arentost one of
Kuco's rare.

to By doing the Shraddha under Muta,
one gams heallli, and by doing ic under the
prior Ashada, one acquires excellent fame.
By peiforming it u ider.the fater Asliada,
one succeeds in travelling over tile whole
world, freed from every sorrow.

It. By doing It under the constellation
Ablnjit. one acquires great knowledge. By
don g It under SItravnna, one, after deatlii
aiiains to a very high end

la Jhe man vvlio performs (Ire Shradha
under the constellation Dhainsilia becomes
n king. By doing it under the constella-
tion presided Over by Vanina (vie,
Shauvisha), one becomes a successful
. physician

>3 By performing the Shraddha under
(he constellation rfii the prior Bliadrapada,
one acq iires many goats and sheep while
by doing It under the liter Bliadrapada,
one acquires thousands of kine.

14 by performing tlie Shraddlia under
the consteliation Revali.one acqnresmany
ote/rsrfs o! white brass and c ’pper. liy
doing it under Ashwini, one acquires many
horses, while under Bliarani, one lives long.

15 i.istemng to these ordinances about
the Shraddfia, king Shishavmdu acted
accordmgly, and succeeded in easily con-
quering and ruling the wliole Barth.


194


MAtlADlIARATA.


CMAprnu xc.

(ANUSUASANA PAUVA).-

Conltiiuet.

Yudbislithira said.—

I. Yon shouTd, O foremost one of Kuril's
rnce, tell me lo wli-it kmd uf Pmliman-is, O
Kr.iii(Urfttier, slinntil the (ifTera mode aI
bliraddlns, be K<ven <t\vay.

Bhisbnia said —

3 llie Ksbatnja wlio ia ronverssnt
ivah ilie oidiiMiiCe>i about (iift stiould newer
examine lirMltmanas In all maltera, lioiv*
ever, relalin^ to tlic wniabip oi lt>e deiiirs
Mild llic depailed AI inea, an examination
baa been said lo be proper,

3 'Ilie deities are adored on Carlli

by men only ivlien tlmy are Hlleci wnli
devotion oii;;ina(ii)^ from llie cetesiiaU
tliemselves IlencL, one sbould, approacli*
in^ tliem, make Draliinanas,

respectmi> such Kilts as aie made to Uie
celestial tliemselves.

4 In Sbraddhas, Iin^evcr, O t.m^, the
man of inlelliKence should examine tl>e
Uralimaiias bucU examination should be
about llieir birUb conduct. aKe, appearance,
and learning.

4 5, Amongst the Drahmanai there are

some v«ho pollute ibe line and some «<bo
purify It Listen 10 me, O king, as t tell
ou who those Brahnianas are tliat should
e excluded from the line.

6—11 lie wtio IS wil), or fie who is
guilty of f<Eueide, or lie who is ill ol con*
sumplian, 01 lie who keeps animats, or he
who has no Vedic slu ty, or is a common
servant of a village, or lives up n usury, or
he who IS a singer, nr he who sells all
ariieles, or lie who is Kiiihy of arson, or he
who IS a poisoner, or he who is a pimp by
profession, 01 he vrlio sells b>>ma or be who
teaches palmistry, or tie who is m the em-
ploy of the king ei he who is a seller of 01),
or tie who IS a ctieal and latsc swearer, or
lie who has a qiiairel wiih Ins father, or be
who tolerates a pdrainoiir of Ins wife, or he
who has been cursed, or he who is a thief,
or he wlio lives by some mechani«.ai an, or
lie wlio puis on disguises 01 lie who is de-
ceitlul in his conduct, or he who is hostile to
those he calls his friends, or he who Is an
adulterer, or he who is a preceptor ol
bhudras, or lie who has taken up the pro-
fession of arms or he who wanders with
dogs (lor hnnling), nr he who lias been bit
by a dog, ur he who has married before
his elder orulhers or he who seems to have
undergone ciruuincision, he who violates
llie bed of Ins pieefeptor, he who is an actor
ur inline, he who lues bj setting up an id.^.


and Im stim lives liy cafciilaiin? tlie con*
Jiincimus of stars and planets and asteitsms,
are considered as Tit to be exeluded from
the line.

12 Persons knowing the Vedas say that
the ofleimgs made at Shraddtias, if eatei
by such Hralimaiias, go to Til llie stomachs
ol Uaksliasas, O Yudhtslithira

1 hat pertoii svlio having eaten at a
Sliraddha does not abstain that day from
Vrdic studies, or who has known iliat day a
bhinira woman, must know that his de-
parted Manes on account of Mich deeds
' ol Ins, have to lie fur a month on Ins own
excreti,

1 1 — 15 The offerings made at Slirad-
dhas »l presented In A Brahmana who self*
wine, become vonverletl inin liiiman excreta ,
if presented to a Uralimsna who practises
MSA ph)Sivi?n, ifiey become conveited into
puss And bloo i , if piesentfed to one who
lives by setting up an idul, they fail to pro
dnee any fruit, if presented lo one who
who lives upon usury , tliey lead lo tiilatii) ,
if presented to one who is eriptaged tii trade,
they become productive ol no fruits either
■It this wot Id or in the luxt If presented
lo a Brahmana who IS bom of a widowed
mother, they becomeas fruitless as Iilialions
poured on ashes.

t6. I hey who present the Hivya and
Kavya to sucti Dratintsnas wlio do not pcr«
form the duties ordained for them and who
do not ofiserve those rules of good conduct
that persons of their order sliould observe
find siKii presents productive pf no merits
hcieaftev.

ly. Ihat Iilife wilted man who makes
gills ol such articles to such men knowing
their d'sp'isili >115 obliges, by such conduct,
his departed Manes to eat liuinan excreta
in the next world,

iS You should know that it ese wretched
Brnhinanas deserve lo be excluded from the
line llnrse Brahma las aLo of liiile
enerRy who are engaged in msuucinrg
Shudras belong to the same class.

19 A Brahmana who is blind stains
sixty indrvid ia)s of ihe line , one who
IS destitute of manly powers stai <a a
hundred, while one who is .ifnicled
with while leprosy stains as many as he
looks upon, O king

20 Whaievr r oflerings made at Shrad*
dhas are eaten by one with Ills head wrap-
ped round with a cloth whatever is eaten
by «■ e with lace southwards and whatever
IS eaten with shoes or sandals o», all goes
to please the Asuras,

31 Wlialevrr, again is given wilti ms-
tice, >nd whatever IS given williuut KSptCl,


ANU3I»A5AMA PARvX


m


hayc been onl^meJ by Bi'alinrarr ftimself
HS the p(wl!untf{ Uiefcingot <\suras (vis.,
Vah)

32 Dogs and such Bfahmanas as are
potluters of lines, shaiild not be suffered
to look upon the offerings mnde at bhrad*
dlias Itierefore, SliradOlms shmild be
performed at a plnce lint ii properly
liedged around or conceeled from the view,
hiat spot should aUn he covered with
sesime seeds.

2J. 'i hat Sliraddha whicli IS done wtili-
oul sesame seeds, or that which i<> dune by
a person in riiiger. has ns Hdvi robbed by
HaksUasas and Pi-ihachas.

24. According to the number of Brali>
mams seen by one wlvi deierves to be ex.
chided from (lie hue is (he loss of merit t>e
causes of the fuulish performer of the
blirad lha who luvrtes hrm to the feast.

35 t shall now, O chief of Uharata's
race, tell you who are purifirrs of the line.
Uu you And iliein uut by exsminatwu.

36. All those Brabmanas whn are pun.
fled by knowledge, Vedic study, vows and
observances a' d lliey who are of },ood and
righteous conduct, should be known as
purifiers of everything

37. ( shaft now teff you wfio deserve to
Sit in the fine Y .u should kimw Hiein to
be such wliom ( shall mark uiii p<esenily.
He who »Ht;<iitversaii( witli (he thne Na>
chiUrias, h« wh 1 has s't up the five SaenR.
Cial Area, he who knows the five biiparnas
lie wlo knors (he six liraftcbcs (called
Angas) of ilie Ved I, lie wlui is a de^ceit*
daiit of faiheit. wlio were engaged in leacU*
tug ihe Vedis mid is tinnsil/ engiged i»
leaching, lie who is well cxivrrstcii with
• I e Prosody, he wlio is aiqiiainied wilh the
(eshlUya bainaii he wliu Is otiedient to

.parents, he whu i» couveisint witli the '
fVeda*, And whose ancestors have f»een so 1
, or ten geiteralioiis tie wli knows only his
fnirried wives and tins at their seastns,
•md he who has been pnriAed by kn nviedgr,
by the Veda, and by V iws ami nlis.r-
V luces,— even such a Braliniaiia, — puiiAe>


who are seif conlrolled rmslers nf iHcir
seities and they wlio are devoted to lliu
befiuuf of all ctesiures,— these sliould be
bivited to SliradJIias

35 Anything givrn to ihesc. becomes
endless. Itiese, indeed, are purifiers of
hues There are others also, highly blessed,
who alioutd be considered as purifiers ul the
line.

34. They are Valis and those who are
eonversjot wiili the religion of Em incipa-
tion, and they who are devoted to Yoga and
tliey who properly observe excellent vows,
and ihey wJio, wiih collected inmd, recite
(sacred) histories lu foremost of UraU>
(lianas.

33—36 Kiev who are conversant wilh
coiutnenianes, they also who are given lo
griunmatical studies, they who stiidy the
Pitr^iMs and (hey who siiidy. (he Dhariti*-
sliastras, ami liavrng ktitdied them act up to
thesiandaid Uid down in them, he who hlS
lived in the lu>o»e ei Uii preceptor, he ivliu
is truttiful in speech, he who is a giver of
tliousands, they tfiat , are foremost ill Vviki.
lore and (in the knowledge oi) the scriptural
and Ipbilosopliicaf ephorianis,— these puiify
the lines as far i' ey look at it.

33 And because they purify all who sit
»> the line, tlierefoie are tlmy called pijii.'
Tiers of lines. Dturers nf B'ahiiia say that
even a siivgU pers nv wlm happens (o be the
I descend-int uf aiicesturs wh 1 wrre teachers
of the Veda and wlm is luins>*|{ a Vedic
' teacher, iniriAes lii‘l seven miles around
liim.

3^ If lie who IS not a Uiiwik and that
ismita Vedic teacisr tikes the forennst
»ea( (•< a ^irad Ihi, iviih even the perini>.
sum of the niher Kitwiks llmre present, he
Slid to take the suis of all wliu 111 ly be
sitting ii» the hue.

4 >. If, on the other hand, le happens
tu be cnversint with the Vedas h>>J
freed from all those faults wliitli ai e coiisi.
dered as capibte of poHiitnig the hue lie
shall not, Icing, be C Misidered as fallen.
but.h a man tvuicld then be rcjlly a pu ilief
of the Ivne.


30— )2. fie who reals the Alharva*
siiiras, who is given (0 the nbservaiu-e of
lltahmacbary) a practices, and who is
Steady 111 tl>e ubseiviiice of rigtitenus vows,
who IS truthful and of pure conduct, and
who duly satisfies the duties UkI ciown for
Ills Order, they also who have undergone
fatigue and labour for bathing m the sacred
waters, who have done the final bath after
celebraling sacrifK-es witli proper Afaperas,
who are treed froin anger, who are not
restless^ who are endued with fvrgtrciivss.


41 Fir these reasons, (> knu;, you
should prnpoily ex inline tlie Brahni'inas
before («vi{in;g them to bhradJlMS. Yon
slMUIdlnvnc uivty sncIi amnng tliem as are
devoted to (lie dudes laid down for their
order, and as are born m good families, and
as are gifted ivitiv great leatmng.

4J He who pertorriis ShraddMs for
feeding only bis friends and wlwse Hjvi
does not please ilie cefestials and iho
departed Maiies, fadi lu asteud to ffeaicii.


196


AtAIiADItARATA.


43 lie wlio collecls Ins Inendi and
relatives only on the occasion ol ll>e
Sliraddha lie performs, fails to proceed
(after deatlil by the celestial path, 1 he man
who converts ll*e Shraddlta l>e performs,
into an occasion for only coltectmg his
Inends, never succeeds in ascending: to
Heaven 'llie man who converts the
b'lraddha into an occasion for treating his
friends, becomes alienated from Heaven
even like a bird dissociated from the perch
when tlie chain t)ing it breaks.

44 Therefore, he who performs a
, Shraddha should not honor his friends

He may make gifts of riclics to them on
other occasions by collecting them togellier.
The Havi and the Kavi offered at bhrad*
dhas should be served to them who are
neither friends nor enemies but are only
iiidinerent or neutral,

45 As seed sown on a barren soil does
inoi sprout forth, or as one who has not

sown does not gel |a share of ll>e produce,
so (hat bhraddlia the offerings in winch are
eaten by an unworthy person; yields no
fruit either in this world or in the next*

46 That Brahmana who is destitute of
Vedic study is like a fire made by burning
grass or straw , and becomes soon put out
even like sudi a fire 1 he offerings made
St bhraddhas should not be given to him
even as libations should not be poured on
the ashes of the sacnfrcial Hre

47. Wlien the o^eniigs made at Shrad*
dhas are exchanged by the peciormers with
one another, they become Pishacha presents
buch olferings please neither the gods nor
the 'departed Manes Instead of reaching
the other world, they wander about even
here like a cow winch has lost her call
wandering about within (he fold.

48. As those libations of clarified butler
that are poured upon the exiingnislied nslies
of a saciifiCMl lire never reach eitl er the
gods or the departed M sues, similarly a gift
that IS made to a dancer or a singer or a
Dakshina presented to a lying or deceitful
person, yields no merit.

49 Ihe present that is given to a lying

or deceitful person destroys both the giver
and the receiver wiihout benefiung them
in any way. Such a present is destructive
.nid highly censurable, llie Piiris of the
person making it have to fall down from
the celestial path. I

50 The gods know tliem to be Brali ^
maiias who always walk, O Yu.ihishtiura,
witVin the limns set up by the Rishis who
know all dunes, and who have d firm faith
in tlicir efficacy.

51. Those Urahmaiias who are given


lo Vedic study, lo knowfedge, fo perrances, j
and to acts, O Bharata, should be knowir {
as Risiiis.

ST. file offerings made at Sliraddhas,
sliotild be given to those who are devoted
to knowledge. Indeed, they are to be con*
stdered as men wlio never speals ill of the
Urahmanas.

53 Those men should never be fed on
occasions of Shraddhas win speak ill of
Brahmanas in course of conversation in the
midst of conclaves. If Brahmanas, O king,
be vilified, tliey would destroy three gencra-

. tions of tlie caluminater.

54 This IS the sajrnp, O kmg, of tl'T
Vaiicliaiiasa Rislus Brahmanas knowing
ihe Vedas should be examined from s
distance,

55 Whether one likes them or not, one
should give to such Brahntanas the offrt'
ings made at Shraddhas. Ihal man who
feeds thousands upon tlminands nf w”'
worthy Brahmanas ac<}uiies inerit that**
attainable by feeding even one Brahman*
tf the latter happens lo be endued with*
knowledge of the Vedas, O Bliarala *


CHAPTER XCr.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-
CsnUnutd,

Tudbisbtbira said:—

i. By whom was the Shraddha first
conceived and at what lime ? Wli-il hIsO
IS us substance? In tbe time wlieti the
world was inhabited by only the desc*”'
daiitsof BIlnguainiAi giras , who was itw
Mum who established the Sliraddlia ?

T What deeds should not be done at
bhraddlia? Wliat are this® Shi^addlias m
wl ich (runs and roots are t > be 1 ffered ?
What kinds also of paddy sh luld be avoided

III Siiraddlias? 1 ell me all this, O grand-
father

BhiBbma said

3 Listen lo me, O Ume , as I tell Jf^ii

how the Shraddha was inirodoced, d’*
tune of such iiUrnduction, the essence o*
the cite, and the ascetic wlio conceived it,

4 From the Seif Create Braliman sprang

Atn, O you of Kuril’s race In Atn*
taimJy was born a Mum named Daltatreya

5 Daitaireyk got a son named Ni>ru

having .asceticism for wealth NiinigU*
soil named Slirimat wlio was gifted wid'
great beauty of pcisun ^


ANl/stlASANA PAKVA


*97


6 l/pon t^e eirpirattun of n Mt lliott*
aaitd )edi9, ShriiDAt luvin^ pracii9ed the
severest austertlies, yielded to the milu*
ttKc ol 1 (m« and depated from th» ivoiM
7. Hjs father Nimi, having performed
tl e piinficatoy rites accordint* to sanctioned
rites, hec-iine stricken with great grief, tii|iik«
ing continually ol tlie loss uf Ins son

8 'Ihinkiiig ol that cause of sorrow,
the great Nimi collected together various
agreeable objects on liie lourteeinh day ol
the moon. Ihe next morning he rose
from bed.

9 Stricken as his heart was with grief,
as he rose from sleep that day he sii^ceedcd
in withdrawing it from the one r>b)rci upon
vvliicti It had been working. His iniiid be*
came busy wilti other matters

JO— It. NVuh rapt attention he thro
conceived the idea of a Stiraddha All
those articles ol his oivn load, containing
iciiils and roots, and all those kinds ol
staple grams which he liked, were carefully
thought of by thdt sage having penances
(or wealth.

13. On tlie day of the New Moon lie
invited a number ol worthy Dralitnanas
Cilied with great wisdom, Ninii made iliem
lit on seats and honored (hem by going
round them,

13, Approaching seven sucli Drahmsnas
whom he had brought to his house (ogelher,
the powerful Nimi gave them food con*
sisting ol bliyatnaka rice, unmued with
salt. I

Toward* the feet of those Brah- j

mams engnged in eating tlie food that was 1
lervrd to them a number of Kusha faUdes |
W'ts spread oui. on ll e seals 11 ey occupied, 1
wiiti II c tops ol the blades directed tuw«rds |
the south. I

15 With a pure body and mind and '
WiOi rapt aticniim, Nimi, having placed I
tlni^e bUdrs of sacred grass in the way 1
huhu..tcd, tlfered cakes ol lice to Ins!

dead son, utieiiog his name and lamity. !

i(> Having done (his. that forentosi of 1
acertus hccauie TiUrd wilh regret al ihe
) Ira of t nving done a deed that l>ad 1
».< I hren 1 r»J d ,«n in »ny of ilir scriprurvs
lidecd. filed with regret, he began to
'think of what hc i ad done.

17. Neier done htfmehy the a*CeUc%
aUs, what hvve I done* lluw shall I avuid
being cursed by the (Irah nanas 1

15. He then Ihooglt of the ortgmal
(xiii ler ol his race As soon as he was
llioughi ol, Atrl liaving penances for Wealth
came tt eif

i ) feeing lirm C'erll) -tiititn With g*»c(


consequent on the death ol hr* son. fJie irn*
Itiurtai Atfi coinlurtcd linn wuh agteeable
advice.

30 He said to him, — O Nimi, tla's -nte
that you liave conceived, is n sacrifice in
liortor of the departed Manes Do not fear,
O you, having asceticism for wealth. Pur*
ineily the Qrandlailter Uralnnan himself
laid It down.

31. Ihis rite that you have conceived,
has been ordained by (he Self Create t>;n>*
self. Who else save the SelhCreate could
ordain this ritual in Sliraddlias T

22 I shall now (ell you, O son, (he ex*
ceilent ordinance laid down in the matter u(
bliraddlaas Ordained by the bcll*Create
hiiiiself, O son, follow it. Listen to me first.

33 Having first performed the Karana
on iiie sacred fire with (he help of Mantras,

0 you (lavmg penances for wealth, one
should always pour libations next to the god

01 fire, and boina, and Varuiia.

74. 'llie Setf'Creste next ordained a
portion of the olfcringt to (he Vishwrdevas
also, who are always the companions ol the
' departed Manes.

25. The Earth also, as (he goddess who
; sustains the offerings made at Shraddlus,
sikould then be lauded under the names bf
' Vaishnavi, Haihyapi, and the raexliaus*

I tible.

I 36 When water is being fetched (or the
' Shraddha, the powerful god Varuna should
I be lauded Alter this, both Agni and
I Soma should be invoked with respect
I and pleased (with hbeiioos^, O sinless
I one.

I 37. Those denies named Pitris were
j created l>y the belf'Creaie, Oihcrt also,

1 lnKhly bIcMed, vie, Ihe Uihiuapas, were
created by him. Ivir all these, vUares have
breu sanctMiied oJ the offerings made at
bUaaddlias.

3S By worihipp ng all these gods at
SliradJbat, the aiicesiors ol |i>« persons
pciluaimng them becume purged of all »in«,
llie departed Maiirv referred 10 a(>->ve as
tl ose created by the Self Create are seven

III number.

29 (he Viihwedevat, having Agni for
tlcii mouth, have been mmiivned before.

1 sliatl now meiiuni (he names ol those
great denies wi^o deserve shares of llto
dflcim^s made at Shradd'vas

'Hiey are Vala, DSni*. Vipsp.
tna, I'unyakiit. I'avana. l*arsl ni, Kal eman,
bamuha. Onjasanu Vivaswat Viryvaval,
lliimat, K'liimat. ICnta Jitalman, Mum*
aftyja, Ibprro-nan Ithaj 4,ilr<ra, Anti*
katman, 1'iatl.a, i’laditif, A'lgO juat.


MAKABHARArAi •


igS


SliniUbhn, Pararna, Krodfi?, D*irw>ini,
Blitipati, Srajas, Vajr?ii, and Vac«, — Uiesc
are tlie eternal Visliweilevas, there are
others also whose names are Vidyiit-
varLlias, Somavarchas, and SuryasUri by
name.

34—37. Others also are Somspa, ‘^nrya-
saviira, Dattatman, Pundariyaka, Ushui*
nablia, Nabhoda, Vishwayu, Diplb Clia-
imihara, Siiresha, Vyomari, Shankara,
Bliava, tstia, Karttri, Kriti, Daksha Blni*
vana, Divyakarmakrit, Ganna, Panch.**
Viryya, Aditya, Rashnnrrtat, Saptakiit,
^omavarchas. Vishwakrit, Kavi, AnuKopiri.
Su^optri, Naptrr, atid [siiwara, — these
highly blessed ones are called Vishwedevas
*1 tiey are eternal, and they know all that
occurs in lime.

38—39 Kodrava, and Pul«lea are the
species of paddy which should not be oRer*
ed at Shraddlias Assalce hta also, .icn.tng
articles used irf cooking, should not be offer*
cd, as also onions and garlics, the produce
of the Nforinga, pierjgoiperma,, Daulnma
Van-gala, , the meat of animals killed
svifh poisoned arrows, alt varieiie* of Cu«
eurbita Pepo, Cucurbita Ugenona, and
black salt. ^

40—41. The other articles that should
not be offered at Shraddhas are the flesh of
the domesiieaied hog, the meat of all ani*
tnals not killed at sacrifices, N'gella sativa,
salt of the variety called Vtd, (he potherb
that IS called Sliitapakt. all sprouts and also
the Irapa bispinoaa. All , kinds of salt
should be excluded from the offerings made
at Shraddlias, and al»<i the fruits of the
Eugenia Jambaldiia.

4 ? AW articles, a^ain upon which any
one has spat or upon winch ieirs have
fallen should be avoided at ShraddlMs
Amons; offeiings made to the ilroaried
Mutes or wuh the Mtv^a and Kav)a
offered to (he celestials, the polherb called
Sudarshana should not be included

43 — 44. mrseA wnh thrs ts not

accept.sb 1 e to tlie departed Manes. Prom
the place where the S'lradilUi is being
peiforined, tlie Chand lU and ihe Shwapa-
cha should be excluded, as also all tvJio wear
yellow clothes and persons «<il1ering fm o
leprosy, or one wlio has hren o ilcasied. or
one who is KUihy of Bralimaniode, or a
Bralitnana of mixed descent, or one who
is the relative of an outcast man. liiese
all should be excluled by wise persons
from tlie place wlieie a Shraddlia is being
peifoimed.

4 S< Having said these words formerly
In the Uistu Ntini of hi> own race, the
illustrious Atti having peuaiKca for wealUi


flwr ivetif back to (he CrtnJlaOici 'a courf
III the celestial region.


CIlAPinU XCII.

(ANUSHASANIICA PAUVA) —
Co/itmtieit

Bhisbma said

r. After Nimi had acted thus, all the
great Kisfiis began to crfebrate the sacrifice
in honor of tlie dep irted Manes (called the
bhraddlia) accoidiiig to iites lard down 111
the ordinance

4. Performing all diiites, the Rishie,
having performed Shraddlias, beg-m l>r-
also offer oblations of sacred waters, wuh
attention.

3 On Aceciml, however, of the ofler-
inifs made by persons of ,ill classes, the
departed Manes beg^n to digest H'at food,^

4 Soon they, and the celestials also

with them, becam- nfflicted with indiges*
lion Indeed, affbeted with the he'ips
food that all persons began to give lliemi
they went to Soma. '

5—7. Approaching Soiin thev said —
AUs, great is onr misery on acCnnnt ol the
food t>>a( IS ullered to 11s at Slir.iddliis
you ordain what is necessary for our cniU'
fort T— Soma answered to them, sa>ing“‘
If, ve gods, ye are dewrniis of acq.'iuu’if
comfort do ye then gu t > the ab > 1e of the
; S-H Crvatr Even ha w II rii wini is fi’i'

I jonr b-lvMif^— \I ihrsr vv inis ><f Son',
the Celestials /iiiil ihe ilr)v.,>teil Msnes lh••"■

wem 0 B-iarita, In-ihr C»r.,ndfallier vvli^re

he w-s se.i(ed oil iIk. suiumii of the nunJ'*'
iHi.isol Merit

'1 he grotis said ?— ■

8 O ilhisliioiis one, wall ihe food thae
IS uffered its in saenfh e-. hi <l SlirnddlMS*
Me VAf£e\\v,' 4 -<* 1 ^ rivi».\i ^"' 1 , show

us f-voiir and do wliut wiuIJ be luflo»r

O Hrarmg these words of theirs ll'«
S^ll OenlH said to them in reply —H
llie god I f Rre IS siunig beside me. bvv-'>
lie will do what is for jour good. *

Agui said

lo. Ye sires, when a Shradd'ia comes,

we shall in a body hH th* offeriiii's to*‘le

ti> us If ye eat those nfl-riov's within •
ye shall, fursoolh, succeed liv digtsting lhc">
cast]) .

II nearing llipse words of tlie G >d nf

biri.,tliedepa(t<.d Maiiea became cumfuricd


ANuSttASANA PARVA


){ IS for iJjfs rrssoJi al«o Ui'il m
tflriiM>.s al Miiaildlirfs a Oiare »s first
clTeivd III \!ie Godot FKte. O kiii^.

12. H a porii<iii<i( Itie rff«riii>»i be first
tiiadi: li> tl>r God of Pire nt a bliraddha,
U king, Udksua&as ot twiCe-liorit origin
ibeii do any injury »o sucli a
bliidddim.

13 beeing tlie Gud of Pire at a
Sfi'aJdfirf, fly A«/-ty I be

liitMl of itie ahr>i(tdi>a 19 liMt tile c-ike
should fust be uftered to the (depaiicd)
fathei. Mexr, June siiuuld be ofTered to iiie
grdiididli'er.

14. Next aliQutd one be nfTered to the
greac>).i<itidUtlfer. 2 hts is llie (irdiiiance
iclaiiiigs 10 bhraddha. Uver every cake
ttidl IS ofTeied, the offerer should, wiili
rapt aiieiiiion, inter Ihebavilri Mantras.

lliis other Mantra also should be
uUeitd, vit , to Suina who is Coud of the
departed Manes. A weinao (hat has be*
come impure on arcuunt of her season, or
one uhose ears tmve been cut off, should
not be allowed to remain where a bhraddha
IS being done, Nor should a woman be
brougfit from a faiudy other (lien ibtt of
the person who |> performing the bhraddha.

' 16. White crossing a river, one should
offer oblations 1 f water to ins f'ltrts, iMining
them all. Indeed, wlirii one comes upon a
liver one should please ins I'ltris with
ohtations of Muter.

17. Having ofTered obUuons of water
first to the /niceators oi hi» race, one
should next offer such obl^etHMis 10 Ins
departed fi lends and reUlives. '

^ 18. When one Crosses a river on a Car ^
Co which IS )oked a couple of oxen of 1
variegated color, or from ihem tirat cross
a river on boats, the departed Manes ex<
pect oblations of water.

19. Ihcse who know this always oiler
ohlrtUons of water with rapt aiteiiilon 10 Ine
departed Manes. Every lorimghi, on the
day of the New Muon one should make
offenngs to his departed aiicesters

20 — 71 , Growth, longevji), energy, artd
prosperity become all aliainable ihrongh
devotion to tlie departed Manes (he
Graiidlather liraluuan, Pnlastya, VashMi-
Ilia, I’ul-iha, An^rras Kratu and the great
Risln ffrfshyap*.— these, U punCenJ Kuril's
race, aie ubnsideied as gieat masters of
Voga.

22. 'I hey are numbered among the de»
palled Manes Lven this is the high ritual
in tlic mailer of bliraddiia. O king. Ihrough
bhraddhas perfouned on Caith, llie de^
ceased inembei 5 ol Ins race become freed
from apciion of Jinseij. 1


*99

( liave thus. O prirtce of ffitrii's race,
explained to yon, acconting to the scitp-
turcs, the oidinanccs relating to Shraddhas.
I siull once more ducouise lo jou wi
eUts.


, niAPifinxcni.

(ANU5HASANIKA PAUVA) —
Coiittiitieii.

Yndhishthira said

I. If Orahmaiias wlio oliserve a vovt
(vis , last) eat, at the invitalion of a Urah*
ihana, the Havi, cAil they Iw charged with
the Sill nf violaiing tiieir vowf iclf me tins,
O Gtandfather,

JBiDshias sstd •

t- l.ec those Brahmailas eat, moved by
desire, who observe such vows as are nut
laid down 11) |ije Vedas. About those
Urahmanas, liowever, who observe sucli
vows hs 4ie laid down fn tfie Vedas, tiiey
arc cbnsidered as guilty of A breaCli ol their
vow, O Viidliishiliira, by eaiing tlie Havl
of a bhraddha at the request of him who
performs the bhraddha. , ,

Tndhjshjtbra said i—

'3. borne people say that fast Is a pen*
ance. Is penance really at one with fast
or IV It not sot Tell me this, 'O grand*
father. , ,

Bhishma saidt—

4 Ri-ople do consider a regular (asl for
H month or a lialf moiiit, as A|penance. J2ie
ituih, however, is liMt one who niorlifies hts
own body is not to be considered, either
as an ascetic or as one conyeresmt wjili

5 Kenunciaifon, liowever, is considered
las tie best of peiiinices. A Bialiinana

should nlways abstain Irum food, and ob*

' serve |l>e row oi celibacy,

I 5. A Brahnisna should always pracine
I sell denial cmilrollmg even spi-ecli, and
reclletle Ve<l<s Hie Urahin-ina should
tiiitrry and siinonnd hunsetl wUli children
and rcUuves, fiuin desire «il ncquiring vir-
tue. Hn should never sleep,

7. lie should rbstnin from meat He
should 4lwavs read the Vedas and lUe
sciip(ur«s He should always spe«k the
truth, and practise self control He should '
eat tie residue (»i» , of what reinams after
serving the deities and guests) Indeed, he
SfiOnId be hospitable towards all tliat comer
to his house. He should always eat nectar.


20o


MAHABtlARATA.


Me xlioiilil tlnly observe all riles and cele*
brate saci ifices.

Tadliishlliira said v—

8 Howmaj one come to be considered
as atuvajs observant of fasts? How may
t)t>e become observant of vows? How, O
bitiR, may one come to be an eater of Ibe
residue? By doniR xvliai may one be said
to be fond of guests

Bliishma said

9 He wbo taftes food only Rtornme
end evening at Idie appnnted iioiirs
end abstains front all loud during the
interval, is said to be an abstainer from
food.

ti. He wbo knows only bis marned. wde
end that only at tier season, is said to be
observant of the vow of celibacy. By
always making Rifts, one comes to be con-
sidered as truthful in speech,

12. By abstaining Fmm all meat obtain*
ed from animals kilted for nothing, one be*
comes an abstainer from meat. By making
gifts one becomes puiged of all sms. and by
abstaining from steep during day time^one
comes to ee considered always awake

13 He who always eats wliat remains
after serving the guests and servants, know.
O Yudhishthtra, is said to always eat
nectar,

14. He who abstains from eating till
Drahmanas have esten, is considered as j

i Conquering Heaven by sucfi abstention.

15. He who eats wliat remains after ;
serving the celestials, tlie departed Manes. ;
and relatives and dependants, is said to i

£ eat Vighasa or itie residue.

16 Such men acquire many regmns of
happiness in the abode of Brahman him.
self. I here. O hing, |h» live in tlie
cimpanyol Apsarasaiid Gandharvas.

17. Indeed, they sport and cn)>y i«
those regions, with tlie celestials and guests
and the departed Manes lu lf>elr company,
and surrounded by tlieir own children and
grandchildren. Even such becomea their
high end.

Yadhi8btliir& said

t8 People are seen to make various
kinds of hilts to the Brjlimanas What.
Iwwever, IS tl e difference, O t.randfailier,
bstween tl.e giver and the receiver T

Dhishma said;—

ig. I lie Bralimaiia accepts gifts from
I im wlo IS iiRhlroiis, and from Inin who
Is siiifiil If itie giver liappcns to be
vitluau*. tlie receiver commits Juilc sin. If,


on the other hand, the gfver hippens Id be
Impious, the receiver sinks in hiij.

20 Regarding it IS cited an old history
of l?ie conversation between Vrlshadarblil
and the seven Rishis, O Bharata ,

21 — 22. Kashyapa, Alri, Vashishtha,
Bliaradwaja, Gautama, i Visliwamitrai
Jamadagni, and the chaste Ariindhaii (the
wife of Vashishtha), all had a common
maid servant whose name was Qanda A
Shildra named Pasliitsalclia married Ganda
and became her liusband.

33 Kashyapa and others, formerly,
observed the austerest penances and roved
over the world, desirous of acquiring
the eternal region of Brahman by Hie h*lp
of Vog.i.meditation,

24. About Ifiat lime, O dchghter of lh<
Kurus, there took place a severe drought.
Siricken with hunger, the whole world of
living creatures become greatly weak.

25 At a sicrilice which liad been per-
formed formerjy by Shivi'a son, fie l"“*
given away 'to the Ritwiks a sou of liisa*
the sacrifieial present.

26 ‘About this lime, long lived as the
prince was, he died of starvilin i> lh8
Rishls named, afflicted with hiiiigeri appro*
ached the dead prince and sat enviiclmg
him.

7f Indeed, those foremost of Rishisi
seeing the son of him at whose suriReil
they had oIBciated, O Oharnta, thus d«a I
of starvation, began to cook tbe bo iy ■» ^
vesset, actuated by the pangs of liunger.

28. All food having disappeared from
tl e world of men, those ascetics, desirous of
saving their lives, had recourse, for purposes
of livnig, to such a miserable end.

29. While they were thus engaged,
Vnihadarbha'a son, rfv , king Sliafvyi.
course of Ills roving, came upon these
Kishts. Indeed, he met lliem on his way,
engaged in cooking the dead body, moved
by the pangs of hunger.

Tbo son of Vrishadarbha said:—

30. Tfie acceptince <f a 1.1ft wdl Im-
mediately relieve you all. Ooyou, tf-ere
loro, .sccept n gift for tfe maiiilenance of
your bodies I Ye atcelics-having pmances

lor »«»hh listtii to me as I declaic what

wealth 1 have.

3t. I hat Brat mins who solicits me i<
ever dear to m-. ludeeil I shall gu*
you a thousand kine of w> ite hair, foremo*^
in speed, each acLompanied by n buff,
each fiaving a well botn Calf, and,
lore, Kivuig milk.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


fot


\i. i sli-il) pjve you a UioiMand

Wlls of while col ir aiid of the best species
tind capable of carrying heavy loads I shall
also give jou a lirge riumberof feme, o£
good nature, the foreinost of their kind, all
iaf, and eich of ivl ich, having brought
forth her fir>t calf, is quick with fier seconds

Sq Teil me what else [ shalt give of
foremost villages, of gram, of barley, and
of even the rarer and more precious jewels.
Do not seek to eat this food that is inedible
'leil me what should I give jou for ttie
maintenance of your bodies. f

The Rzshis said}~

34 O king, to accept gifts from a

monarch is very sweet at first ^bui it is
poison In the end Knowing Oils welt, why
do yoti, O king, tempt ti< 'then «icti these
ofiers ? ill

35 The body of the Brahmana is the

divine fiald By penance, iK is purified'
then •ii'ain, by pUas ng the Oralimana,<
one pleases tlie celestials, ^ •

36 If a Brahmans accepts the gifts
tnida to him by the king, he loses, by such
Acceptance, the merit il,a( lie would oilicf
Wise win by Ins penances that day. Indeed.
Shell acceptance destroys (iMt ment as a
burning fire destroys a wilderness

3f, May you be happy, O king, as the
result of the gifts you make to those who
solicit you ••Saying these words to them,
they left that place, proceeding by another
Way,

33. The flesh those great ones had ln>
tended to cook remained uncooked lii'
deed, abandoning that flesh, they went
away, and entered the forest in search of
lood,

3g. Aft»r itifs, urged fay thefr master,
the mmislers of the Jting, eniered those
woods and plucking certain figs tried to
give thern away to those Hishis.

40. The officers of the king filled some
of ttidse figs with gold and mixing (hem
with others tried to induce those ascetics to
accept them.

41. Atri took up some of those figs
and fipding them heavy refused to lake
tliem He said, — We are not shorn of
knowledge. We are not fools,

41 We know that there Is gold within
these figs. We have our senses about
(IS. Indeed, we are awake instead of
being asleep If accepted in this world,
those will yield bitter results hereafter.
He who seeks happiness both in this world
and i^the next, should never accept these.

' 2G


Vashishtha said i—

43 If tve accept even one gold Coin,

It will be counted as a hundred or even
a thousand. If, therefore, we accept many
coins, we shall surely attain to an unhappy '
end in the next world. >

KasUjapa said

44 Aff liie paddy and barley on Harlh,

all the gold and animals and women (hat
are m the world, are incapable of satisfying
the desire of a single person Hence, a
wise man should, removing cupidity, adopt
tranquillity. ' , , j j •

Bharadwaja said ^
45. The horns of a Ruru, when they

first appear, begin to grow with the growth
of the animal Ihe cupidity of inanislike
this. ' It has no limit. ^ ^

Gantama said •— ^ ^ ^ij

411. r All the ohj'cts which e\ist,in Ihe 1
world cannot satisfy even a sm^le person, |
Man IS like the ec'an, for he can never be I
filled (• f • satisfied J , \

VishwatDitra eaid;— • >

4;. Wlsen one desire cherished by a t
person becomes satisfied, there originated \
(mmeduiely another whose satisfaction }
sought and which pierces him hke an {
arrow. < <

Jamada^i said

45 Abstention from accepting gifts sup-

ports penances as th-ir root. 1 Acceptance
however, destroys that, ,

Arondhati said 5—

49 Some people hold that things of (he
woild may be stored for spending (hem
upon the acquisition of vii lue 1 think,
however, that the acquisition of virtue is
better than that of riches.

tSkmdl tfUA?.*-'

S« When these my lords, who are
gifted with great energy, are so very much
afraid of this when seems to be a great
tenor, weak as I am, I fear it the more.

Fasbusakha said *

jr. The Value of virtue is very superior,
lliere is nothing superior to it. That
wealth Is known to the Brahrtianas. 1 wait
upon them as their servant, only for learn-
ing to prise that wealth.

The Riabis said

52. May he be, as the result of the gilts
lie makes, who is the king of the people o(


202


MMUlinARATA


lilts land Let bis gift bear fruit «ho has 1
sent these Itutls to us, enclosing gold within 1
them.

Bhishma said

53 Having said these words, those
Risins ol steadfast vows abandoning the
figs having gold within them left that place
and proceeded where they liked

The ministers said:— i

^4 O king, coming to know of the ent
istence of gold within the figs, the Rishis
have departed. Let this be known to
you.

Bhishma said

55. Thus addressed by his ministers,
king Vrishadarbhi became stricken with
anger against all those Rishis Indeed, to
lake vengeance upon them, the king entered
his own apartment.

56. Practising the austerest of penances,
he poured on nis sacred fire libations of
clarified butter, accompanying each with
Mantras uttered by him.

57. From that fire (here then ong mated,
IS the eulcome of the incantation, a form
capable of striking every one with fear. '
Vrishadatblii named her as Yatudliani

' 58. Tliat form wl ich had ongmated
from the ineaniaiions of the king, looking
as dreadful as the Last Nigl t, appeared
wilh loined hands before the king Ad>
dressing king Viishadarbhi, she said, —
What shall I do 7

Vrishadarhhi said

59 Go and follow the seven Rislns, as
also Arundhati, and tl e husband of tl>eir
maid-servant, and tl e maid servant liers'lf,
and undestand what the meanings are ol
their names.

<£r. ^iVvirfg~iVamC(^leir names, ab you
kill all ol them After killing them you
may go wherever you like.

Bhishma said •—

61. Sajme— So be it —The Rakshasi
who had been named Yaiudhani m her
proper form went to that forest m wbidi
the great Rishis, travelled in search ol
food.


[he was travelling with a dog In his ton*
pany

64 Seeing that mendicant xvliose limbs

were all well developed and beauitfiil Arm-
dliait exclaimed a Idressing the Rishis-^
N »ne of y >n >vill ever be able to show such
veil grown featiifes *

Vashishtha said : —

65 I he sacred fire of tl IS pejson is not

like ours, for while he IS able to pour hba*
tions on It, morning and evening, none ol
us can do the same It is tlierelore that
we see both him and Itis dog so well-
formed. I )

Atri said:—

66 this man does not like ns, feel the
sufferings of hunger. His energy has not
suffered, like ours, any decrease. Ac-
quired with the greatest difficulty, hTs
Vedas have not, like ours disappeared.
Hence tl IS that we see both him and In*
dog so well-grown.

Vishwamitra said ^ ‘

6y. this man IS not, like us, unable 19
observe llie eternal duties laid down 111 tlie
scriptures, ) have become idle. I feel the
sufferings of hunger, I have lost the know-
ledge I had acquired Ihis man is not hke
us III this matter. Hence I see both him
and his dog so well grown,

Jamadagni said —

63 Ihis man has not to think of slOM''g
Ins annual gram and fuel as we are to do.
Hence 1 see both him and his dog so well-
formed.

Kashyapa said:—

66 n IS man has not, like us, four bro*
liiersof the same blood who are begk'
from I Ouse to house, uttering tbe words—*
Give — ijive fi'eiice it it ttist fseeih”**

and Ins dog so welt grown.

Bbaradwaja said —

70. 1 hii man has no regret I ke ours fof
having condemned and cursed his
He has not acted so wickedly ind foohsMy.
Hence I See botli him and his dog so we”*
formed.


62. Indeed, O king, those great Rishis
wilh Atii among them, roamed wiihin the
forest, living upon fruits and roots.


63 In course ol (hrir travel (hey saw s
mend cant of brosil shoulders and plump
arms and legs an J welt-grown face ami
abdomen. 01 limbs that were all adipose


Gautama said'—

7t. This man has not like us only three
pieces of covering made of Kusha
and a single Ranku skm, each of whid*.
again, is three years old. Hence it ^
lhat 1 see both him and his dog w wcu*
formed. \


f^NUSliASAHA PARVA.


303


BhUKma continued

71 Seeing those gre»t Uls^ut ihe nan*
Uering mend cant, approached thcnii and
accosted (hem all tij' touel irtg their liaitd,
according to tlie practice.

73 Conversing then eacit ailief

nbout the diTRcpUy of getting sustenance in
tVf&t forest and the consequent ticcessity of
(itidergotftg the pangs of hunger, all of
Uiem left that place

74 Indeed ifiey travelled throngU lliat
lorcst. aU bent upon a common ob|ect vtt ,
(fie plucking of frinls and the eitraction of
roots for maintenance.

75 One day, as they were (ravefhng,
(bey saw a beautiful lake «tlU lotuses
1(8 banks were covered with trees wliicli
stood ilnckty near one anoifier. q he waters
of the lake were pure and transparent.

y6 Indeed (hr fetuses that adorned
the take were all of the color ot the rising
SIM 1 he leavrs liiat (I laied on the water
were of the c ilor of (apis lae ih 1

JJ Various kinds of aequatic fowls
were sporting on us boson) there was
but one path leading le it the banks
were not covered iriih mire and the access
to (he water was easy

78 Urged by Vnshadirhlt (he Rak.

shssi of dreadful appearance who had
ori)(ina(ed from I is incaniaiiont andsvht
I at been named Y iludhaiu, euarded (he
hke. ‘

79 Those foremost Hishts, «>th Paslm-

saUha in their company, went towards the
like, winch was thus (rn tried by Vatu
dliani, for (he object of collecting some
loius'SfaUs. ,

80 — 81 Seeing Yatudhanl of fearful
aspect sunding on (he b inks of the lake,
(finsa great Kishis addressed her, aaying.~'
Who are )»u who thus stand^tone tr> ilns
solitary forest 7 For whom do you wait
lereT What, indeed, is your purpose?
What do }ou do Irere on the banks ^ (hi*
w.s'.b .tVisw T

Yatadhazti said f~

8s ll matters not who I am 1 dew/t-e
pot to be accosted. You having asceiic
sveallh, know that 1 am the guard set to
watch (his lake.

The Rishis said —

83 All of US are hungt). Wc 1 ia\e
nat! mg rlre to eat Wnhj «r permission
we would colUct some lotus suIks,

Yivtndhanj said —

8| According to agrectneol, do soutvke
Vc litus slsUs as )cu please \erajkt,


one by one give me jour names Voi
may then, ivithout tieiay, take (lie stalks I

Bhisoia said

85 Ascertaining that her name was

Vatudhani and that site stood there for
kifhng rhem, Am, who was iamishing wit)
liunger, addressed^.her, ^ and said tlitst
words. ^

Atrisaid'—

86 I am called Alri' because I purify

the world from sin For, again, thrice
Studying the Vedas every day,. [ have made
days of my nights Ihst again, is no
night in which I have not studied the
Vedas. Iherefore also I am called Alri,
O beautiful lady * 1

Tatddham said *— ,

87 O you of great effulgence, tlie ex*
plaiiation you have given me of jour name
IS incapsbfe oflbeng understood by me.
Oojoii therefore go and plunge into (hit
lank filled with lotuses.

Vaslit«htha said:—

8S I am gilred with Yoga powers, I five
i again, as a householder, and am consi>

, dered as the foremost of all persons that
lead such a mode of life On account ol
cny being gifted with (such^ powers, of my
living as a householder, and of my being
considereii, as tlie foremost of all house*
holders, I am called Vashishtha,

Tatudbani said — ^

89 Ihe etymological signiFrcaliorv ol
your name « simply incomprehensible to
me musmiich as tlie inflr«((ons winch (he
©r,gii»4l^root8 have ijndergone are Imlrf-'
(elhhi^f^ Co and plunge into this Uke ol
lotuses.

Kasbyapa said

90 1 always protect my body, and orr \
account of my penariees I lure become
enk^wuA eiTnVvmw /urishjv pruxwuig-
(lie body and (or (Ills effulgence (I at is due
to tny penancea, t pies by (lie w«me of
Kashyapa.

Tatudliani said'—

91. O jnu of great tfTulLence, the
etjmoJ igical significatrort you (uve c'ver, of
your name IS what I camoi comprri »■> I
Go anil plunge into this lake filed will,
lotincs

Biiaradwaja said

9S I always support mysons. my ifv.
Cipl’S, the c lestuli, the (i, a! manat, and


204


MAItABllA^ATA


my wife. On account of my thus suppod*
mg all with ease, ] pass by the name ol
Uliaradwaja.

Tatudhaoi said.—

93 The ct>roological significatron you
have given me of your name is what I
cannot fully understand, on account of the
many inflections the root has undergone
Go and plunge into this_lake filled with
lotuses

I ! > I

Gotama said t—

91 I have conquered Heaven and Earth
by the helpof self.conirol For my consider*
ing all creatures and objects imparii.dly, I
am hire a smokeless Are. Hence I am m
capable of being subjugated by )ou When,
again, I was born, the effulgence of my
body removed the surrounding darkness
For these reasons I am ciUed Gotama.

Yatudhani said s—

93 The explanation you 1 ave given me
of your name, O great ascetic, is beyond
the range of my comprehension Co and
plunge into this Ulte of lotuses,

Yisliwamitra said : —

96 1 he celestials of the universe are my

I friends. 1 am also the friend of the
G universe. Hence, O Vatudham, I am
* called Vishwamitra.

Tatndbam said •— <

97 * Tl>e explanation -you have given of
your name is a puxzle to me, on ac: unt of
the inflections the root has biideriione Go
and plunge into tins lake of lotuses.

Jamadagni said:—

98 t have onginaied from the sacri

ficial Are of the celestials Hence am I
called Jamadagni, O 1 you of beautiful
features. ‘

Yatndhani said: —

99 The ctymotogical sigriflcation you
have given, O great ascetic, of your name,
passes the range of my comprehensiun
Do you go and plunge into tins lake of

lo US'S

AmadliaU said i

too 1 always live by the side of my
husband and hold llie E-ti|h jo nlly with
1 im 1 always incline nty husband's heart
towards me. 1 am, therefore, called
Atundhati

Yatudhani said —

toi Ihe expUnatton you have given of
name is beyond my underslandinj,, on


account of the inflrclions the roofs fiar?
undergone. Go and plunge into tins Uke
of lotuses.

Gandft said —

loi Ihe Ganda means a poriron of
the cheek As I have (hat portion a (idle
elevated above the others I am, O you «h»
lave onginaied from the sacriflcial Are of
bhaivya, called by the name of Ganda

Yatndhani said : — ,

103 ifie explanation wliicii ylu h®''*
given of your name is perfectly incomprehrn*
sible lo me, on account of the inff-'Ctions
which the root has undergone. Go at"J
plunge into this lake of lotuses. ^

Pashnsakha said : —

to4 I piotect and tend all animsls I
see, and I am always a friend to allainmah
Hence am I called PHshusakhn, O you who
have originated from the (sacnficwl)

(of king Vnshadarbhi}.

Yatndhani said

, 105 1 he explandiiort you hire given ef

your name 1$ wiiat 1 cannot understand on
account ol the iiifleciiuns which tie rents
have undergone. Go and plunge into tl is
lakeof lotuses

Shnnasakba said — *

106 1 canno* explain the etymology
my name like these ascetms But knnv,
O Yatudhani that I am called by the name
of SUunaiskha.

Yatudhani said —

107 You have mentioned your name

only once 1 have not been able lo Under-
stand the explanaiton Sou have given,_o®
you therelore, inentlon it again, O twic**
born one ‘ ,

Shunasakha said — | /

’108 Since you have not been able fo
cwtcli my name on accou rt ol niy ^
mentioned It only oncer 1 si all sfnke
with niy triple slick' btnick willi ‘b “C
you reduced ioriliwith into ashes. 1

Bhishma continued ;

109 Struck lien on the head by tlie
S->nnyasin, wiili I is triple stick wh ch resem-
bled the punishment infliuted by a Brah-
mana the Rakshasi who had originaied

( from the incaniaiiOns of king Vrishadarbhi
dripped down on the Earth and became
reduced lo ashes

110 Having ilus killed Ihe 'powerful
Rakshasi Shu lasakha thrust I is sit k lolo


AHUSirASfttlA rARVA


205


he earth and sat himselt down on a grassy
plot of land.

Ill, The Rishis ihen, having, as they
Ii^ed, pfucked a number of lotuses a»d
taken up a number of >o(us>sia]k 3 , ca>»i;
up from the lake, filled with joy

113 . Tlirowmg on the ground the mass
of lotuses which tliey had collected with
great labour they plunged once more into
II for ofTering obtaiians of Water to tlie de*
parted Al.<iies.

113 Coming tip they tvent to that side
of the bank where they had placed the
lulus stalks Reaching that place, those
foremost of men found that the stalts were
nowhnre to be seen.

The Rishis said —

114 What sinful and cruel men has
stolen away the lotus stalks collected by our
hungry selves (rum desire of eatitig — -

Bhishma said [

ti5 Those foremost o( twice born
persousi suspecting one another, U des*
troyer of enemies said,'»We shall each
have (0 swear to our innocence
ltd All those ascetics then, exhausted
witli liuiiger and exertion, agreeing to the
proposal, look tliese oaths.

Atn said —

117 Let him who has stolen the fotus*
sialkf (oucli ki le wiiti his loot, pass urine
(••cing the sun, and study the Vedas on cx«
eluded days.

Vashishtha said.*— ■

liS-'-lip Let him who had stolen the
lot iS'StdlUs abstain from reading the Vedas,
or leash hounds or be a wandering meiidi
cant unrestrUined by the ordinances laid
down for that Inode of life or be a destroy^
er of persons who seek refuge ^ith him or
live upon the proceeds of the sate of I is
daui,hter, or solicit riches from those who
are low and vile

' J^asltyapa said — ' '

130 — t2i Let him who lias sioleri the
lulus stalks give vent to all sons of vrords in
all/Olaces, give false evidence in a conn of
la/ He flesh of animals not killed 1 1

"sr ^. mak^e^ Lifts to unworthy persons
r 'il^persons at unseasonable lines,

sual'coniieciiun^twih women

.aja said.—

Let him who has stolen tl e
alks be cruel and sinful 1 1 his con
wards women and ki ismen and ktne


Let him humifiate Brahmartds.'fo tfisputd-;
lions, by showing his soperror knowledge '
and skill Let him study ibe Bichs and |
(he Y.4jusbes rlisregardmg his preceptor, f
Let Inin pour libations upon hres made ^
with dry grass or straw.

Jdmaddgnl fealQ ^

(34— (25 Let him who has stolen the
iolus stalks be guilty of throwing filth hnd
dirt on wa'er. Let him be filled wit{i
enmity towards kine. LetJnm be gu Ity of
having Sexual union with women at times ?
otberiban^heir season Let him incur the s
haired of 'all 'persons Let hitn gam the I
living from the earnings of bis wife. Let >
him have no friends and let him lave |
many enemies. Let him be another’s guest }
lor getting in reitirn those acts of liospnahiy
whicli he has done to ihsl other.

Gotama said

ti6~—t2j Let film who has stolen the
lotus stalks be guilty of throwing away the
Vedas after having read them. Let hnn
renounce the three sacred hres. Let him be
a seller of the Soma (plant or lU'ce) Let
him live with that Brahmana who lives in a
village which has only one well from , whicit
water is drawn by all classes and Who lias
marned^.Shudra woman. 1

VlBhwamltra said •—

128. Let him wlio has stolen the lotus |
stalks be doomed to see his preceptors and (
seniors and his servants maintained by I
others during his own life.tirre. Let him |
not have a good end Let him be the *
lather of many children.

129 Let him be always impure and a
wretch amohg Brahmanas Let him be
proud of fns riches f et him be a iiller of
the soil and let him be filled with m<<hce

130. ( el him wander in tiie rainy season.
L^t him be a paid servaht Let f ■ it be the
priest of the king Let him assist at the
sacrifices of S11J1 impure persons who are
not worthy of being assisted kt (heir sacri«
Sees

Anmdhati said ■—

131 Let her who has stolen Ihe lotus*
stalks always’humiliate her mdlher in taw. ,
Let her be always vexed With her husband. ,
Let Irer eat wliatever good things Come to i
tier house without giving a part to others. '

133 Disregarding the kins-ien if her ,
husband, let her live in her husband’s house i
and eat, every evening, the flour of fried
barley • Let her come to be considered as *
unenjoyable. Let her be the mother of a '
heroic son.


ftAltAOItARATA.


so6


Ganda said

133 Let I er who has stolen the lotus*
stalks be khvays a speaker o( oniruili Let
her always fall out with her kinsmen' Let
her give away her dau^^hter in marriage
lor mone}.

I3t. Let her eat the food which she has
has cooked atone and without giving a part
it to of anybody ' Let her pass her whole life
as a sUve Indeed, let lier who has stolen
the lotuS'Stalks be c] nek with child on
account of sexual union under circumstances
of guilt. ,

Pashusatha said

13s Let him who has stolen the lotus*
stalks be born of a slave mother Let him
who have many unworthy children. And let
him never bow to the celestials.

Sbunasakha said:*-
136 Let him who has removed the
lotus stalks acquire the meni ol bestowing
Ins daughter m marriage upon a Brahmana
who has studied alt the Samans and the
Vajushes and who lias carefully observed
the vow of celibacy Let him perform the
(Inal ablutions alter having read all the
Attiarvans 1

All the Blshis eald —

t37. llie oath >011 have taken is no oath
at all, for all the deeds winch you lave
mentioned are i^very ^ desirable for the
fBrahmanas' It is evident, Sliunasakha.
llhal you have appropriated our lotuS stalks.

Shunasakhai said

138 Not seeing tlie lotus stalks' deposi*
ted by you what you say is indeed true, for
it IS 1 who have actually stolen them

139 Before you all I have made those
stalks d sappear Ye sinless ones, the
act was done by me for testing you

140 1 came here for protecting yoti
1 hat woman who lies killed there was
called Yatudhani She wasola dreadful I
disposition Originated from the mean*
taiions of king Vnshadarbhi, she had come
here (tom the desire of killing all of you

141 Ye ascetics having penances for
wealth, begged on by that king, she had
come but 1 have killed her. that wicked
and sinful creature, originated from the
sacrihcial bre, would otherwise have taken
your lives

142 It was for killing her and sasnng
you that 1 came here, O ye learned
BcaKmanas l\now that 1 am Vasava! you
have entircl) got rid of il e inn»ence of cupi*
dily On account of tins, you have icquired
many eternal regions fraught with the


fruition of every desire ss soon as It rises It
tlielieartl I)j you rise, lorthwilli IronOrs
place and go to those regions of beaiiiule.
O iwice*born ones, that are reserved for
you

Bliislima said —

143 He great Itishis highly plessed af
this replied fo Purandara, saying,— So bj
It I — -I hey then ascended to the celestial
region the company of Indra himself

144—145 Ihus, those great persons,
tbojgh svorii out with hunger and tl'ou^t
tempted at such a time with the offer of
various kinds of enjoyable articles, refraij**
ed from giving way to temptation As ti^
outcome of such self denial they attained
to the celestial region It appears, therefore/
that one should, under all circumswncesi
renounce cupidity

14^—147 Even this, O king is ibc

highest duty CBpidity should be renounced.

1 1 e man who recites this account m assert'
biles of men, succeeds m acqu ring fichea»
Such a man has never to come by a d stress*
ful e»'d The departed Manes theRisl>*r
and the celestials brCome all pleased with
him Hereafter, again, he becomes gihed
with fame and religions merit and iiches


CHAPIER XCIV.

'(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—

^ Coniniued,

Bbisbma said —

1 Regarding it 1$ diled the old history
of the oaths on the occasion of a sojourn to
the sacred waters.

2 O best of the BharataS, the ^
theft had been cominitted by Indra, and
tl»« oaths were taken by many royal and
I vice born Itislits.

3 Once an a lime, the Rtshrs, fiavn^
assembled logetlier, proceeded to the west*
ern Prabliasa 1 l>ey held a ccmsuftali^
there winch resulted in a determination on
Ihew part to sojourn to all the sacred waters
on Earth

4 TTiere were Shakra, Angiras, the
highly learned Kavi, Agastya, Narad* aiw
Parvata , and Bhngti and Vaslnshth* and
Kashyapsaiid Gautama and Vishwanriira
and Jainadagni, O king.

5 There were also the Rishi Gdava
and Ashiaka and Bharadwt]* and Arun
dbass and il e Valivhilyas , and Shwi aod
Dilipa and Nahiisha and Amvsrisha aijM
ti e royal Vayati aid Dliuiidtiumsra q’lJ
I’urU


ANUStUSANA PArVA


20?


ti. Tlese foremost ol meh, headed llie
5'eat peflofmer of lumlred sacrsRc^s, tl»e

staler of Vritra, so] xiined to all the Sicred

waters one after anolhefi and at last teacli-
ed viie linjlily sacred Kaiis'fki on (lie
■day of Ihe lull moan In ilte monA ol
MaRf.a.

7 Having purified ttiemselves of atl sms
by ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, they at last proceeded to the very
sacred Bralimasara. Bathing m that take,
tliose Rishis gifted with fiery energy began
to gather and eat the stalks of the lotus.

S. Amongst those Brahmanas, some had
extracted the stalks of the lotus and some
the stalks of the Nymphcei stellata. Soon
they found that the stalks extracted by
Agastya had been taken away by some*
body,

g The foremost of Rnhis, Agastya, ad-
dressing them all, said, — Who has taken
away the good stalks which 1 had extracted
and deposited here? 1 suspect some one
amongst you must have taken diem. Let
him who has taken them away return Diem
to me. You should not thus misappropriate
my stalk?.

10. It Is heard that Time attacks the
energy of virtue, that Time has come
Upon us Hencoi virtue is sfHicted. It it
proper that I should goto Heaven for good>
oelore sin assails the world and eiublishes
(iseU fully liere. _

ti. Before the time comes wf>en Brah.
manas, loudly uttering tfic Ved.<r, wuUm
the precincts ”ol~^vitl3ges and inhabiteO
places, cause the Shudris hear them, before
the time comes when kings Dltered ngamst
the rules of virtue from motives of
policy, I shall go to the celestisl region
lor good.

12. Before men cease to regard the dis-
tinctions between the lower, the middle and
the higher classes, I shall go to the celestial
region for good Belore Ignorance attacks
the world and covers all things in dark-
ness, I -shall go to the celestial region for
good. '

13 Before the time comes when the
strong begin to oppress the weak and treat
them as slaves, 1 shall go to the celestial
region for ever. Indeed, t dare not remain
on Bart)) for seeing these things, ^

14 The Rishis, much concerned at what
he said, addressed that great ascetic and
said,— We have not stolen your stalksl
Yon should not cherish these suspiciuns
against u*, O great Rishi, we shall take
the most dreadlul oaths.


desirous ol iiphohluig the cause ol virtue,
tho.e Rid IS and royal sages liien began to
SROxr, one after another, the fcilawing
oaths.


Blingn said *—

t6 Let Inin who has stolen your stalks
censure when censured, assail When assaiN
ed, and eat the fiesli that is aitached to Ihe
back-bone of animals,


7asliishtba said

17. Let him who has stolen your stalks
neglect his Vedic studies, leash hounds,
and having taken himself to the mendicant
order live in a City or town.


Kaahyapa said

18 Let him who has Stolen your stalks
sell all things In all place* /nitapproprtsia
trusts, and give latse evidence I


Qotama said '

19 Let him who has stolen your stalks
live, showing pride iit all thing*, with an
undersiandjng ihvt does not see all erea*
tureswiih an rqnvl eye, and always giving
way to the n ll lence of desire and anger.
I,et him be a cultivator ol the soil, and let
jiim be moved iy malice.


Angiras said *—

90. Let him who has sti !en your stalks
be always impure 1 Let him be a censurable
Drahmana Let him leash hounds Let
him be gnitiy ol Bralimanicide Let him
be averse to expiations after having com-


BURadhtimara said*— '

31 Let him who has stolen your stalks
i>« ungiateful to his friends 1 Let him lake
birih m a Shudra woman I Let him rat
alone any good food. ,


Dilipasaid —


32 let him who has stolen your stalks
attain to those regions of misery and in-
famy which are reserved for that Brahmana
who lives in a village having but one well
and who knows a Sliudra woman, )


33 Let him who has stolen your ‘Stalks
practise as a physician ! Let him be sup-
ported by the earnings ol his wife ! Let him
draw hie maintenance from his father-in-
law!


15 Having said these words, conscious
as ih'/y weie of their own innocence, and


Shukra said —

24 Let him who has stolen your stalks
eat the flesh of animafs not killed m


2o8


MAIIAODARATA.


sacrifices! I.cl l>im Inve texinl union nt
da\>tiino! Lei lim be ft servant ul llie

Jamadagni said t—

35 Lei liim who Ins stoTen >onr sutks
study tlie Vedas on (ordidden days or
occasions. Let him feed frl*‘iuls at Slirad-
dhas performed by him I Lei limi eat atll*
Shraddha of a Sliudra,
fehlvl said;—

26 Let liim Miha b-is stolen your stalks
die without liaviiik* established a lire (for
daily worship) I Lei him be i,uiUy of
obstructing tiie celebration oi sacrifices by
others t Let him fall out with those wiio
practise penances !

'Tayatl flald:—

37. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be guilty of having seauil union with Ins
Wife when she is not m her season and wlien
he IS himself in the observance of avow
end bears matted (ockf on tns iicadl Let
him also disregard the Vedas I

K&husha said:—

23 . Let him wlio lias stolen your stalks
live in domesticity after liavi ig betaken
himself to the vow of mendicancy! Let Inm
act in whatever way lie pleases, after having :
performed the Initiatory rites in view of a
sacrifice or some solemn observance ! Let
him take pecuniary satisfaction for teach*
tng Ins disciples.

Amvarlsha said;—

29 Let him who has stolen your stalks
be cruel and sinful in liis conduct towards
women and kinsmen and kine { Let linn be
guilty also of Bralimamcide 1

Karada said >—

30 Let him who has stolen your stalks be
one who identifies the body with the soul I
Let him study the scriptures with an ur
wof.th,v .orec^iuir Let liun xliauiu Jtfir
Vedas, violating at each step the rules of
orthoepy 1 Let him disregard all his elders

.Nabbaga said —

31. Let him who has stolen your stalks
always speak untruth and quarrel with
those who are pious Let Inm bestow his
daughter marriage after accepting a
pecuniary satisfaction offered by his son*
,tn law,

Kavl said—

33 Let him who has stolen your stalks
be guilty of striking a cow with his foot
Let him pass urine, facing thelsun ! Let him
Mnounce the person who seeks shelter at
< nts hands.


Vlshwamltra Said —

33 l.et iiinl who Ins siolen y 0 ir slatki
become a servant who .lets deceitfully to
wards liH m <»lcr ! Lrl him be the p'l u of
ft king) I cl him ofliualc as the sscnfuial
priest of one who should not be assisted at
his sacrifices I

Tarvata slid:—

3t L't iiiin who has stolen your stalks
be the head of a village. Let him make
|oiirneyson asses Let Inm leash lioutiJs
for maintenance. ' 1 "

Bharadwaja said;— . t ?

35 Let him who has stolen jjoiif s'alks
be gmlty of all the tran»gressMns tif In 0
whots cruel in conduct and untruififul 1 >
speech. i '

Ashtalfa said —

; Let him who has stolen your slalks

I be a king shorn of wisdom, Capiiu ms am
sinful m Ins conduct, and disposed W
the Barth impiously.

Qalava 8aid —

37 L»l him who has stolen ymiP
be more infamous than a siiiiul man 1/1
him be smfiij fn )iis deeds towurda Id* J'*
men and relatives Let him proclaim l"*
gifts he makes to others,

Arundhatl said —

3$ I el her who has stolen your slalki
spe.*k ill of her mother in»law let
dislike her husband Let her eat alone an/
good food that comes to her house.

The Valakhllyas said —

39 Let him who has stolen yojr stalkr
stand on one fool at the entrance of a »' *
lage Let him, wlnle knowing all duliesi oe
guilty ot every transgression.

Shunasakha said

40 Let him who has stofen your

be a Brahmana who sleeps happ ly havme
neglected his daily Homa Let Inm, all*
becoming a religious mend'cent, act
any way he likes, without observing an/
control 1

Surabhl said —

41. Let her who has stolen your s'^****
be milked, with lie, (hind) legs bound wit
a rope of human hair, and with the help 0
ft call not her own, and, while jnilkeo*
let her* milk be held in a vessel of nh'ts
brass

Bblshmasald — ^ '

42 After the Rishis and th'* roy**
sages bad taken various oaths, V*)


AT^U&IIAISANA PATtVA


209


cliie{ o! the iceles*
It^ls, filled witli joy, looked at the angry
Risl'i Agastya

43 Addressing llie Rislit *i 1 io was very
■angry at the disappearance of tus lotus
stalks, Indra thus declared wlial was pass-
ing in Ills mind Hear, O Umg, the
words fndra spoke in the midst ol those
twice<born and celestial Rislus and royal
sages.

BhaKra said ~

44 Let hirn who has stolen your stalks
require the merit ol him who bestows hts
daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana
wlio has duly observed the vow oi Brahma-
diaryya or who has duly studied (he
Samans and the Y.<]ushes Let him also
have the meiit of one who takes the final
bath after completing his study of the
Atharva Veda.

45 I et btm who Iia8”lolen your stalks
acquire the merit of having studied all (lie
Vedas. Let jiiffl be observant of all diUi*s
and righteous in Ins conduct indeed, let
him go to (he region of ^rahman. <

ASastya said — 1

46 You have, O ^destro}er of Vala,

uttered a benedicifon instead of a curse
Give them to me, for (fiat is the elernal
duty ' I - '

India said

47 O holy one. I did not remove your

stalks, moved by cupidity. (ndeeO, I
removed them from desire of bearing ilns
assembly leciie wImi the duties aie'Umt we
should observe. Vou should not yield to
anger. p

f 43. Dulles are the foremost of Shrutis.
Dunes form the eternal path I have
luiened to this discourse of iH« Rislus (on
duties) that is elernal and iininutable, and
that IS above all change

49 Do you iheti, O hremott of teamed
Bratimanas, take hack these slalks of yours
O lioly one, you should forgive my (rans-
gressioti, O you who are free from every
fault

BUlshma said —

^'50 1 hus nddre'Std b) (he kbig of the

Celesinls, (he sscelics Vie , A(.as(ya, who
tiad been very angiy, took back his stalks
Gifted with inieihgence, the Kishi became
checflnl.

51. After this, those dwellers ol Uie
forest went to various other sacred walet*
Indeed, going to those sacred waters tltey
performed their ablutions everywhere. ,
51. ,Tl c man wlio reads (Ins discourse j


withTapt alteiilion on every Parva day, will
not beget^an ignorant aiid^m ked son. lie
will never be shorn of learning.

53 No calamity will ever befall liim.
He will besides, be free from every sort
of sorrow. He will never suffer from
decrepittide and decay. Freed from stains
and evil of every sort, and gifted with
merit, be is sure to acquire Heaven,

54 He who studies this Shastra ob-
served by the Ruhis, is sure, O king, to
attain to the eternal region of Brahman that
IS full of happiness.


CHAPTER XCV,

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

Centinued, ,

Yndbislitbira said
•1—3 O ‘chief ol Bliarata’s race by
whom was the custom of giving umbrellas
andsandaitai Shraddbas introduced 7 Why
was It introduced and for what purpose are
those gifts insdef ^llieyt are given net
only ai Shraddbas, but also at other re-
ligious rites lliey are given on many
occasions with tl>e view of winning religious
mem I wish to know in full, 0 twice-
born one, the true meaning of this practice*

Bhlsbrna said

4 Do you, O prince, Attentively listen
(o (he details { sliall recite about (he cus-
tom of K'ving away um_brehas and shoes
at religious riles, and as^to how and by
whom it was introduced.

5 I shall also tell you in full, O prince,
how It acquired ihe.(orce of a permanent
observance and how it came to be con-
sidered as a rneritoiious act.

6 I shall 111 tins connection, recite the
coitvenaiioii between Jamadagni and (he
great Sun Formeily the illustrious jama-
dagiM, O powerful king, ol Otirigu's race,
was engaged in praciismg with his bow,

to taking his aim, he shot arrow
after arrow ills wife Renuka used to pick
up the arroas when he sliot and repeatedly
bring them back to that descendant, gifted
with (he burning energy of Blirigu s race.
Pleased with the wiiiuiiig noise of his
ariows and the twang ol his bow, he
amused himself tfiirs by repeatedly shooting;
hts arrows winch Itenuka brought back to
turn One day, at noontide, O monarch,
III tiat month when the Sun wasinjyes-
thatnvla. tlie Brahmana, having shot all
I (s arrom, said to Renuka,— O iargC'Cycd


310


MAllABItARAT^.


lady, CO and fetch me the arrows I have I
shot from my how. .

tt — 14 O you of beautiful eye<browsI
1 shall acain shoot them with my bow 1“ |
1 he hdy proceeded oil her errand but was
compelled to sit under the shade of a tree,
on account of her head and feet heme
^torched by the heat of the Sun. 1 he black-
ejed and graceful Uenuka, having rested
for onl) a moment, feared ilie ciuse ot her
husband and, therefore, began to collect
and bring back the arrows. Taking them
wiih her, the celebrated lady of beautiful
features came back, distressed in mimt and
her feet smarting with pain. Trembling
with fear, she approached her husbam).

15 Ihe Rishi, stricken with anger, re-
peatedly addressed his fair-faced sviCe. say-
ing,— O Reniilta, why have you been so late
in returning 7


fruits of vegetables and herbs, Is changeJ
into food.

2^ — j 6 O son of ntirjgu, the rites
consequent on birth, religious ohservnnce*,
invesliliire with the sacred thead, gifts of
kme, marriage, all articles m view of sacri-
fices, the rules for Itie governance of men,
gifts, all sorts of union, and the acqui'inon
of riches, originate from food I You khow
llm well I

ij. All the good and sweet things in
the universe, and all the efforts made by
living creatures, originate from food I
duty recite what is well known (o )Ouf
Indeed, you fully know all that I have

aS Do joii, therefore, O Iwice-born
Ri%hi, appease yoiir anger I Wliat will )0U
gam by anniliilating the Sun T'


Renuka said 5—

t6. O you, having penances for wealth,
my head and feet were scorched by the
rays of the Sun ! Oppressed by the lieai,

1 look shelter under the shade of a treel
17. Tins has been the cause of the
delay! Informed of the cause, do you, O
lord, cease to be angry with me.

JAmadftgul said

>8. O Reniika, this very day shall t des-
troy, with the liery energy of my weapons,
the stir of the day with ms burnmg rays,
wlio has afilicted you tlius.

Bbishma eontiaaed 1 — *

19 Drawing hisceleslial bow.and taking
Ip many arrows, JamaOagni stood, turning
IIS iace towards llic Sun and watching him
ss he moved on.

20. Then O son of Kunli, seeing him
ready for fight, the Sun approached him m
the guise oi a Drahmana.and said to him,—
What has the Sun done to offend youT ^

21. Passing through the fsky, he draws
jp.tlie.rnoisince.fwin.the JCaeil* »aru* ,ir .tk*
form of rains he pouts it down once mote
on her.

22. It IS through this, O twke-born
one, that the food of human beings springs
up— food tliat IS so agreeable to them*

1 1 e Vedas say that it ts food that forms
the vital airs. |

23. O Brahmana, hidden in the clouds

and encompassed by his rays, the Sun
drenclies the seven insular continents with :
showers of ram. I

24. O powerful one, the moisture, thus!
poured, spreading iiseU into the leaves and


CMAPrER XCVI.

(ANUSH A 5 AN 1 KA PARVA) —
Cfniiftuiii,

Tudhiehthira said

t. What did that foremost of asceliCJr
v(« , Jamadagni gifted with great entrgyi
do when thus besought by the SunT


Bhwbma Baid^—

9. O descendant of Kuru, kisptteofall
the prayers of the Sun, the sage Jamadagnh
eflutgeni like fire, continued to cherish h‘*
anger.

3—4. Tlien, O king, the Sun,
guise of a Brahmana, ^wed his head to
him and addressed him, with clasped hands,
m these sweet words,— O Iwice-born Rishi,
the Sun is always moving ! How shall you
pierce the Lord of day who is continn*''/
moving forward T


5 With the eye ot knowledge I knO’J
you to be both moving and motionless I •
sliall surely read you a lesson this day.

6 At mrdday you appear to stay rii ih®
firmament “for a moment. It is then, U

I Sun, that 1 shall pierce you with my arrows!

1 there IS no swerving from this resotuCio*!
of mine.


Surya said •—

7. O twice-born Rishi, forsooth, y^
know me, O best of archers* But, ^
holy one, though 1 have oflended, see *
pray for your protection,


AKUStf^SAKA PARVA


Bliislima said

6 At (> 114 , <>ie «ars>fipr((} J^nt
smtlmglv addrrs?«d (!•« S<m, sajiitp.— O
Sw, ttrltefl 5<n( t aresoci^ht my prolecttoti,
}o« liave nolltfHji to /ear.

9—10 ffe wcmtd pet over the 'Jmptiaiy
(hat exists in DrahiTianaf, the slxbihly that
<xistsmtl>e Faith, the tnitdness existhif;
(n (he Mnnn (he praviiy existing m
Vartina (lie effntpence exi4((np in Apm,
the brigiituMs of Mem, and the heat of
tt e Sun, «{K)>wouIti kill a su(iphant for
piotecWon.

II. Ihe man who can kill a suppliant
is capable o( vioUlinp tin- bed of Ins
preceptor, of kilting a Bratimana and of
dunking atcotioi

It Do \o<i (tierelore, ttnnk oi some
remedy (or (I is evil, b} wtncli people may
be relieved nlien lieated by your rays

Bhiahma continued :->■

13 So saying, that exccllem descendant
nl U'riiiu reiraiiied silent (or some time,
and ihe Sun immediately eave turn art
iimbrelfa and a pair of sandals.

Sarya «aid —

14 Ha you O pteat Risbl take tins
tinibrella with nhich the head mat be pro*
lecied and my rays warded olT 11 ns pair
of sandals ts m^de «( leather for the
lirotection of tlie feet.

15 From, tins day the g<(( of diese
Articles in all rd gious rues ahofl be
e>tab(tsl ed as a cast >in.

Bhiahma continuel

16 this custom ol piTinp umbrella and
shoes was Introduced by ll>« Sin O
drsceiidanl oi ilti-uata, tlieee gifts are re«
garded ineutoi Mos in the three worlds

T7 Ha jotf, therefore gjre away Min.
brelfat and sloes 10 llralima'ix* I have
no doubt that you wi)l then acquire great
rel <u<M>s merit by. the deed

tS— 19 O foremost one of Bharata's
race, lie wl o pives away a white umbrella
w th a Innidred ribs to a Ilrahmsna, ac>
quires et'rna} happines a(ter death and
lives in llie repron ol Indra, rctpected by
Drahmanas Apsaras, and Devas,

. ao O powrtfol one, lie wlio gives shoes
\ to SnataVa Uiahmanas as aho 10 Drainna*
1 nas praciisn p (!•* riles of rdpionwlose
I fret have become sore wKh (t e I rat of (he
'Siun, acquires regions coveted by the eery
celestials

31 . Such a Riin, O Bhsrats. fives


2 I 7


ftappiiy in the Iifghest Heaven alter !iis
death.

33 0 foremosi one of Bharata's race, 1

have thus recited to you, in (tril, the merits
of.psving Away shoes and umbrellas at reli*
glous ceremonies.


CHAPIER XeVH.
(ANUSHASANIKA PAKVA)-~
^orrfrrrnctf.

Yndbishthira said

t« O foremost one of Bhacata^s race, do
y'Ou describe to me ail (he deities of (he
liotHehoM mode and (ell me all tha( a man
should do nr order la acquire prosperity tn
(Ins wo/ld.

BBislima «aid:—

3 O Oharaia, f ah*\( m Out oinnec»
(i«». rente in you Ihe old $iary of Vafudeva
and the goddess Errtli
3 Tire powerful VasudevsrO exealfent
prince of uliaraia’a race after singing the
praises of the goddess Eirti'r accosted her
about (his very subject that you have re*
quired about.

V&sn3*va latd

4. Ilavme adopted tlw domestic mode
of life, what acts should I, or one like
me, do and liow are such acta (0 yield
socCess

The goddess Eartb stiid

5 O Madhava, the Ris> is, ihe relestr^ls,
(lie departed Manes, and men should be
adored, and sarri^ccf should be performed
by a liDUioU

6 Oo you also r«arft tl fS from me fhat
dm celestials are always pleased wiih s»e«i-
Arev and men are pleased with liospitaliiy.

Ilerefore, He homelv.)lJer should please
them with such obyects as they desire.

j, Dyanehaeis D desiroyer of Madlux
Rifl IS also are pleased 1 1 e honehold'r.
Absiainuip from lood, should daily attend
to Ills sa^cd ftre and to hts stcriGcul
sffeeingv ■- —

S— in The celestials, O destroyer of
Madhu are pleased with such rieeds Ute
h us»lo'dee should daily effer nblalinns
of toed And waier, or c( Iruits, rooft and
water, Inr the valnlacirau of lied pane,!
Manes»aiid give boiled food to the Vaithve*
devas, and ot^atlons of rtaitfied butter |o
AK1>^ Soma, and ITfiAuwantait.


MAttABItARATA


ti— ts. He oCttr wparMe «nd

aistmct oblauon* 10 Pi-ajxpali He shouJd
make sacrificial offerings duly » *"'*

in the South, to Varuna in the \Vesr, to
boma in the North, to Prajapali within the
homestead, to Dhanwantari in the North*
Cast, and to Indra in the East.

13 He should oiler food to men a* the
entrance of his house. Tfiese, O Madhava,
are known as the Vail offerings The Vali
should be offered to the M.*rilts and the
deities m the interior of one's house

14 To the Vishwedevas it sfioold be
offered in open air, and to the [takshasas
and evil spirits the offerings should be
made at mgtit.

15 After making these offerings, the
householder should make olferiUKS to llrah*
manas, and if no Br^hm^iia be present,
the first portion of the food should be

j thrown into the fire.

t6 When a man wislies to offer Shraddita
to his ancestors, he should, wSen tlie
Shraddha eeremotiy is dune, please his
nncestors and tfien make t he V ah vReungs
dut^. —

17 He shonld then make offerings to
tlie Vaishwedevas Vte should next invite
Brahmanas, and then properly entertam
{guests arrived at his house, with food.

18 By this act, O prince, are guest*
pleased He who does net live in the liouse
tong, ofi having come, goes away after a
short time, is called a guest.

lf)—ao To his preceptor, to his fader,
to his friend and to a guest, a householder
should say, I have fot tliwni my lionse
10 offer you to-day And lie should offer
It acordingly every day.

\ 21. The householder should do whatever

’they would or^r him to. do lliisistl»e
established custom The TOttsehoIder, O
Krishna should take his food the last of all,
alter having oRered food to all of tliein

22 The householdershould adore with
offerings of lioney, etc , Ins king, his priest.
Ins preceptor, and Ins father in law, as also
Snaiaka Brahmanas even tf they were to
live in Ills house for whole year.

23. In the morning as well as m the
evening, food should be offered on the
jiroiind to dogs, tl e cooks for dogs and
birds Hus is called the Vaishwedeva
offeniigs.

24 The householder, who performs these
ceremonies with mind shorn of passion,
cbiams the blessings of the Rislns mi this
woild, and alter death acquires thebeaveiilt
egions.


Blwslima 8\id*—

25 Having heard .alt this front the gwf'
dess Earth, the powerful Vasudeva acted
accordingly. Do you also act in the same
way.

26 n> performing these duties of a
householder, O Icingryou shall acquire fame
Mt lUis world and Heaven after dcatli t


CHAriER xcviir.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAy-*
Coniinuei.

TadhisUthira said —

I. lit wliHt kind Is the gift of hk^h ^
chief of UlMr.4t,«'s race f How did tins gift
originate f Wiiac are the merits of
Do you left ins all tins

Bitisbioa said {—

2 Rvverding n, O B'laraM, is reensJ *
the old discourse between Menu that lurd
of creatures, and Suvariia,

3 Jhere was formerly an ascetic O'
Bharata, named buvania, Mis cuinpexun
was like tl at of (,uld and lieiike I e was
called Suvacna.

4 Gifted with good birth good conducl
and good qualities he had ntaa ered all the
Vedas Indeed, by ,tlie aecomphshnieiiie
he possessed, he succeeded in excelling
many persons of noble birth.

5 One day that learned Brahmana be-
beheld Manu, the lord of all creatures, and
approached him Meeting each other, tl ey
made the usual polite enquires

6 Both of them were in the truth
Having m»t each other, tlieysat downon
chaiRiing breast of the olden mount Aferu

7 Seated there they began to ulk with

, each other on various subjects about the
ST«k\ devties and twice-born PiK.biiS
Daityasof ancient times

8 riien Suvarna addressing the Self-

create Manu said these words — Vou
should answer one question of mine for the
behoof of all creatures , I

9 O lord of all creatures, the cefestials
arc seen to be adored with presents of
flowers and other good scents What i*
this? How has this practice come into
operation ? Wliat also are llie meritk of d >
Do you describe (Ins subject to me.

Manu said —

10 Regrrdiiig u is recited the r^d dis-


ANUSltASANA PARVA.


cntir^e t>f(wefn Shutcra and the gftat
(Daitya) Vah.

ti. Once on a time, Shuhra of Rhfiuu's
face approached Valu)>e»oii of Vtrochana
while he was ruling the three worlds

12 Having adored the descendant of
Iltiri^ii with the Ari>hya the hnig of the
Asuras, that profuse giver of sat^iRcial
presents sat down after his guest had
Stated himself

13 Ihis very subject which you have
iiiimdiiced rrc-irdinc the merits of the gill
o' fluwers and mcense and lamps came up
on the occasion Indeed, the king of the
Daitjas put t> is high q lestiou to bhuUta
that most learned 0l all ascetics

Vali 8aid*~

14 O (oremost of all persons converssnt
with Brahma, wlut indeed, is (he merit 0/
Kiving II iwers and incense and i^inpsT
Vou should, O faretiiQst of Utahinanas.
describe this to me.


Sbukra siidt—

IS I’enance first sprang into existence.
Alterwards came religion In the interval
many creepers and herbs sprang up

16. llieir species were inumerable Aff
<1 them have (l>e Mmu (or their lord
home uf these creepers and herbs came to
lie considered as Ambrosia and some came
lu be considered as i’oison (Jitiers that
were iieitlicr this nur that formed one class.

17. that is Ambrosia which gives im*
merliaie pleasure and joy to tti« uirnd
'lhai IS I’oison which lotiures the imi»J
t really by its smilt

i5 Know ogam tint Ambrosia 1* I ighly
Biisnicioirs and I' at I'oison is t ij.lily in-
niKpicioiit Alt the herbs are Ambrosia
roison IS bom of the energy of fire.


19 1 loecit please (he mmd and confer

(propriitv. Hence men of pious deeds
[ bestowed the name Sumanas on them


20 rfisfmfTstVnT 0 tf/pwvrry

effrrs flsweis 10 (lie criestials ft ids that llie
CTicstWi become pleased with I im, and as

tl r result of such 'satisfaction confer pros*
pent) upon fiun.

2 J. O kmc of the the Haitja* tfwso
ttlesvuU to whom wofsl ippers oiler flowers,
ttford uttering (tern naa.es the s.h.V. W-
r come pleased w.lh 0 e t flciers on account of
’ their devotion.


3} Ttie{Jer»Ji>:
Viovls and J<"ssess
should lx cfasied
t owttfi]


Mts) herbs are e( various
d ITrf cnl qaahtx Tl ey

OS ficitr, ludj, and


23 Lrslen to me as f teli y lu which trees
are useful for ptirposea of sacrifice and
whKfi are not so fiear also wtiat gar-
lands are acceptable to Asuras, and
ssliat are beneficial when oflcred tP the
cclestiafs.

24 1 shall also set forth in duo order
what gartandv are hired by (he Raitshasas^
svhai by the Uragas, what by the Yakshas,
wfiat by fiuman beings, and what by tfie
departed Alanes, >n proper order.

25 Flowers are of various kinds Some
are is-tJd, 5orn« are from trees wfuch grow"
nr the midst of human dwellin<s , some
belong to trees which never grow unfess
pUiKed on well-cultivated soil , some are
from (rees growing on irsomiiams . some are
from trees tvlncli are not pricUly , and some
from trees which are prickly. Fragrance,
beauty of form and taste also make grounds
of classification

36 i he scent ot flowers rs of two kinds,
agreeable and Jrsasree.ible. Those flowers
wi.acii fiave sweet smell should be oflered
to (he celestials.

27 Ihe fliwers p{ trees which have no
thorns are generally svhite nr color. Suds
flowers are Hlways aeeepisbte to the celes*
iwh, O lord.

28 A wise man should offer gartanda
of aqnaile flowers such as the lotus and Ihe
hke. to tlie Gandhaivas and Nag«s and
Yokdias.

39 Such plants and hetlA as produce
red flowers, as l>«ve keen scent, and as kre
' prrekiy, have been laid down tit the A(hor<
vans as fit for all acts of incaiilaliun foe
•■•|urmg enemtes.

30 Such flowers as have keen energy,
as aae painful to the touch, as grow on
trees and plants having lUoriis. and as arr
(ttber bloody-led or bUck, should bo
vQercd to (evil) spirits and unearitily
beings.

3(. Such flowers avpfetse (he rnmd and
Ixan, as are very agreesble when prosed,
0ffJ 0t juv fnftv Aewr

said, O lurd, to be worthy of bemg oflered

32 Such fl *wevs as grew eri cemeferies
and ere nalotia, or in pUces ded>c«tcd to
(ix Celeslials, shouhl not he brought and

. used (or ii>4rtia^e and oiler rites having
' growth and prosperity lor them ob|ect. or
lor acts of pleasure in searCy.

33 Such flowrts as grow on mountains
«nd in vales, and as ate beauiiful 10 look at '
and sweet »>ente J sliWd be oflered title
celestials, bp'mkhng them with sanja).
fiiic, sikU sweet flowers sI>ou'J tc dAy


rtAUABH^RATA.


oflered according lo tlie scriptural ordi- what sliould be the kind of Itghts tftrt
nances. should be offered.

34, The celestials become pleased with 45 Light is said lo be energy and fame
llie scent of flowers , the Yakalias and and goes upwards Hence the gift of ligntj
ItaUshasas with their Sight; the Nagas whicli ts energy, increases the energy oi


I beings with j men.


all three, oie , scent, siglil, and touch. There is a hell named Arrdhatama*.

35 Flowers, when offered to the celes llie period also of the Sun's southward
Hals please them immtdialelj. 1 h^y are coarse is considered as dark. For avoiding
capable of accomphslnng every object bj lliat hell and the darkness of tins period,
merely wishing us accomphshment As one should give lights during tliat

such, when pleased with devotees offering when the Sun is in northern sohsirce Such

them flowers, they cause all the objects an act ts highly spoken of by the good
cheris! ed b) their worshippers lo be »mme- Since, again, light has an upward

diately achieved. course and is considered as a remedy lor

36 Pleased, ihey gralify Ihetf worship* darkness, therefore, one should give ligl tS

pers Honored they make their worship* 1 Ins is the conclusion of the scriptures
pers enjoy all honors Disregarded and .g g,ving lights that Uf

insulted, they make those vilest of men to celestials have become gifted with beautfr
be ruined and consumed. energy, and resplendence. Dy abstention

37. 1 shall after this, speak to you of from such a deed, the Rakshasas ha« b«*
the merits of the ordinances about the gift come gifted with the opposite allnbute .
of incense. Know, O king of Asuras. that Hence, one sliould always give hghts
incenses are of various sorts Some of jjy g,ving lights a man becomes

them are auspicious and some inaus* with keen vision and resplendn'cr.

P'CWU** One wl 0 gives lights should not be li»«*“


49 f^y giving lights a man bewm

gifted with keen vision and resplendei'C •
One wl 0 gives lights should not be 1®®*


38. Some incenses consists of exudations wnh jealousy by others. ^’** ‘**'

Some are made of fragrant wood set on fire stiould not be stolen, nor pul out *■'
And some are artificial, being made by the given by others

liand, of various aritUes mixed together One who steals a lifib‘ become*

lleirscenliso two sorts, sue, agreeable Such a man has lo gr®pe

and disagreeable Listen to me as I des darkness and becomes shorn of resplend*
cnb. 111. ,ubi«t lully On. ivh. riv.. Iiglil, f'""’ "

39 All exudations except that of the beauty in the celestial regions lieear®
Buswciha serrata are agreeable lo the cries* of lights,

tMl, Ili,.ho».v.r ..rl.rn tl,,l]l..b«t«l 5,. a„o„r |,r|„ 5, n. fc,, sr.

5 ' '’‘“‘ 1 ?"?'“ '• ‘I'*' ”1 U.ls.mod,n- cl.nH.d b.lt.r „ bnmt N«

40 OI .11 Dl.iipa, ol 111. San cl.sj. lb. d.c.du.u, b.rb, ,■ burnt. O"' ‘"j";

Aqnil.r,. AR.IIocb. 1 , lb. bot li t, v«ry prap.'d)- ""d Rro.lb .bmld n.vrr ■>
Bctept.bl. 10 lb. Y.li>b.s, lb. R.ksb.u. pnt. Ib.l t”""'

.lid N.gas 1 he e.udalion of ibe Bo. crealnre.- ^

belli, s.rr.ll., flnd Ollier, of ibcsamecla... 3* Pbe man who destre* bi*

are mucli acceptable to the Dailayas. aggrandisement and prosperity should a •

ways give tl^liis at descents from mounia'® '
in roads iliroiri»li forests and inaceessil


41. Dfiupas made of il e exudaimn of the


Sliorea rohusta and ifie Pinus deodara. regions, under sacred trees standing m
mixed with various spirits of strong scent, midst of human dwellings, and m
arc, O King, acceptable to fiuman bein{,s ‘


4a Such Dhupas are said to imme-
diately please llie celestials, the Danavas,
and spirits. Besides these, ihere are many
other kinds of Dhupas used by men lor
purposes of pleasure or enjoyment.


mme* 53 The man who gives ligl f*
lavas, illnrntnes his race acq iires ptrriiy ®‘ f** ,
'r'*”y and tnulgenee of form Indeed,
in lor man, alter death, lives in tiie company ®
the luminous bodies in the sky.


43 the offer of flowers and the gift ol ,l,.pr.be to lou f''!

such Dhupas as yield graliflcaiionaie equal mitus. wnl, ule fn, ts they bnng about, «
in mens Vah offenngs made to the celesliol® *'


44 I stall now speak of the merits of
the gill of hghts, and wl o may give them
at what time and ns what manner, and


Vah offenngs made to ll
Yakshas, llie Uragas, hum
and Rakshasas


5S 1 hose unscrupulous and svi^ked mt'


ahushasana parva.


215


vlo eat without first serving Bralimanas
BnJ ce)est(>ils and guests and dnldrvn,
should be known as Rakshasas.

56 Hencci one should first ofter (he food
tine has got ready (o the celestials after
tiaving adored tl em duly with controlled
senses and rapt attention One should
offer the Vail lo the celestials, beirdtng i»s
head in respect.

57. The celestials are always supporied
by food that househt>lders offer I hey bless
such houses in which offerings are made
to them Ihe Vaksliasas and ftaksltasns
and Pannagas, as also guests and all house*
less persons, are supported by the iood
offered by liousefiolders,

58 Indeed, the celestials and the de*
parted Manes derive their suslenau(.e from
such olTerings. Pleased with such offerings
they please tite offerer in return with louge*
Vity and fame and riches.

59. Clean food, of sweet scent arid took,
mixed with milk and curds, should, along
with flowers, be offered to the celestials.

do. The Valrs that should be offered to
Vakshas and Kakshasas should be rich
wiih blood and meat, with wines and spirits l
accompanying, and adorned with fried '
paddy. !

61. Valis mixed with lotuses and Utpalas
ere very acceptable to the Nagas. Sesame
seeds, boiled iit raw sugar, should be offered
lo (he spirKs arid other uiieardily Oeriigs
6 j, He who never takes any food with*
out first giving a part of ittotheBrah*
manas end celestials and guesis, becomes
cntiiled to first portions of food, buck a
man becomes gifted with strength and
energy. Hence one should never take any
food without first offering a portion thereof
lo the celestial after adoring them wiih
respect.

63 One’s house always shines in beauty
on account of the household denies that
live m It. Hence, he who desires Ins own
advanerment and prosperily should adore
.lh.“ lini'vlioW rp-nds djv jifb-tii^ .Ih'in th.»
first poilfon of every food.

64 Thus did the learned |{av} 0}
Dlingu'srace discourse 10 Vail the c) lel
of the Asuras (hat discourse ryas rtcM
recited b) Menu to the Rislu buvarna* Su*
Varna, m his turn, recited it to Natada.

6s The celestial Riihi Narada recited
lo me the merits of the several acts men-
tioned Informed of those merits, do you.
O son, perform the several acts mentioned


CHAPTER XCIX.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Coiifmired.

Tudhislithira said

I. 1 .have, O cluef of the BhsrataS,
heard what the tneriCS which presenters of
flowers and tincense and lights acq lire, t
have heard you speak also of the merits
of a due observance of the orJiiisnces in
respect of ttie presentation of the Valt You
shoutd O grandfather, discourse to me once
more on this subject.

a Indeed, tell me, O Sire, once more of
the merits of presenting incense and tights.
Why are Valis offered on the ground by
householders.

Bhishma 8aid> —

3 Regarding it ts recited the old dfs*
course between Nahutlia and Agastya and
Shcigu.

4 Ihe royal sage Nahusha, O monarch,
having penances for wealth, acquired the
sovereignty of the celestial region by his

I own good deeds.

I 5 With conirolled senses, O Uhg, he
lived m the celestial region, engaged lit
doing diverse acts of both human and cefes*
tial natuie.

6. From that great kmg flowed various
kinds of human acts and various kinds of
celestial deeds, also, O king.

7—8 Ihe various rites with respect to
lie sacrtflcul Rre. Ihe collection of sacred
fuel and of Kush* grass, as also of flowers,
and the presentation of Vali COllsisling of
food adorned with fried paddy, and (lie
offer of incense and of light,— <all the e, O
monarch, occurred daily in the fiouse of
that great king white he lived mtheceles^
tiaf region, fndeed, though living in the
celestial region I e celebrated the sacrifice
of recnatioh and the sacrifice of meditation.

9 Arid, O chastiser el laes, Naliusha,
li-* h-xA **k“ .pfiK’snr.lIi!*

de ties, \ et adored alt the deities, as he used
to do (otmerly, with due rites and cere*
monies.

10. Sometime after, Nahusha reafsed
his position as the king of all the deities.
Ihisfilied liim wilt) pride From that time
all Ins deeds were suspended.

II, Filled with pride on account of the /

I boon he had received from all tlie eelesiult, \

! Mabusha caused the very Rlshts to bear
I him on their slwulders. On account, how. ’
I ever, of his abstention from all religious
I aav, ills energy began to wane.


2I&


' MAIlABtUttATA.


12 Til** tlrrte xvas very fortthich
Nahusba, filled willi arrogance, cnntinned
to emphy the foremost of Kishis, having
penances for wealth, as the bearers of his
vehicles.

13 He make the Risfns perform by
turns tins hiimilialing work. Ihe day came
when It was Agastya’s torn to carry the
vehicle, O Bharata.

14“'JS At that time, Bhngu that fore*
most of all persons conversant with Brahma
went to Agaslja while the latter was :
seated m his Irermitage, and addressing him i
said, — O great ascetic, why shout t we ■
patiently suffer such indignities infliLted on
us by tins wicked Nahusha who has become
the king of the deities.

Agaslya said —

16. How can I succeed frt cursing
Nahusha, O great Rishi? You know how
the Booii.giving (Brahman) himself has
given Nahusha the best ol boons. ,

t? Coming to the celestial region, the
boon that Nahusha prayed for, was that,
whoever would come within tl e range his
vision would, deprived of all energy, come
wiXliin his control.

18 The Self'born Brahman granted
turn this boon, and it is therefore that
niether yourself nor 1 have been able
to consume him Forsooth, it is for this
reason that none one else amongst the
foremost of Rishis lias been able to consume
or throw him doun from luselev^ted posi
tien,


*4 I shall lo-dny, in jonrVfirysU^h
re-establish the true India in his position,-^
him, vie , who has celebrated a litiiidreo
horse sacrifices,— having hniled the wicked
and sinful Naiiusha from that seat.

*5 1 hat impious king of the celestials

will to-day insult you by a kick on account
of his understanding being afflicted by fate
and for bunging about his own downfall
26 Enraged at such an insult I shall
to day curse that sinful wretch that enemy
of the Brahmanas, who has transcended an
restraints, saying,— Be you meUmorphosed


Before your ejes, O great ascetic, I
shall to-day hurl down on the Earth the
wicked Nahusha who shall be deprived 0
all power on account of the cries of /"«« h‘al
will be uttered from all sides.

28 Indeed. I shall hurl down Nahiislu
to-day that sinful man who lias beside'i
been stupefied by lordship and power 1
shall do tins, if you like it, O ascetic
39 Thus addressed by Bhrign, M't’’*'
vaimia’sson Agastya of unfading P'’"'*
and glor>, became highly pleased and Iree
from every anxiety.


CHARIER C

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CcniiHiitii.


19 Formarly, O lord, nectar was given
by Braliman to Nahusha for drinking
1 herefore we can do nothing to him

20. The great god, u appears, gave that
boon to Nahusha for plunging all creatures
into grief lhat wretched man behaves
most unrighteously towards the Brah-
manas.

21. O foremost of all speakers, tell us
what should be done under the circumstan-
ces Forsooth, I shall do what you will
advise.


Bhrigu said*—

22. It IS at the command of tlid Grand-
fattier lliat 1 have come to you with the
view of counteracting the power of Nahu-
sha who IS gifted with great energy but who
has been stupefied by fate.


23 That exceedingly wicked being who
has become tl eking of the cetesiials, will
to day yoke you to Ins car. With the help
of my power I shall to day hurl him down
icom his position as Indra on account of
his having transcended all restraints.


Tudhislithira said —

t How was Nahusha plunged into
iressT Hnw was he hurled down on U®
Earth? How, indeed, was he deprived 0'
Ihe sovereignly of the Celeslials ?
should recite euerythmg t6 me.

BUisbma said '

2 thus I did those two Rishis, '
Bhrigu and Agastya, talk with cac'i ot''* *
I have already told you how Na'iuyiOj
when he first become the king of f

uals, acted in a proper way Indeed. 1"
great royal sage performed alt liumaii an
ceUstial deeds.


3—4 Nahusha who had become t
king of the celestials, made gift* 0^ '

and properly deserved all other rites ol

similar nature — the due presentation
Valis and all rites as are performed 0
especially sacred days Pious acts a
always done by wise men, in bo*'* ,

world of men and lhat of the celesua V
Indeed, O foremost of kings if such *0 >

areobserved, householdersjalways succee jn

acqumiig prosperity and aggran<V«d^8''>


ANUSIIASAMA parva.


5 Even sticlt is Uic etteci of tlie gift o^
lamps and of incensp, as also of bows and
ptostratloiis, to tlie celestials

6 When food is coolc-d the first por-
tion thereof should be i ff-red to a Brati-
tnana The particular ofTHfings called Vali
should also be preseiUrd to the household
gods. I lie deities becorne pleased with
such gifts

J It IS also well hnown that the nea-
Siire of graiificaiion which the celestiaU
derive from such n(! nni's is a liundr>-d
tirnes as great as that which the louse-
holder I irnself i,els from making them.

8 Pious and wise persons make orTernig
of incense and hglits accompanjmg tl«m
with bows and prosiralioiis Such acts
always yield advancement and prosperity
to those il at do them.

9 fhose iites which the learned per-
form 111 course of (heir abhiiiont, and ntth
the help of waters accompanied ivilli bows
to the gods, always coninbute to the satis-
fiiclionof the celestials

to vVlien adored with proper riles, the
highly-blessed departed Manes, Itishis
(laving asceticism for wealih, and the house-
hold deities, all hecome pleased

If. Tilled iviih such ideas, Nahusha.
that great king, when he obtained the
sovereignty ol the celestials observed all
these rites and duties fraught with great
glory,

IJ Sometime after, ihe good fortune of
Naliiisha decreased, and as the outcome of
it, he neglected all these observances and
began to art in d fiance of all control in
the manner I liave already described.

13 Ihe king of the celestials, on ac-
count of his absieniion from observing the
ordinances about the ufTers of incense and
fight, began to decline in power.

14 ills sacrificial riles and presents
WPic obsiructed hy Itaksh^sas, It was at
tins time that Naiuisha yoked that foremost
of ftisfiis sue, AgHstya, (o Ins car.

15 Possessed of great strength Nahusha
smiling all H e ssiiile set ltia{ great Kishi
speedily to (be (ask, cimmanding hiin to
tiesr the vehicle from the hanks of itie
Saraswati At t)>is time, Ifhrigii, possessed
of great energy, addressed Ihe sort of
Mitravaruria, saying —

16— jy Do >01 shut jniir eyes lilJ 1
enter nitci the matted incka on y>>ur 1 ead —
litving said this, tlhiis^iiol unfadirtg glory
and great energy entered into It e malted
locks of Agaslya who s'ood tliU like a
wooden post, tor hutting kiisg Natiusha
from ^ throne of Heaven. Soon after

/ .-s


Nahiislia saw Agaslya approach him for
bearing Ins car.

tS Seeing the king of the Celestials,
Agaslya addressed him, saying— Do jou
yoke me to your vehicle forthwith ! To
what region <hall 1 bear you

19 O lord of the celestials, I shall bear
you to the spot which >au may be pleased to
direct I hus addressed by him, Nahusha
caused the ascetic to be )oked to Ins car.

20 Qhrigu, who was living withm (he
matted locks of Agascta, became highly
pleased at this act of Nahtisba. He took
care not to look at Nahuslia.

21 Fiifty acquainted with the power
wliicli the illustrious ^fdhusha had acquired
on account of the boon winch Brahman had
gr-inted him, Blirigu acted (litis Agaslya
also though treats by Nahusha in (hra
way, did not yield ta anger,

23— 2S 1 hen, O Bharata king Naliusha
urged i^gastya on with Ins goad. Ihe
pious Risbi did not still yield to anger,
the lord ol (he Celestials himself enraged,
(hen struck Agaslya on the head with hts
left foot Wlien the Rislii was thus struck
on the head, Dhrigu, who was living williin
Agastya’s matted locks, became incensed and
cursed (he sinlul Nahusha, saying,— Since
you have struck with your loot on the head
of this great Uulii, do you, ihetefore, fall
down on the Earth, changed into a snake,
O wretch of wicked understanding '—Thus,
•mprecaieii by Bhrigu who had not been
seen, Nahuiha, forthwith became transform^
«d into a snake and dropped down on (ho
Larili, O chief of Blurata’s race I— If, O
moua'ch, Nahusha had seen Bhrigii, the
Utter would not then have succeeded, by
his power, in hurling the former down on the
Earth. On account of the various gifts that
Nahuslia had madn, as also fns penances
and religious observances, thougli hurled '
down on tlie Earth, O Icing, he succeeded
in keeping his memory, lie then began to
propitiate Ulirigu with a view to get rid
of the curse.

29. Agaslya also, filled with mercy joined
Naiiusha in pacilying Bhri^u for the lermi-*
nation ol tl e curse. At last Bhngu felt
mercy for Nahusha and arranged lor the
working out of the curse.

Bliriga said

3«. There will appear a king (on Errifi)
of the name of Yud< ishthira, the foremost
of I IS race. He will rescue you from (his
curse ’—Having said Ihis, the RmIii dis-
appeared from the presence of Nahusha.

31. Agaslya afso, cf^ great energy,
having thus performed (lie busmets of the


2lS


MAIIAOllARATA.


true Indra, thal arbilralor of a hundred
sacnfices, returned to liis liermitace, adored
of alt members of the regenerate order.

32. Vou have, O Uinfj, rescued Nabrnha
Bhrigu’s curse. Rescued by ^o«. he

ascended to ibe region of Braliman before
your ejes.

33. As regards Btirigu, having hurled
NaJiusIia on ttie Earth, he went lo the re*
gion of Brahman and informed the Grand-
father of It.

34. riie Grandfattier having called
Indrahacli, addressed \be cclestrals, nay-
tiig,—Ye C'Jestials, tlirougli the boon I had
granted him, Naliuslia had obtained the
sovereignty of Heaven.

35. Deprived, however, of that sover-

eignty by llie enraged Agastya, he has
been hurled on the Eartti, O celestials,
you vtdl r\ot succeed tit living vrithouc a
king. I

36--38 Do you, therefore once more I
inst-ill Indra as the kmc ol Heavert — llte j
c^eslials Tilled with joy. O son of I'rtlha, re* 1
plied to the Grandsire who sairl so to them, j
sny ing,— ‘So be It, Bialnnan then. O best I
ol kings, irtsiatled Indra tn the soveretgiiiy '
of Heaven. hUdeonee more (lie king of
the celestial*, Vasava began to sinne in
beauty and re<-plendenc«. I his is what
took place formerly through the transgres*
stons of Neliuslia.

39 On account, fiouever, of the merit*
he had accinired through deeds of the kind
I bate mentioned, Nahiidia succeeded in
oncv more regaining Ins }o%t position
fUnce. wlien evening comes, Imuicholdeis
should gil|e UgTits.* "*■

40. 'Ibe giver of lights 1* sure to win
celestial vision alter deaili Givers of bglil
become as resplendent as the full moon. .

4t. Ihc giver of lights becomes (.died
with beauty of foim diid sirenxlh lor years
corresponding witli the nunitKr of IwinkUs
lor which the lights given b) iuni bum or
bUie.


CHAPinu Cl.

(ANlIllASANIKA PARVA).—
CentiiiueJ.

VudltUhtliira jatilt—

I Wr.eie do il.ixe loolnh, wrelcled
a»d sidul men go. O king, whosiealot
m «rr'“P*’»'c suwU aiiiUci as belong to
Urahin.ius 7


Bhishma saitl

I shall, about it, O Blnnli. rccilf to
ifie conversation between a ChanJaU
and a low Kslialnya.

This Kshatriya said J—

3 You seem, O Clundala, to be old m
yeirs, but your conduct appears to be
that of a boy ' Your body is besmeared
with tite dust raised by do^s and asses, b d
witliout minding that dust you are anxious
about ll e little drops of milk lliat have la'l*

upon your persons.

4. It IS plain that such acts as are cen-
sured by the pious are ordained f'*''
Chandata, \Vny, indeed, do you seek to
wash off the spots of milK from

The Cbandala said;—

5— <5. Formeily, O king, certain k' ®
belonging to a Brahmins were
While they were being earned awai, so
milk from their udders dropped .
number of Soma pt mts that grew by*'
road-side. Ihose Br.ahmanas w*'® v
the loicO of the plants thus

tutlU. as also the king who celebrated

saoifice in wind) that Soma was ‘I'"'*'*"’ ,
to sink »n hdl Indeed, for Invnig t"“»
Appropriated something ,, .1,,

Brahmana, ll>e king With all 1*'®
manas who bad helped htnt had to ifo
liell

7, All llw)se mew rUo, Brahmanai a®
Kshaiiiyas, who drank milk or
Imlier or Cords, in the paUce of the •>'
wiro had stolen the Brahmana's kme, «
to fail into tiell.


8 The stolen kine also, shaking thr^j
bodies, killed with their milk the son* *

eiandsDWS ol those who had stolen theio,
itss the king and the queen tllhoi'C'' ‘

Utter treated (he annuals, with great C*
and atlention,

9 A* for mjself, O kmg, I used to
live the life ol a celibate m lh*l ^,'’,3
•sliere »lic-,c kme were placed after they ■'
been stolen nw ly. 1 he food I had ,, t
begging U-iitiie sprinkled over W‘lh t
■iiilk of ihi>se‘liiiic.

10 Having I, ikrn thtl f’Od. O J''’’*
lti>a. 1 hate, in this hfe, become a t-’’*
daU. the king who ii id Siolen the k>K<
betonpitig to a Urahmana came by
wcetvlied end.


toprlate aii)thing beijnpmg to a

la. Maik, to Mrliat state I am red«»rs


vii account ol my basing 1


AMUSHASANA PARVA


been spr.uWed over will' milk belong- i
«iK 10 a Braliinana. ^

ri U IS lor Ill's reason llul Soma pUnls

should never be 'VriieK

Hey wUo sell iheboma pUtU are held in ,

low esteem by ibe wise. j

13 Indeed, O son, they wlia purchase
Soina and they who sell it, both sin m
the hell c.illed Uaurava after dealU.

lhat man who. possessuie a know-

tedoe of ihe Vedas duly sells Soma be

conges m ins next life a usuer and speedily

meets with destruction.

\ t?-i6 For ihree-hundred times he has

to sink into hell and become changed into
an animal 'which subsists upon human

S.,v.nj a p.r.on. P-J;.

"'JJ'’:. Ur/,

5 ho» th.i p„d<. ;• pi

Is the heaviest Mark this dog. so smlul

and disagreeably pale and lean |

15—33 It IS through pride that living
c, pom. by such
As lor misoll, I ”>! S"'" „ 'n

f miiy in a former birili of mine O
lord ^snd I wa« a perfect master of all
btsuchcs of kno®l.dge«tiO .11
1 knew the itnmensuy of all these fauUs,
but moved by pride. I became blmded and
ate tlie meat attached to the ve.‘ebr.

columns of animals. On

conduct and suJi food, I have come by

this state Mark, the reverses engendered

by Timet Like a person

L"""a 'So o “ ri"

... I cnoot .oo rlo.rly how I m.y
succeed m punfyinR myself *

nu amount of some meritorious deed of a
former iV I have not lost the memoyr of
my previous births ,

,e O king, I throw myself on >our
11 ask \ou Do sou remove my

EL.u.'/ri,r^'™h-o'Uhh:i

iE\“.sr\o”'^Un“o 7 '»”

Chandalahood.

TlioKsbatriyasaid:—

1 ,6 Know. O Cl.sndala the means by

i wi tch >*-u nuy be able to accimre libera-


C19

lion By renounemg your life for the sake
of a Brahmana, you may come by a
desirhbfe end.

, 47 By throwing your body on the fire

lof battle as a libation lo the beasts and
birds of prey for the sake of a Brahmana.
indeed by renouncing
inav achieve liberation. By no Other
means wHl you succeed iii acquing it.


Bltishma said

aS Thus accosted, that Chandala, O
5C<woh.r ol ea.mio. pour.d I"' '‘lo-b'e»"s
as a libation on the fire of battle for the
sake of protecting a Brahmana s ''"'•'C*
and as U»e result ol that act attained lo a
very desirable end.

20 Hence, O son, you should always
protect the property of the
O chief of Briarata's race, you wish. O you
of mighty arms, an end consisting of eternal
happiness.


CHAPTER CM.

(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Centtnutd.

Tndbisbthira said —

I. O grandfalher, it has been said
that all righteous men attain to the same
region alter deaili It « true O Bharaia,
that there is difference of position among
U emT

Bbisbma said —

3 By different acts, O son of Pfitha,
men acq ure different regions. Iheywlio
arc richieous in conduct acquire blissful
regions while they who are sinful acquire
miserable regions.

3 Regardingit is cited the old discourse,

O son, between the ascetic Gautama and
Vasava *

4 A certain Brahmana named Gau-
tima, mild and selbcenlrolled and with all
Ins senses under complete control, saw an
infant elephant that had list his mother
and that was liigtily checlcss on that
account.

5 Full of mercy and steady in the ob-
se^ance ol Ins vows, the ascetic nursed
that infant animal. After a long lime the
little beast gicw up into a large and power-
lul cliplianl.

6 One day, liu’ra, in the guise ol Ling
Dltiiiorashtia, scued that pOACtfuI elephant


220


MAIIABIIARATA


wliicli was as huge as a lull and from whose
rent temples the juice was trickling down
7—8. Seeing llie elephant dragged
away, the great ascetic Gautama of rigid
vows said to king Dhritarashtra,— O un-
grateful Dhnlarashtra, do not rob me of
this elephant. It is considered by me as a
son and 1 have reared it with much pain
It IS said that between the pious, fiieudship
IS formed by merely the exchange of seven
words. You should see, O king, that the
sm oi injuring a ftiend dues not affect you

Gatitama said —

g — to. You should not, O king, lake
away by force this elephant which bungs me
my fuel and water, which protects my her-
mitage when I am awaj, which is exceed-
ingty docile and obedient to hts tnsiiuctor,
which carefully does wlial Ins preceptor
commands, which is mild and well broken,
and which is grateful and very dear to me
Indeed, you should not lake it away without
caring for my protestations and cries.

Dliritaraslitra said

II. 1 shnll give you a thousand kine, a I
hundred maid-servants, and five hundred I
pieces of gold. I shall also, O great Kishi,
Give you various other kinds of we»lih
\Vhat use can Gralimanas have with ele-
phants T

Gautama satd —

13. Keep, O kihg, your klne and m'aid-
servants and coins of gold and various gems
and various other kinds of riches \Vu <t, O
king, have Brahmanaa to do with riches

Dliritaraslitra said

13 Drahmanas have no use for ele-
phants. Indeed, O learned Urahmaiia.
elephants are intended lor Kstmnyas In
taking away an animal, via , this foremost
of elephants, for my use, 1 cannot t>e const
dered as committing any sin l>o you
cease obstructing me thus, O Gautama.

Gautama eaid

14. O illustrious king, going even (o
tint region of Yams where the pious live
happily and the Sinful in grief, 1 shall take
from you this my elephant.

Dhritarashtra said:—

15. They who are destitute of religious
acts, they who have no religious Huh and
are atheists, they who are sinful and arc
always engaged in«p1essing tlieir onMiiics
enty they I ave to go to the region of Varna
arid suffer ilie misery he iiinicls. Dhrita-
tavt iia shall go to a higher region and not
there.


Gautama said •—

16. Men are restrained in the region of
Yama. No falsehood can be told there.
Only truth prevails in that place. I here
the weak persecute the strong Going
there 1 shall compell you to yield up tins
elephant to me.

Dhritarashtra said ■—

17, Only those persons who, intoxicafeJ
with pride, treat their eldest sister and
father and mother as enemies, have to go, O
greatasceiic, to such a region I shall go to
a higher region Indeed, Dlintarashlra
sliall not have to go there.

Gautama said — ' '

i3 Those Ill^h1y blessed ones go to the
region called MdiiH-iknit, of king Vaishra-
vaiia for enjoying ] ly and comfort. Ihere
live Gandharvas ditd Yakshas and Apsaras
Going even tl ere, O king, 1 shall compell
you to yield up this elephant to me.

Dhritarashtra said —

19 Ihose persons who consider

Iity to guests as a vow, who observe good
vows, who give sheher to Brahmanas, »''d
who eat what remains after disinbunon
among Ins dependants, adorn the
called Mandakini of Kuvera. I shall not
go tlere, fora higher region is reserved
for me.

Gautama said •—

20 If you go to those chimimg wooK
decked with fViwers, which 5l.*nd
summit of Meni, winch echo ivith the melO"
dious notes of UinnarK, and winch a'*
graced with be-nitiful Jumviis of wiJ*"
spreading branches, I sliall proceed evtO
Ihere and cainpell you to yield up tins
pliant to me

Dhritarashtra said —

21—22 1 hose Brahmanas who have mil'I

dispositiuns, who are devoted I) Iniih,
are endued wiih icriplural knowledge.’*!’®
•re compassionate to all creatures, • '®
Study, the Puranas with all the fnsiories.
pour hbaiions on the sacred fire and
gifts of honey to tlie Bfahinmas, go to rui:
regions, O great Rishi ’ I shsll go
higher region. Indeed, DliriiarashlM ***.

not go there If you are acquainted wi*

any other well-known region of lisppmrth
speak to me, for | stuIl go even llmre.

Gautama said

23 If you go to 4he woods owned by
Naradt ami held dear by him, wl ich »»'
adorned wnh fljwcrs and which echo .
ihe ratUdijuj sengs of the pnnsc <*


ANUSltASANA PAfiVA


231


Kmnaras, and winch are the eternal habi-
tation of Gandharvas and Apsaras, I shall
follow j'ou there and compel! you to yield
up this elephant to me.

Dhritaraahtra said

34. ihey who never beg, they vlto culti-
vate music and dancing, and alwHys move
about happily, proceed to such repiuns O
great Ristil) 1 shall |>q to a region which is
higher. Indeed, Oliritarashtra shall not
Jjaie ta golksie,

Gautama said —

25—26 If you go to that region where
the Utiara-Kurus LUze in beauty and pass
tlieir days happily, O king, in the company
of the very cefesltdis, where thote beings
who originate from fire, those who oiiginate
from water, and those who originate from
mountains, live happily, and where Shakra
rams down the fruition of every desire,
and where women live in perfect freedom,
uncontrolled by rules of any kind regulating
their conduct or motions and where there is
no feeling of lealousy among both the sexes,
— ifjou go lliere. even tliere shall I go
and cotnpell you to yield up this elephant
(0 me.

Dhritarashtra said

27—28 Tliose men who are freed from
desire for all articles of en|0)iiient. who
abstain from meat, who never take up the
rod of punishment, and never inflict the least
harm on mobile and immobile creatures, who
have formed themselves the soul of all crea.
lures, who never accost others by pronoun-
cing blessings upon them, who are entirely
freed from the idea of mmeness, who are
shorn of attachments for every llniig, who
view profit and loss as also ptaise and
. blame in equal light, only those men, U

great Ilislii, go to such regions 1 shall go

to a hi,^htr rraio" Indeed, Dhritarashira
shall not go there.

Gaaiama satd '

29 Next 10 these shine in beauty those
eternal regions, full of excellent pc'fumes
wtiich are tree from passions of every tmd
and which are destiliile of sorrow. These
form the abode of (he great king goma If
you go there, even there shall i proceed
andcompcll you lo yield up this elephant
to me.

Dhritarashtra said •—

3a_3i. niose men who always make
gilis without receiving any gift, «ho never
accept any service frtJm others, wljo possess
hoiliu g which Hicy cannot give IQ a worthy
pc(:oi>,s who arc hoiritablc (o alt creatures.


I who are inclined (0 show favour to every
one, wfio are of forgiving dispositions, who
'never speak ill of others, wlio protect all
creatures by covering them with mercy,
and wlto are always righteous itt their con-
duct, only those men O great Itislii, go
to such regions I shall go to a higher
region Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not
go there.

Gautama said

32 Next to these shine in beauty other
regrons fkacare eterriaf free from passtan
and Darkness and sorrow, and which he at
the loot of (lie great S<m Gad ll iou go
there, even lliere shall I go and compell you
to yield up this elepliant to me.

Dhritarashtra said:—

33 — ^3t- lliose -men who altenlivefy
study (he Vedas, who are given to the ser-
vice of iheir preceptors, who observe pen-
aoces and excellent vows, who are firm in
truth, who never utter words of disobedience
Of enmity to their preceptors, who are always
alert, and ever ready in the service of elders
and preceptors,— Hhey go. O great Rishi,
to such regions, they who are pure who are
gifted with cleansed souls, who are of Con-
trolled speech, wiio are firm in truth and
who are well versed in the Vedas. ] shall
proceed to a higher region. Indeed, Dlift-
(arashtra shall not go there.

Gantamasaid —

35 Next to those are the eternal regioi s
which shine in beauty, which aiQ full of
excellent perfumes, which are free from
passion, and winch are desiiliiie of every
sorrow I hey form the abode of thrfgreat
king Varuna, If you proceed there, even
there shall I go and compell you to yield up
(his elephant (0 me.

Diiritaraslitra said —

36—37 Those mo who adore the celes-
tials by observing the vow called Chatur.

' (irary^, petioem a iiundred and (en
sacrifices, who pour libations every day on
ttieir sacred fire wiih devotion and iaitli for
three years according to the ordin'inces
declared in the Vedas, who perform wiiliout
! besiiahon of all duties, who wwlk steadily
; along the way trod by the pious who
' steadily sustain the Course of conduct fol.

I lowed by the righteous sonled,— only (hey
I goto such regions. I sl<alt go to a Ingher
I region. Indeed, Dhritarashira shall oci go
, there.

Gautama said:—

33. A bove them are the regions of Indra,
free from passion and sorrow, which are
diflistdi «( access and coveted by all men.


MAttABUAltATA.


Comg even lo ihe aboJe of Indra himself
ol great energy, I shall, U king, compel you
to jield up this eleptiaiit to me.

DhrvtatasUtra said —

39 He who lives for a hundred jears,
tvlio IS gifted tvith heroism, who studies the
Vedas and who celebrates sacriRces wiili
devotion, indeed, such men proceed to the
region of Shakra I shall go to a higher
region, Indeed, Dliritarashtra shall nut go
there.

Gautama said

40 Above the firmament are the regions
of the Prajapatis, ol superior happiness,
abounding in ever} happiness, and shorn of
sorrow. Uelonging to those powerful ones
from whom the creation has originaied the}
ore coveted by nil persons II you go ihert.,
even ilieir shall I go and compell you to
yield up this elephant to me.

Dhritaraslitra said *—

41. 'Ihose kings who have bathed upon
th;p lermination ot tlie Ra|HSU)a sacnficc, 1
who are gifted with righteous souls. wi< ■ I
have protected their «uh}reis propeily. ond
wlio hate washed their limbs with punfied
stater upon the terimnatiOM of the Muse,
saenfiee, go to such regions. Indeed
Dhriiarashtra shall not go tliere.

Gautama said:—

41. Meat lo those, shme in heaiity those
eternal regions, full ot delicious perf jmes.
freed from passion, and transcending nil
sorrow. 1 hose are the regions of kme, very
hard lo gel in, svhere oppression c»n never
be If you go there, I shall go even there
and compell jou to yield up this elephant
to me.


Dhntaraslitra said

4J~-U lie win, having s ihoiKsnd
klnc. gives ansy a hii 1 IreJ kine esery Jear,
or living a liiindied kme gives a«T» tru
every year lo the l>*-st of l.is piwer. or
possesvi g only (en or ev^en (lee kn»e gives
away tl errfiom one C.iw, ai d they whvgne
a nialiice ol 1 a^e pracii.iug t?»e vow ol
ctlOjrcy alt t .e.f day,. He

luiKliont el It e VeJts. and wlm. K»b*d *«'•
enrtgy of mind go to sacie i waters and
Shiiiiti, hvc luppily III the region ol kine
45—4*1. Tley »l o po to Prsbhvsa and
M.iiaia.the laVrs ol I'oslikafa, the targe
called MaUsisara itie sicted forest ol
fsmimraha, ValiKlj, lUrstoya. Ganga,
s >syavh>rat,Vlpsvh>, Sthut»»«tuWj fviivHni.
J*Ki f VC Micrv (of t> e I'uni.b). the rMcnvive
t.k, calivj suhaI.raJt, f’ij.n.il. Ka«»h.v,.
uluiDpa, t>araswat>, Dibladaat’, and ka-


muna, — indeed iIkjsc illuslndus nrshtmrji,
firm in the observance of vowv, who go to
these sacred wniers, — go to llie regions cf
which you speak Gifted witli celestial
b idles and adorned vvuh celesual gatUiidSt
those blessed iiidiiiduals, always emiciing
the sweetest perfiines, go lo the regions of
]oy Indeed, Oliritarashtra shall not go
there.


Gautama Baid —

49 — ^st. Nest to tliese are regions where
there IS no fear of tlie letst cold or heal, no
liunger, no thirst, no pun, no sorrow, no joj,
MO one who H agreevble or disagreeable, no
friend, and no enemy no decrepitude and no
death, and wtierc there is neither virtue nor
sin Gimi;, even to that region which is
freed from passion, winch IS full of hippi*
Mtss. and where there is wisdom and the
quality of Saitwv, — indeed, going *'’ 5 '’
liiat sacred abode of the self*creale iJrah-
I man — 1 slnll compel you to yield “P * *’*
I elephant to ine.

1 DhntarABbtra said


.......uviiis, who arc Rifted with

souls, who steadily observe the
vows, who are given to Yog* which 'S
funtome ol the pacification of the rmndi *'
wlio have acquired the happiness of »
— il>o«e persons possessed of the O'*, 1?

Saiiwa— come lo the sacred region pf f*^*. *
man O great ascetic, you shall "
able to discover Ohniarashira there.


Gautama said —

S|. There where the foremost of R*’
ihaniaras is lung, where altars are cover*
wiUi the svered Iviivha blades, for the C*w*
lirMimn r>f Pimdaiika saciifices, there

boma.drmkiiig llrahinaiias sojourn on cs

drawn by excelf-'iit horses, going e*‘
there I shall compel joU to yield “P*'
elephant.

55 I tl.iik you are the destroyer^
Vfiiva tia.ileg.J who Ins celebrated


undred
t» r nigh all the iri.»


engaged

. . of the universe •

lope t have not. ilirough mental ’"C»»n* *
cuininined any UuU by tl*e word* I h*»
addressed you.

The God of a hundred sacrifice*

said —

5, V.., 1 «m 1

canii l>e sen ng this elephsnt I
you. Do yon command me. I slull
tnritutcly aceomphvh all tlut >0** uia) ^
pleavcd lo say.

Q.antama laid

Z'l, Uo joj cue ne, O S *' tl *' *


AKuSfiASANA PARVA.


22 $


CeleMial^, Oiis wliite eleplianl that is ^
JuiHnfj for It IS only ten years of age I
liave raised it as a child of my own. Living
in this forest, it lias grown under my eye
and has been lo me a dear companion Do
you set free tins my cliild that you have
seizi'd and wish to take away.

The god of a hundred sacrifices
said : —

5$. fills elephant that has been a son,
lo you, O foremost ■>( Braiimaiias, comes to
yon loofmig wistfully at you. See u smelts
)ont feet with nostrils My salutations
to you. Do you pray for iny well'being.

Gautama said

59. O king, of theeelesiiah, 1 do always
ihinlt of your good f always offer you
worslnp. Du you also, O Shakra, impart
your blessings to m'e Given by you, 1 ac*
c«pt (h)> elephant.

The God of n huodred sacrifices
said —

Co Amonjist ah those great and fore*
most of llishis ivf 0 Hrmly follow (ruth and
who have the Vedas planted in their heart,
you alone have been able (0 recognise me. |
llierefore 1 am exceedingly pleased with
you,

6t, Do you, therefore, O Orahmana,
coma with me speedily, accomyamed by
this your son, Vou are worifiy of going to
various regions of great happiness, wilUout
the delay of even a single day,

,BhJshtaa said —

62, H iving SJid these words, the holder
of the iliuoderbolt, taking Gsiilama with
him and placing Inm before, along with his
son, sio, that elephant, went to Heaven,
that IS difiiculc of attainment by even the
pious,

63. He who would listen to 0 ns history
every dayortvoiild recite it, controlling his

AxUib*. wutl ,^.0 J^/-tvr,vy,wwoi'
Brahman even as Gautama Inmself.


CHAPIEU CIH.

(ANUSIIASANIKA PARVA).—
Caiiftn ueJ,

Tudhishtbira said

I. You liavc described to us the various
hinds of gift, tranquillity of soul, Iruilt,
meicy, couieiitment with one's manicd wife,
end lhe*riieri(s of gift.


2. You know very well, O grandfather,*
that tlieie is nOtl iiig whose power is supe-
rior to that of Feiijnces Vuu should ex*
pisiit to us what foims the highest pen*
ance* ^ ^

Bbishma said

3 1 tell you, O Viidhishihira, that one

acquires a regions of happine-s according
to the nature pi penances he piacitses.
linsiswhat 1 hold, U son of Knnti, tivat
there IS no Penance superior to abstention
from food,

4. Regarding it is recited the ancient
discourse between Bhagiratlia and the illus*
trious Oraliman .

5. We have heard, O Bharala, that
Bhagiraiha attained to that legion which is
supeiior to that of the celestials of Line, and
of the Rtshis.

6. Seeing this, O motiarch, the Grand,
father Biahman, addressing Bhagiraiha,
S/tid,— How, O ChfiKi'aiha, have lou at*
lamed lo this region that is so liard to
get at.

y. Neither the celestials, nor Gsndhar*
vas. nor mankind, O Bhagiraiha, succeed
III coming here witliout having periormrd
I the severest austerities How, indeed, have
' you come by (Ins fegion.

Bhag^iratha said '

8 1 used to make gifts of hundred thou*
sands of gold coins to ilie Brahm«nas pr,*c*
Using the voiv of celitiVey all the while. It
IS not by dint of the merit of ihose gifts,

0 teamed one, tliat J iiaie acquired tins
region.

9 1 celebrated the Ekaratri ( one-
night's} sacrifice (consisting of fasts apd
gilts) for ten limes, and the PancharaCri
(five .nights') sacrifices for as many times.

1 perf ormed eleven limes the Fkadashrairi
sacrtrice. 2 performed a hundred times
the great sacrifice ol Jyotishtoma. It is
not, lowever, tli rough tie merits of (hose

's'icnifi.-w iWaV uv%pmvvj'i‘ihyrrgiuir

of liappiness.

to. Fora hundred ye»rs J Jived connnu*
ously by tlie side oi the sacred Jalmavt, all
the ivlnlc performed {lie severest austenites.
Ikere I made t'lfis lo the Brahmanas of
thousands of males and nuniberJess female
slaves.

II. By the side of the Pushkara lake I
made gifts lo the Bral manas, (or a hundred
ttiousand limes, a hundied thousand horses,
and two hundred thousand kine.

t2. I also gave away a thousand women
o( great beauty, eacli adorned With golden
moons, and sixty ihoussnd more, decked


MAUAfillARAtA.


224

ivitli ornaments of pure gold. It is not,
liOuevert ttirouglt the inetiis of those deeds
that I have suceeded In acquiring these
regions.

13 O lord of the universe, performing
those sacTifiies known as Qosava, I gave
away ten Arvndas of Icine, presenting each
Brahmana with ten kine, each of whom
was accompanied with her calf, each of
whom gave milk at the time, and with each
of whom were given a vessel of gold and
one of white brass for milking her,

14 Celebrating many Soma sacriBces.

1 gave away to each Drahmana ten khie
eacli of whom gave milk and each of whom
had brought forth only her Brst calf, besides
making presents to them of hundreds of
kine belonging to iliat kind wliich ts known
by the name of Rohlni,

15 1 also gave away (0 the Brahmanas
twice ten Prayutas of oilier kine, all giving
milk, It IS not through the merit of those
gifts, O Brahman, that I have succeeded
in acquiring to this region of happiness.

16 1 also gave away a hundred thou*
sand horses of the Valhika breed, ail of
white complexion, and adorned with garlands
oi gild It IS noi, however, through the
merits of those deeds that I have acquired
this region,

17. 1 gave also eight creres of golden '
coins 10 the Brahmanas, O Brahman, and
another ten crores also, in each sscriRce that
1 celebrated It is not, however, ibrough
the merits of those deeds that ( have ac*
quired tins region of liappineis.

t8 , I also gave away seventeen crores of
horses, O Grandfather, each of green color,
each having bl-rck ears, and each adorned
With garlands of gold.

19 I also gn\e away seventeen thou*
sand I uge elephants having teeth as large
as plough-shares, each having tliose whirls
Oil us body, wt ich are called Padmas, and
each bedecked with garlands of gold.

JiP gavtr away- Anv Alxmvirmf «.v>v. ^
Grandfaiher, whose parts were made of gold,
and which were adorned with various iKna-
* merits of gold.

21. 1 also gave away seven thousand
Other cars wilii 1 orses yoked to each. All
the I orses that were >o<ed to them were
adorned wiili oniaineiils of gold lliose
cars represented the presents of a sacrifice
and were oi exactly tliat kind winch is nidi*
cated in the Vedas

22. In the ten great Vajape^a sacriRces
that t celebrated, 1 gave away a tliomand
heroes each gilled with the power of Indra
himself, Judged by their prowess and the
sacrifices they had celebrated.


2'^— 24. Spending a vast sum of money,

0 Grandfather, and celebrating eight
Rajsshya sacrifices I gave away to Ihe
Brahmanas who offli.iated in them, a thod*
sand kings whose necks were adorned
with garlands of gold, after having defeat-
ed them 111 battle It is not, however,
through the merits of those deeds that I
have acq iired this regi -i.

25 In those sacrifices, O Lord of the
tiitiverse I made presents as profuse as the
stream of Ganga herself. Each Brahmana

1 gave two thousand elephants decked with
gold, as many horses adorned with golden
ornaments, and a hundred Villages of H'S

, best kind.


26—27. Indeed, I gave these thrice W
each Brahmana observant of penances,
living on regulated diet, adopimg tr*”*
qmlltly of soul, and controlling !' 1

lived for a long time on the breast
Himavat by the side of that |f,.

irresistible current was borne by M* '
deva on his head It is not ,1,,*

merit of these deeds, O grandfather, t
I have acquired tills region.

28 Throwing the Shami, I wofshipp*
the gods 111 numberless such
are completed m course of a single day. a
such others as take twelve days for c ]
pleiing. and Alhers still as can be W™P ,,,,
III thirteen daWs, besides many Pundari
I have not acquired this recioil through t"®
nieiits of any of those sacrifices. ^

39 1 gave to the Brahmanas

thousands of white bulls, each possesse *

a beautiful hump, and each having 0
Its horns covered wiih gold,
also gave beautiful wives whose necks
adorned with chains of gold.

30. I also gave away masses of ^
and wealth of other kinds. I ^ave

hills of eems and valuable stones I 8 ^
away Villages, thousands in mirtibW •
filled with wealth and corn.


JJ'iViV tfiV my sensev athnid
gave away the Brahmanas a |,t

thousand kme each of whom had brouB
forth only her first calf, at many g
sacrifices which I celebrated H
liowever, through the merits of those ot
that 1 have acquired this region.


32 I worshipped the celestials '
sacrifice that is completed m eleven o*J
Twice I worshipped them m saciifices ‘ ,
are completed in twelve days. 1 worship?*
them also many a time in the
fices. I performed the Arkajans
sixteen times, ll is not through the
of those deeds that I have acquired t
region, *


I^HUS^ItASANA PARVA.


M \ *Hfl CavB esc'i Bra1im*na * fofttt
tjf K*ncfiatia (re«% t>tce(idiii< (or * Yojana
Qn rVrry vide, and tvilli v<«c1i iree aducncd
'Mlh^^wets and Keim tt h nol Uirough
the rntT^i't of Itut deed tliat 1 have acquired
lliSsretiton

3^ P'lf ihirli jears tvlihhMftparfecJ-
ly ^leed fiom rfiiRer, 1 observed ihc lura*
ysfta vnw that lua Very superior merit, and
Vave atvay to the Ur-dlimanaa every day
time liUiidred iune.

35. tiideed, O I nrd of the umverse,
every one ol lliose kiiie bMon|;ed ta tite
Robin) species dint i.ave milk nt the tune
I gave them away U is not ibrongh the
merits of (hose deeds, O kmit of the deities,
that t have acqnued tins regiun.

35. I adored tlnrty fires, O Brahman,
Vrery day. I 'Wursliippei) t)>e celesuats ti>
eit:1it sacrifices ni wiiRh the (at of all
ttnimafs rvas puurixf «u (h« fire I worship'
fled tlieii) in seven sacrificeH tn wlncH the
(at at human beings wn> pooreii on tlie
fuf.

37. t adored tittnt m a llionsand and
liventy'Oii;>it V>shw,i] t srcrideet. !t>s)rot
throBitli the merits of those sacrifices, O
kiiiif of af> tlm cefesiMfs, that I have a<«
qutred thlH region. 1

3S. Uii the banks of Saraju andVahuda
and Ganga, as ais> f/i the fomf of Nai'
mtsiii, t gaVe A<va> millions of Vine to lire
Urahiiiaiiis (r >s nor ibroityh the merits
nf those deeds that 1 have acquired this
region.

39, TJie vow of fast had been known to
Itidra. He had, however, kept ic a secret.
Shukra, the d^si.e»denl of Dhngu, gametia
knowledite ol it by means of spininal sight
flcqnired through penanee* Oornmg with
energy as he does, tc is Uslianas who first
made it Icnowit to t)ie umverse. f observed
that vow, O boon giving Oeiiy.

40. Whrn ( finished that very auperior
Wow, the Biatnnanas became all pleased
with me. A thouiand Uislus came there.

4t> Ail th >se nrabmanas and Rishis, O
powerful lord, plrased with me, said -"Do
yet) go to tl>« rrg) >n of Hr.thtnan t— It if
on account ol llie menis of that vo<r that
I have succeeded m scq<iirin< this region ol
very supenor happmess. I iiere is no doubt
in this. j •

42. Asked by the Supreme Creator of
ail things, I havo duly espUined the meiiis
of the vow of fast. In my opinion, there
isTio penance higher than fast. I bow to
you. G foremost of all the celestials. Ue
propniatrd.wiih ni*.


Bhiahma said f

43 ' i^iiig Uliagiratlm, who had said to
and who was worifiy of every honors was.
on tile conclusion of his speech, honored by
Orahman according to (he rites ordatneJ
for (hat purpose.

44 Oo you, therefcre, O Yudlnshthira,
observe the vow of fast and adore the Ikitti*
tnanas every day. 1 lie words uttered by
Bralimanas can do every thing both m tins
woild and nt the next.

45. fndeed, (lie Orahmanas ahoufd ever
be pleased with gills of dresses and food
and white-comptesioned kme and good
dwelling houses and palaces. Hie very
celestials should please the Brahmanas.
Freeint; yourself from cupidity, do you
practise this vow of very supenor menc
that iS not known to all. ,

CHAPfER CIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—',
Couftnurd.

Yttdhishthira said :■»-

1. Man, it IS said, is gifted with a period!
of life eaiendi'ig for a hondred years, and
with K'lnl energy and power. Why tlieii.
O graixiialher. do huiftwn beiogt die even
in ihur youtti T

2. By what does a man become fang*
lived. Mild by wt>at is his life sher^ned f
Ihiough what does a man acquire the tame
■hat depemjs iipcni great deeds? Ihroiigli
wl>at dues one acquire wealth and pro<«
pertly 1

3. ts It by penances, or celibicy or

recitation of SaCred Mantras, or
drugs? is it by his deeds, br mind, or
speed'? Do >ou explain to me (his, O
grandfather.

BbUhxaa said:— '

4 I stMtt tdf ymi what you ask me. fn
fact, i shall l«ll yuu what llie reason is for
which one becomes sliort lived, and what
tlie reason is for winch one becomes long*
lived.

5 1 shall also explain to you the reason

for which one succeeds tn winning tl«e fame
that depends on great deeds, and tlie rrasox
lor which on^ succeeds 10 acquiring riche-V
knd prosperity, indeed. 1 shnll esijgigeii
)(M about the manner in which one must
bve in ordet to be possessed of wtiai is good
(or him. ^

6 . ft Is by conduct that one arqulres
a long life, and it w by conduct ttMt one


^.nUSIlASANA PAIWA


257


rjt, neve? «(rt oifier* tJrtli

ipofdy nrfow^t Indeed, one sboidd net^r
Rlteqany cruel speech. One should never
accept anyllung m nrft frotn a person who is
low »»> j vulgar. One slioiila nete# irtlef
sifch words as psiir o’her people or
>s are tnauspieiotfs or as are stnhil.

fSt. Wordy arrows fall front thofmonlli.
Pierced therewith, the vicirm grieves day
and nJght 1 he wfse irwn sliordd never
shoot them for cutting llie viiaUol other
people.

“33 ^ A forest, pierced «ilh arrfiWi or cut
down With (h^ axe, prows apam. 1 he man,
however, wlio ts prerced with words unwisely
spoken, becomes the victim of wounds that
festerand bring on iteaih.

5t Bsrbed arrows and PJahkas and
bra id headed arrows are capat le of lierng
eyirnctod front tfre body IV ntly arro«r«
however, ore nieapobte ol berrru extracted.
fpr they he etnlieddeii tiT the very hesrt
35 One shotiM not Munt a person who
IS ilrfecuvr ol a limb nr wlio has a rnntr in
exerss or <n e wlio H ihorir of learning, or
one ivl 0 rs miserable, or one ivliw » ii},ly
or poorr or one who is shofir of strerrxlh.

• jfi One slmdd avnr I atheism vihfymt;
the Ve<l#s, ceiisurinj; (ire eelestrils, mRiice,
pride, Hirogance, and harshness
37 One sh iiM not angfity, take up
the rod of piniishment for tayi ig 2( npnt
another Only the son or Uie pupil, it has
been sard, can be imidly repnmanded fur
purposes of Disfriictioir,

33 One should noi, vilify tirahmanas,
nor shotdd point at Uie stars «itli o<>e a
R igers H asked, one si o ill not say what
the I inaiion is on a pnriiciilar day By
telling It, bis hfe becomes shoitened'

( 39 Having answered calls of natirej
er laving wallted over a road, one sliiilJ
wasli tiis feet Une should also wasli Ins '
feet before itlUng to recKe the Vedas or
to eat any food.

40 Ihese are the tfiree thnigs w1 nfrave
consrdered as pure and sacred by ilie celes
tuts and as saeli fit (or the HrahinanVs
rise, ViX I thoi wliose nnpiiriry is unknown
that nhich has been washed >ir water, oihI
Ihal which lias been well spokeir e(,

41, Samayava, Krishara, meat. Shasha*
huh, and Payasa should never be eo fced
lor one's ownself. Whenever cooked, these
should be offered to the cetestuls.

43. One should attend every day to his
sacred fire One slioirfJ every day gne
ahns. One should, controlling s^ech tlie
while, clean his Uelli with Uie loolh siKk.


1 4i — Jffr One ahorrfJ nev'er be in bed i
wlien the sun fi up. If orreifaih any day |
to be up With the sun, Ire should then pera^ ^
form An exprsdon. ffisrtig front bed, ona i
should first sslute Ins parents, aird precept
tors, or otlier elders worthy of respect. Ify r
so donig one nce^nrn rt lorrg Uter 1 he tootli*
slick shaiilil be tlirrvivn off when done with, -
and a new one should be used every day.

45. One siroitfif eat food nbiclr ts r«t
forbidden m the scriptures, abstaining fronr
food of every kind ou di>s of the new
moon and U« fulJ rnoon. One siioiddl with
senses controlled, answer calls of nature, \
facing the north.

46 — 4y. One slioiifd isot adore the c«f«»
iials witliout having first washed Ins teeth.
Without also adoring the celestials Rrst,
one sinudd ntver repair to any person
except his preceptor or one who is oM nr
years or one wlio is ngfiieous or one whir
IS wise Wise men shoulrl never s^e tlitm*
selves 10 an unpolished or duty mirror.

43 O^ie should never fenoiv a womarr
that IS Hiilenoivn or ivitlK out that 19 big
wiiti cl lid. ,

491 Ore should never sleep With head
turned towards the nerth or th* west. One
siioiihl not he doun upon a broken bed*
stea>i. I

50 One sfiotrf I not sf'efpoira beef wrtff-
out harvmg eXa mnrd it first with the help
of a hgtit. Nor sho ild one steep nii a bed
with anoiber by his side One elicirid never
sleep rii » transverse diteclmir One should
never inuke air as.ree<neiit wuP tlicists or

I Oo anjihing m eoiijiniciion wiih llieur,

54. One slmiilJ rmver drag a seat wulr’
the foot and sit oir it One should never ^
baibe in a nude vtate mir at iii^ht.

32 All iiiCeltTgenl person should never
alluv (us limbs to be rubbed or pressed
after Pstlnng One should never smear
uogueuis tiprnr Ills body without having
br>( gone iiiroigh bath Jfsvi'g bailiedv
one vhuu) t never Wdve I is cloth lirthe dir.

53 One sltoiihl not wear wel clothe*
every (kiy Ol e should never take ufT Inv
body the garUndsof Rowers one may wear.
Nur should one wear sui.h gaclaiids Over
Ilfs outer garmentsv-

51 Ohe shoiild never even talk with a* r

woman during the period ol her menses.
One should not answer a call of nature on
a field Of at a place too near aiv tnhabiied
vdUfce. , ^

55- One shnurj never answer a calf of >
nature on a piece of water. One sf oulj <
first wash Ins mouib ihrice With water J
before eating any food.


226


mauabiiarAta'


acqmrn riclic* and prosperity. Indeed, 1
K i« by coiidnct that etie acquires llie fame j
itiat depends upon great deeds both m tins [
world and in the next.

7. Tlie man whose conduct «s improper
br wicked never acquires a long hie All
creatures (ear such a man and are oppressed
by him.

8. If, therefore, one wishes hts own ad-
vancement and prosperity, one should, i»
tins world, lulluw the path oi righieousness
and conduct himself properly Good con
duct succeeds m removing the inauspictons-
ness and misery ol a\en one that is sinlul.

g Virtue is singled but by cunducl
Hie good and vntiious are so on account «>(
the conduct they follow 1 he marl s, again,
of good conduct are afforded by thu deeds
of those that are good or righteous.

to. People regard that man who acts
righteous!) and wlio does good acts even if
they only hear of him without actually seeing
him.

If. The atheists, they who are desiitule
oi all acts, they who are disobedient to pre
ceptors and violate t1 e nqunaions of the
sciipiutes, tliey who are uiidcquamted with
and, therefore, unobservant ol duties and
they who are wicked of conduct, become
short lived.

t3. They who are of improper conduct,
they who violate all restraints Oiey who are
unscrupulous about sexual congress, become
shortlived here nnd have to go to Melt here-
after.

13 Cven those men live for a hundred

years who, though desiiiuie of alt accom-
phshineiits, follow propriety and righteous
iie<s of conduct and become endued with
fauh atid freed from malice •

14 Me who IS free from anger, who ■$
truthful III speech who never does any in.
jury to an> creature in the universe, wIh> is
shorn of malice and cro kedness and insm-
cent>i succeeds m living fur a hundred
years

15 He who always breaks little clods of
earth, or tears up il e grass that grows
under his feel, or cuts off Ins nails with
his teetii, or is alwa>s impuie, or very
restless, never succeeds m living trw g,


tiolfinp speech the while. One shmitd !
never look at the rising sun, nor at Iw |


setting sun.

18. Nor should one look al the sun'wlien '
he is in eclipse , nor al his image in I ie ^
water, nor al midday when he is at lie j
meridian Ihc Uishis, on accounl of llinr jj
tvorsliipptng the tw'o iwiliglits, with j
regutaniy sULCeeded in acq lifing longeviiy,
ig~2i> Hence one sliontJ, controHi’S^
speech, say his prayers regulaily al the iwn 1
twilights As regards ’ihose Oralim*'**’ 1
who do not say their prayers nlhemOj'

twilights, a nghlcoiis king should set tlirinji


peiform sudi deeds as^ are 1


the binidras. Persons of every caste
never have sexual congress wiui oH
people’s wives.


Miereis nothing that
so effectually as sexual unon wuh ol""
people’s wives ,

I 2J. Ihe ailnllerer shall have to Iwe 'S

Mell for as many tliousand years a ,
number of p res on llie bodies oj
women witli wliom he may conniii
offence. ,

23. One should dress one’s ha'^}
colivnum to one’s eyes.jaiid ®
teeth, as also worship the celestials 1
forenoon. •)

*4—27. One should not gate at
fxces, or tread on d ** *' '.nievi

feel. One should not see out on a 1

at eaily dawn, or at tnid day .,,,1
evening twilight, or with a compa'”''

•s unknown, or wiili a Shudra, 1 ijj
While passing along a road, one " J
standing aside, always give way w a to
msiia, to kine, to kings, to an old ' ,J
one that IS loaded wiili a burthen, to a
big with child or to one ilut '*

When one meets a large tree that I*

^’■■"’‘’““of fw"’


t6. One should wake up from sleep at
I the hour known as the Brahma Muhorta


I and tbjen thin'k of both religion and worldly
I profit. Gelling up from bed, one sltould
; then wash Ins face and mouth, and }oining
' Ins hands in an atiitute of respect, tiien say
tlictnuriimg prayers.


In this way, one should when evening
, say his evening prayers also, cjn-


roads One should never *
r clothes that have been worn


should walk round It. One si
when coming upon llie ciossmg '
roads, walk rou id it before pars"'"- ^
|oumey “’At mid day, or at ^

at night in general, Of al the two

one should not proceed 10 the crossn^^^^

the four roads '' — -'•■'■••n never
sandals o

another .

sS— 30. One should alway s observe I
vow of celibacy, and should never cro”
legs. One should observe the vow ol
bacy on the day of the new moon, as
on that of the full moon, as also on llie eiR jj
lunar day of both fortnights
never eat the flesh ol animals not
sacrifices One should never


ol the back ol an animal. One


avoid censuring and calummating


btli***»


also all kinds of deceitful condiich


ANUSJIASANA' MKVJI


22 ^


tUoTif’er than any of these two, destrQ)rs, ;
not only Uie object of Ins anger but Ins '
eaiire family as well, not by looHs alone but '
by (hdught also. - i >

6o. A wise man should, therefore, (end
these three carefully. One shoul^l never
engage in any disputation with hi4 pre*
eeptor. ' ' ^ « .

81. O Yudhishthfra, if the preceptor

becunies angry, he should always be pact*
fied with due lienors. If the preceptor U
entirely in the wrong, still one should follow i
and lionor him. , -I

82. Forsooth, calumnious sayings against |
the preceptor always consume the hves of j
those who utter tl<em. One should always I
answer a call of nature at a spot far |
distant from Ins dwelling place." One i
should wash hjs feet at A distance from his |
dwelling place.

83. One should always throw the rem* ‘
nauu oi his dishes and plates at a spot
distant from his dwelling place. Indeed,
he who wislies for Ins own beuooi should do
all this. One should not wear garlands of
fed flowers (iideed, (he wise should wear
gaifands of white flowers.

84 lte|ecln>g the lotus and the lily« O
oil of great mi|tht, one may bear on his
ead, however, a flower that is red, even if it

be an a^iMtic one.

85 A garland of gold can never become
impiue. After one has bathed, O king, he
sluxitd use perfumes mixed with water.

‘ 86 0»e sh 'utJ never wear hts upper

garmriu for coveiiog (he lower limbs or
lOe lowrr garments for coverinit the upper
Ones. Nur should one wear clothes Used
by another. One sfiould not, acain, wear a
piece of cloili lhal has not Us fringes.

By. When one goes to bed, O king, he
should wear a different piece of cloth
When passing along a road, one should
wear a different piece of cloth. So also,
when adoii g the celestials, one should wear
B OifTeieht piece orcliilU.

88 lie intelligent man should smear
> IS hmbs with unguents m^de of Pri'
yangu, sandal wood, Vdwa, Tagera, and
Kesiiara,

Jij. In observing a fast, one sheiild puri-
fy himself by a hath, and adorn his body
with ornaments and unguents. One sheutd
aUajs abstain from sexual union on days
of the full moon and the new moon.

90. One should never, O king, eat oft
the same plate with another even tl he be of I
his own or equal rank. Nor should one
ever oat any food that has beeri prepared
by B swoman in her menses.


9t. One should never e»t^ any food or
drink any liquid whose essence has been
taken off. Nor should one eat anythmg
witbnat giving a part (hereof to persons wkn
wistfully gaze Ht the fixid that one Inppena
to take. Ihe mtelhgent man should never ^
sit near an impure person. N >r should one <
Sitnear persons who are foremost,.hi viilue.

92— 9J All food that IS forbidden in fell-
gtous rites should never be taken even on
other occasions the fiuiia of the Ficist
reliytosa and the Ficus Bengatensis as also ^
|l e leaves of tlie Crotolaria Jiincra, and tha
fruits of the Ficus gloineraia, should never
be eaten by one who seeks his own good ^
Ihe flesh of goats, of feme, and the peacock,
should never be eaten.

94— One should also abstain from
dci^ flesh and all flesh that is stale. Hu*
■iitelligent man siioiild never eat any salt,
taking It (Ip wiih his hind Sor should he
eat curds and flour of^tned barley at mgh.,
0»e should abstain also from flesh n
animals n<>C killed In sacrifices. O
should, wiili rapt sttenixin, eat once on
. (lie morning and ortce in the evenii g.
absiaiumg entirely from all food in the
I mtervat,

' 96 One should never eat any food in 1

I which he may And out a hair. Nor should t
I one eat at the Shraddha of an enemy. On>* ,
! sltonfd eat silently, one should never e^it
I without coveiiog his body with an upjser
garment, and without siUmg down.

97—100. One should never eat any food
pUemg It on the naked gruinul Ouo .
slxiuld never eat except m a silting posture, f
One should never make any noise white ,
eating llie inlelligriit man kliould first
offer water anil then food to one who has
hccome his gurst, and after hrving served
the guest thus, slioutd tlien t.tl<e lus meals
• imself fie wllb sits down to dinner in a
line wilh friends and himself eats any food
without giving theteol to his frieii Is, is
s-«,«l to eat dreadf il poison. As regards
WAMi'.aiiJ.P.^vas., aiui.fl.Hir^f.fruul J*a».h;v
and cu'ds and clarifieil huiter and honey,
one shvni I never, after dniikiug or eating
these, offer the residue thereof to others.
One should never, O king, eat any food
hesitatingly.

tot. One seeking one's own good, shntild
never drink curds fiuisliing Ins rne-l. After
the meal is finished one. should wash hts
mouth and lace with |l e (right) hand only,
and taking a httle water siMuld then dip tlM
toe of the right food in il.

107. After washing, one slioulf (oik*) I
the crown of his head with the (iiglrt) hand. \
Wiifi rapt attention, one should next touch i
: Are. ^


228


MAtrABIIARATA*.


56. liavmjj finished lit* me*l*, cne

aliould wasli his motilh thrice with water
and twm again. One should eat, with
face (limed eastward^; ins food, conlrelling
speech the while and vrilhout cerfsurini; ifie
food that is eaten. ' ’ ,

57. One should alirajs leave fl fesidiie
of the food (hat ts placed before one for
eating. Having finished his meal*, one
should mentally touch fife IF one eats with
face turned easlwards, he becomes long-
livid. By eating with face turoed south-
wards, one acquires great fame.

53. By eating with face turned west-
wards, one acquires great ncl>es. By eat
ing with face turned northwards, one be-
comes triilhlnl in speech.’ Having finished
his meals, one should wash all the upper
holes of one’s body with water.

59 * Lihewtse, all the hmhs, the navel,
and the palms of tl>e hands should be
washed 'vaU water. One should nevec *ii
upon husk of corn, or upon lurr, or upon
ashes, or opon bdiie*.

69. One should, never use the water llni
h'B been used by knottier for bathing
One should always perfornt the Home for
prepiitating the celestrals, and recue the
aavitii Mantras.

Ol. One should always eat m a sealed
peslsre. One should never eat while walk
ing. One should never answer a call of
nature standing. One should never anvwei
a call of nature on ashes or in a cmvpen.

67. One should wash Ins feet before
silting to one's meals. One should never
sit or lie down for sleep wuh wet feet. One
who stis to his meals afier havntg washed
bis feet, lives lor a century.

63. One should r>ever touch these three
things, while one is in an impure stale, jtt .
fire, a cow, and a Brahmaua, By cdiserv-
ing thrs rule, one lives long.

64. One should not, while he » nt an
Impure state, cast one's eyes on these three
things. Via , the sun, ll>e mootr and the
Stars.

65. The hfe-breaths of a yoiing’^maiv go

upwards, wl en an old and venerable person
comes to his house He gets them back
by stand ng up and properly saluting the
tuest. ,

66. Old men should always be aaUiled
One should, upon seeing them, offer seats
wilht • own hand. Alter the old man has
taken I is seal, a person should sit anti
rtraain wilh hands joined in respect. Wlien
an cild man goes along the road, one
should alwajs follow him instead of walk-
ing aliead.


One’tfinnM'nevff sit OTT»tprner
broked seat. Ohe should, 'witlwirt n»ing if
any longer, throw away a broken vessel^ el
white brass. One should,' hever eat with*,
oiAapieceof tipper garmeai covering li^w
body. One should lic-fer batlw in a nt"*
stale. ’ ^

68 One’shonld nivet sleep m a naked,
slate One sIhiuW^ never even tonch the
remnant* of other people's * dislies »nd^
plate*.' One should never, while he
an impure state, loud* another’s he.*d. for
It IS said in live scriptures that live vrtalavs
are alt c tncenlraied ut live head

69- One should nevef slfihc anolhe^n
tl*e heart or scure niiolher by the hair.
should not jou* his hands logelliet
scraicituig his liead,

70. One should not, wfule baihiog, re-
peatedly dip his licvd Ml water. By **
doing one shortens one’s hie. One wlw h”
battled by dippmi; the head in water
nor, afterwards piH od »» any p'*'! *’* ^
body.

7;. One shoiild never take hi* wah
withoivt eatiivg some sessme. Onesiw'
never teach (ll>« Veila* or any »crrp(^«'
at a time when he ?* urtpure. Nut
one study while is impure
7* — 74. Whi-n a stmm rises or » t'J',
smell spreads iisetl uv ilw atm»spi»et^»
sliould never llnnk of (l*e Veda* Person*
knowtivs rt*>t»e**t Imt wy tecHe a G ih* *'*"*•
by Yama in dajsof yo*e. Hewhutiin*
while impure or simlies ll»e Veda 1"*
similar circuu*»t-«i>ce*, indeed, Ih^ I"’”'
iKun Bralurtan wl>o slinlie* the Vedi
furbiddeu tunes loses his Veda ai>d slione'
lusMe '

75 -;& n.me.oM.ho.rf.l
the Veda with r..pt Htientioi* at "

limes They who ni»ivcr a chH ot »'


with face towards tl>e !


urtls


biriiing fire, or towards a cow, or I®'*'*.

a twice born person, or on the road. ' *
conve sliiirlhvert At diy inne both ^
of nature should be aiisiwered willi
turned towards ibe liortlv ^ '

77—78 At night, tlwise ealB
answeied facing il« sniKh. Uy so <I‘”"S
one does not slHirteii In* hf^ One
wishes to live long alioiild (levef diireS**'.
or ins lit any of these tliree, however ***
oremaciated tliey may appear to be^t’’*'
the Brahmana, the Kshairiya, ami ‘
snake. All three are vified with ‘^‘•'*,1^
poison, Ihe snake, if angry, burn* i
victim with only a look of Us eye,

79- The Kshatrrya also, if angry, h*''"’
the object of his anger, as soon** he**
him. with his energy. ihe Brahm*'’**


anvausama PAAVA


^pns OimiH ©Jsotje -setlW a»d ^
fx.idoii < f ttie iiliurtBifce •j'fvMi io

tl rin U UtMraia, AS rlicii One

Siliui|)(l brfllie by riippnt}, 1 is bead Tn ^tvaler
l)cforc l»e s^is down to j*eifoim any act
in honor 'Of the departed Mhdcs er Ihe
‘denies. .

l?S One slioald never perform a Sbrad-
-dha nnder the constelUlion o( bis nativity.

Sbraddba should be perlormed nitder
any of the GfiadrnpadHS (prior or Uteri.
iKFT under tlie coflStdUtion Krittilca, O
Ubarala.

126. The SJiraddha shoold never be
performed under any at llroieronsteftations
that arc ‘considered as dreadful (such as
Asfifestia, etc,) and any of those Ifiat opnn
calculmrun, seern to be fioslife fndeetl. in
tins matter, all these coiiMetUlions sboulti
be avoided wIhcIi are forbidden in asUutogy

t lto One slionU sit UcniK eiifrer the east
or tiie north white bemc; sliaved by a barber
6y so damgi O tf^eat king, one succeeds in
living long. T

Ijt, Oneihontd neither vdify otfiers nor
reproaeli himself, for, O chief of tbe Bba*
tbus. It ts said that catniniiy is sinful
whether of others or of oneself,

tjs In marryint.', one should avoid a
woman who is deficient of any limb A
rnstden too, if s'tch, sttonlJ also be avoided
A woittaii of the same Pravars should also
be avoidedf as also one wlio is ill, formed
111 body; as also one who has been born
til (be lace (u wbicli one's mother belongs
*33 A Wise man should never tenow
a woman who is old, or one whu has civen
up the domestic mode of life liir'enieriiii'
the lore«t mode or one who is UuMut to
her husband or one whose organs of g<ne>
ration are not healthy or wtll (urined.

, i34->— 136 You should not marry a

woman «»io i» ol a J ellow toJor, or one
who IS attached with leprosy, or one burn
in a lamily m wl tch il ere lias been epilepsy .
or one tiiat is tow in birth and iinbiis, or
•one that IS born in a fainily In which llie
disease called Itprnsy has appealed, nr
one belonging by birth to a (aimiy m winch
there are early deaths 0"ly lh«t maiden
svlio IS gilied with auspicious indKaiions,
and who IS accomplished lur all sorts oi
. ^uahficaiiQns, who is agreeable and beautf
flit, should be married. One should itUrry,

^ O Yudhishihira, in a family who js higher'
Ibr at least equal to Ins own.

137 — 138 One who IS desirous of bis
own prosperity, should never marry a
woman wlio is of an interior caste or who
lias fallen away front tlie Caste of her birth.
C^reSuhy I’gf’ting up tlie fire, one should


2JI

perform all ihese acfs whicii Karo be^n
ordrfinediand declared in the Vedis or
by the Gr ihmatias One should nev^r
Seek to III} ire women. Wives > sliuufJ
«}«-,<}$ be protected. ^ ' •

139 M dice always shortens bfe.
fle»(.e, one slimld always abilam limn
eiitcftaiiiing msliCe. Sleep at day lime
sfiirtens liie. io sleep after the sun iisc
shortens life, ^ ^ ,

140. they who sleep at any of the t
twifighis, or at nighiUti, or who go to sleep f
in, ,» sirfte if httpnnty, have their lives '
shortened Adultery always sh iitens life.
One slnitiid not remain tit a ^taie of im*
puiity tfier shaving.

141. One sluiiiM, O Dharata. carefully
abstain (fuiii re<idi<ig or reciiing the Vedas,
and eating, and b (thing at evonedc.

142. When (lu; evening twilight sets
in one should collect Ins senses for niedita-
lion, witho it dung any act. One should
cuUecl his semes fur inediUlton, without uiiy
act. One Should, O king, Itdllie and (lusi
adore tbe Grabmanas.

N3~t4-f ludeed, one should bathe
beloie adoring the celestials and reveren.
iially snluiiMg (I e pieceplor. One slieulii
never go 10 a saciiDve unless invited,
(iideed. one niiy go Kiere without an (n»
viiaiion, if he iv>»i e> IO only See bow the
Sacrifice is conducted if one goes to a
saCiifice w ihoul an iiwitalion aiiJ If one
dues nut on that account, receive proper
adoration from flie saerificer. Ins life be*
comes shiiiened^ One shouhl never go
alone oiy a Journey to fotei|>n parts. Nor
oiioufd one ever go aluiie to any pf,>ce at
night.

• 43'*'f46 Before evening sets in, one
should return tu Ins liuu>e and remain
wiilnn It. One should aI vays obey ilie |
coniinaTfis of his par-nts and preceptor, i
nithout .it -If judging whetlier ttiose com* |
m-iicts Or good nut One should, O king, <
aiiend carefully to the Vedas and the
niiiitary saence.

147 Uo then, O Ling, carerjlty attend
to (lie practice of riding an elephant, u
horse and a war cfiaiiut. ihe man who
attends lo these with care, succeeds iii ac-
qmiing happiness.

148 Such a king succeeds In becoming
unconqneralile by cneniies, and govern his
seivanis and kinsmen witlioul any of them
being able to subjugate him. 1 he king who
auaina to sucii a position and who carefully
attends to the duty of protecting Ins sub*
jects, has never to nicut any loss.

149 Vouslould, O Jong, be proficient
in k^ic, as also the science ol words, the


MAttAmrAHATA. -


230

103 Tlie man finow^ltnxr to ob-
serve nil these ofdtniir>Ces carefull) sue-
creils III ACq iiring the (oreinnst pUce
ainrtng; tits liinsmert. Oite ahotrid, »fier
fi>nsliiT)i: (ns meals, wash Ins nose and e>es
and ei><9 and navel and both liarrda s*tlh
water.

I(i4 ^ One should not, howrrrf, iieep hia
hands wet. Between the lip and the root
of the thumb IS siitiate the sacred Irrtha
known by tlie narne of Brahma,

105 —tod On the back of the liitle
finger, it is said, is sitirate the Oeva- I irtha
'Ihe intervening space between the tlimnh
and the (orehnger, O Bharata, ihonid be
used for peiforming the Pitri riles, after
touching w-iter according to the ordinance
One should never vilify other people. Nor
should one ever utter anything that ts
dii>agreeahle.

107. llie man who drsires lits own gond,
should never see< to bring on himself
the wraih ol others One aliould never
seek to talk v«nli an nmesste. tlievert
sight of such a pels >n «h ntd be sliunned.

inS One sh ntd never come m eomact
with a degraded person By avoiding such
contact one succeeds tn acq nnng a Imii' hfe
One s'lOiM never indulge in seanal inter-
course at day time Nor slionld one know
a maiden, or a harlot n«r a barren woman.

' I09— 110 One should nerer know a

woman wlm has not bathed after tlie es
pir) of her menses, K) avoiding such acts
one succeeds in acquiring ^a long life
After washing the several tnnbs directed
III view of religious acts, one should wa>h
his hps thrice, and once more twice. B<
doing this, one becomes piiriRed and Bi
for reluions tiles Ihe several organs of
sense should each he wastied orce, and
w^ier s)i luld al>0 be sprinkled over llie
entne body.

Ill— Its Having dune this one slionld
perform tlie adorHiion of the depailcil
Manes and the celrstul!,, according 10 the
ordinances of the Vedas Lisien Co me,
O you of Kuril’s race as I tell you wfial
purification is cleansing and beneficial hir
a Brahinana Before Wgiuning to eat and
after niuvhnig the meal, and 111 all deeds
requiring purification tl e BrahinHtia s!io ilil
rinse fus mouth will, water pt,«ced on the
hinb catled the Brahma-iirtlia.

I I 13—114 After ejecting any matter from
the throat or S[piiiiig, one should wash
his mouth bef ire he can become pure A
kinsman vvlio happens to be old, or a friend
who happens to he poor, should be aoco
modated in one's house and his comforts
iMked^ter as if he were a member of lias
faiinly. By doing this, one succeeds ini


winning both fanre ant? fongevifye T<t kerp
pigeons as also parrots both nrsle and
Icmale, hr one's hoine ra lirghly blesaed.

*lS-“tlfr If lliesc live in one's houses
they succeed inr removing calintil). Ihe
saiTK IS the case with cocltroachev B fit**
Ikes ami vultures and wood-pigcons and
bee* enter a home and live in it, act*
pfopitiwling tfie celestiats sfiouid be pet*
funned. I hese are creHtures of evifomeiir
as also Ospreys

#17. One shookl never give fnt (he
seciets of great men f one sliouhJ never have
sexiM! minm with a forbuUen woutan Nor
should one ever have' Such inuoir with the
cuisoii rvf a king or with women who- are the'
fiiends Of rpieens.

lift— ISO. One ^hnufJ never nvilce friend-v
with physicians, ivr iviih children, or «il‘r 1
petsonswlio are oW, or with one’s servaiH*r
O V (dhisidhira. One shoiil I always pro-
vide for ft tends, for Bralnnanas and fa*
sucli as seek Ins protection By domff
O kirrg, one acquires » Ide* A
man should live n* sucli a lionse as has b«n ,
constructed with the help of » IJrahinaiiv
and an engineer skilled m his calhiik’> "r .
indeed, O limgr (>« tesks for fiis h®* ,
hoof One slionld not, O kaig. sleep-"* l'« I
evening twitiL'hl Nor shoid I one susly
such an hour (or acquitiivg any bfaiii.fi Of
knowledge,

Ui. An mfelhgeni man slmuM ne«*^
e,«t also At snsh an h iiir. |J^ aclimt
oneacqnires ahnglile One shoul I
perfoimaoy act in lionor of the dvpiftv
Manes at night liuie Oie kh'>uf I n®*
adurar Ins body after Buishing Insine"'*'

Iff Oue slmidd not ba-lie at n’ght, if h*
s. eks I IS ow,» aggrandisenw lU O'le s”®'' •'
als-a, <> Bharata ahvayv abslani froml'i
ll»uv of fried barfey at in.’he

123. Iherevidiwof fool vnd dimkr «
abo tiae fl iwers witla winch one has aiinre
lire celestials slinuld Itever be IT'Cd 1

lUir a guest at night, one sIhaiIJ never, «'
arxcostvecouitesy, cninpell Iniw t» erfl
ha:. Wl. Nur sIwulJ one eat >o hi» *"'1 ®
night

lit — 1*5 One shmild not kill *

(for eating it), especi illy after having fe“ ' ’

A wise man slroiafd espnise a maiden bori
tn A Ingh family, gifted with ansp'*|®‘*'
marks, ami ol full age Begelimg cluIJrei
upon tier and thus perpetnalnag hrs rac
by that means, one aliould make over
90119 to a good preceptor for being edocaie'
generalfy. O Btiaram, asalso an tlac
cusiomt of the family, O monarch.
liaii^hters that one n>ay beget shoiiU *>«
marrred to youths of respectable faunh**'
wlw are agvin possessed ol iiiielliicncc.


ANUiHASANA^PARVA


eiU isK'ink' any «hare ttiercaf (o ficv )ouiig«f

brvllieri..

12 ti brolliers WKh (during (lie tile-timc
of tliefr f-itlie> ) (o p-<rtilio» tlie fninily pro.
petty, ttie fuller sliuuld give equal sliores
tu all Ills sons

13 If tile eldest brotlier l>app*ns tu be

I VICIOUS man and wiiliout any acroin*
ilisiiinenis, lie ipay be disiegarded by lirt
muiigey broiiiers If die wile ur ttie yuuit^er
iniilier liappeiis to be sinful, her or lusgood
iiu»l suit be loured after. ^

J4 Persms cnnvervast wall the efflvacy j
if itghteousness hold that viitne is (lie liigli> I
‘St good. I be UpadUyaya is superior lu |
'veil (eii Acharyyas. 2 lie father 1% equal to 1
eii Upadbyjyas. ^

15 1 lie molfier is equal to ten fathers or '
•Veil (lie whole Earth. Ibere itn senior
‘qnal 10 tlie inodier. Indeed, she is above
all 111 respect of tlie reyeiciice due to tier

16 Ills iherefure, di4t pe-'ple regard the
in ili**r til (iaserve so inuJi respect After
Medripise ol (lie fai1ier> O Ui araia. die
eldest brother shudlJ be considered os the
father

17 It U (he eldetl brother who should
Hssiktn 10 them their TO'-ans of s>pp>riaiid
proirci rf'xf tn-riotAiii (hem AH the jounger
iiroiUers sliuuld bow to linn and obey liis
luimnaiid.

18 Indeed, they should depend upni
him, as tfiry did upon (heir father during
Ins life tune, bo far as the body is con*
Cerned, O Bfiarata. U is the father and (he
inoilier udio creates it.

tq. ffiai birth, however, which the
Aciiaryia ordains, is Considered as die true
birth whicli Is reahv nnfadiiig and nnmoital

f he eldest Sister, O chief of llliarata’s race
fs Iihe a inodicr. 1 he wife xf the eldest
hroilier also is litre die inoihet, for the
^/itiitger brother, III iii/aiity, receives tiur>
Sing from her.


CHAPIEUCVI, I

(ANUSHASANA PAUVa).— !

Continued !

Yudlushthira said —

1 tJ graiidtailier. alt (lie orders of men,
fiichiding (fie very Affect chhas are natural*
ly ilispused to observe fasts We, however,
do not ^now the reason thereof,

t We have heard that only Qtahmanas
and Ksfiatriyas should observe the vow o(
lasts. How, 6 grandfather, are Uio ether


castes ta be (atreiias acquiring any merit by
(he observance of fasts t

3 How have vows and fasts come to be
observed by persons of ail castes, O king t
Wiiat IS that end which one devoted to the
observance of fasts, acquires 7

4 it has been said (liat fasts are greatly
meritorious and that fa<-ts are a great
refiige. O king, what is the fruft that is
acq iired in tins world by the man who ob«
seives fasts 7

5 By ivliat means I* one purged of hiS
, stnst By what means dues one acq lire

virtue. By wliat means, L) best ol tfie
B laratas, does one succeed til acquiring
Heaven and meui.

I 6 After having obseived a fast, what
' slioufd One give away, O king 7 O (elf met
I what those duties are by which one may
succeed III acquiring objects leading (a
happiness.

tf Aishampayana said t—

7. Kunti's son begotten by (he deity of
Dnarma, who was coiiversam with every
duty and who said so (u him, Shaiitanu’a
sun. Bliiibmi. wl>o knew every , duly, an>
swered in the fotiuwing words.

BbiShma said t—

8 Purmeily, O king, I heard ol these
Inirh meiits, L> chief of Hnarata's race, as
beloiicing to the observance of fasts ac*
cuiJnig to the oidiiiaiice.

9 1 bad, O Diiarata, asked the nislii
Angira> of great ascetic merit, tlie very
Same qicsuons which you have asked me
tO'day.

10 Accosted by me tl>us, the illustrious
Kislii, wliu originated from the sacrificial
hte, an!>wered me even llius about the
ub>e(vaiice of fasts accoiding to the ordi*

Angiraa Baid —

11 Fasts for three nigfiis togetheri are
ordained for Bralimanas and Ksfiatriyas,
O debgiler of (he iCurus Indeed, O
king, a fast fur one nighi, for two niglils,
and fur t(>ree iiigtits, may be observed by
tliein

la Fast for one night is ordained for
Vaisfiyas and bfiudras. If they observe
fasis for two or U>ree ingfiis by mistake,
such fasts never bring on their advance*
ment.

13 Fasts for two nights have been or*
dained for Vaishyas and Shudras (on cer-
tain special occasions) Fasis for tliree
nights, however, have not been urdairied
lor Oism by persons knowing iiu.iest


sde^co nf music, and ihe (our and tite siaiy
brkttches of knowledjte Icnowii by tlie name
of Kala.

I 5 <>> One should every day bear the
{ Puranas and Ibe bisiones and aft itie oilier
^ narratives UiaI exist, as also ttie biogra*

^ ptiies of all yicAi men.

151. When one’s wife 15 in her season,
one should never know tier, nor even sum
tni II her for cunversaiton A wise man
may take her inio his coinpany on (he fourth
day alter the b>«th of putiHcattun

153 If one holds sexual union on the
fifih day from the first appearance of the
Cttaminal flow tie Keta a daughter. By
holding It on the sixth daj, he gels a son
A wise man sVoiitd, in the matter uf sexual
intercourse atlrnd to this rule.

153 Kinsmen and relatives by mariiage
and friends shontd all be treated wuli res*
pect One stioutd, to the best of his power
worship the celestials in sacrifices, giving
away vinous kinds of articles as sacrificial
presents.

TS4 After the period laid down for (he
domestic tinde nf life, one should, U king,
become a liermit 1 have thus told you
briffly alt llie characteristics of persons who
succeed in living long

iSS* What t liave not told you should be
heard by jou from the mouths of persons
welt versed in tlie iliree Vedas O Yudliish*
thira You stiould know that conduct is
ihe root of prosperity. Conduct increases
leine

>56 It IS conduct which prolongs hfe,
lliscoiduct wf icli desiro>s aft calamities
and cvfls Conduct has been said to be
superior to all ll e branches of knowledge.

157. It IS conduct which begets vrriue,
and n IS virtue winch prolongs hfe. Gmi-
Ouct gives f^me, long hfe, and Heaven.
Cond ict IS tl e in tsi efllcacious me of
propiuatmg the celesiuls 1 he Self create
Urahman himself has said tl at one should
show mercy to all orders of men.


CHAPTER CV.

(ANUSMASANIKA PARVA) —
ConfiMurd,

Tndbislitbira said t—

I. Tell me, O thief of Dharata's race
bow the eldest brother should treat In
younger brothers, and how the lounge
br^th r* behave towards their cldcs


BWsliina iaid

3 Do yon. O son, aliVaj 5 behave towirdt
your younger brothers as their eldest brotiief
should You are always the eldest of all
these your brothers You should always
treat your younger brothers in the way I'l
whicli a preceptor treats hts disciples.

3 If the preceptor happens to tihe h*
wise, the disciple cannot possibly behave
towards him in a respectful or proper way*
If (he preceptor IS possessed of purity aijd
good. Conduct, the disciple also succee Is in
acquiring conduct of the same kind, O
Bharata. ' '' i ^

4. Tlie eldest brother should at times
not notice the acts of his younger brothers,
and (hough possessed of wisdom shou'd et
limes act as if ho does not understand then
acts If the younger brothers be guilty of
any sin, the eldest brother should cofreef
them by indirect ways and means

S H there be good understanding
among brothers and if the eldest brother
seeks to correct his younger brothers oj
direct or ostensible means, persons who are
enemies, O son of Kunti, who feel pam O'*
seeing such good understanding and «*'*«/
therefore, always seek to bting about* dit«
nmon, try to disunite the brothers and W*
dissension amrmg them, ,

j. It IS the eldest brother who Increase*
the prosperiiy of the family or desire)* 1*
entirely. If the eldest broilief happ«'‘*
to be not gifted with sente and wicked m
conduct, he encompasses iLe destrucUBU 01
the whole family.

7. Dial eldest brother who injure* ("*
younger broiliers ceases to be considered a
tlie eldest and forfeits his share m t"
family properly and deserves to be ciiecke'*
by the king.

8. that man who acts deceitfullyi h***
forsooth, to go to the regions of grief
every kind of evil The birth of
person is of no avail like the flower* ®‘
cane.

9 That family in which a sinful
IS born becomes subject to every evil poC
a person brings about Infamy, and all
good deeds of the family disappear. ’

10, Such among the brothers as are •*(•
dieted to wicked deeds forfeit their »h*r**
of Ihe family propel ty. In such a case,
eldest urotlier may appropriate the enurv
joint property wiihout giving any poftw"
tliereol to his younger brothers.

11. If the eldest brother makes
money, without using the paternal property
and by going to a distant place he msy aP*

I proprute (or his own use, such wealth^with*


ANU 5 .HA*iANA»fARVA 2 ;J 3


tJ'il any share Ihereot lo his )DUiiget

bfuliiers.

C2 If brefliers «VrsIi (during (he We time
of their i-<t>iei ) (o p.<rtitii>i) (lie iattfily pro>
pcHy, (lie l-iilief sliuijld give equdl sftarcs
to dll tiu sons

13 If ifie eldest brother happsns tu be
a viciuns iiMii and «uliout any accoin*
plisniiictiis, fie may he disiegardrd by bit
yoiiii)ier briiiners If (lie wife ur tlie yuuiiKer
bfiiitier liHppeiis tu be sinful, her or tusgoud
inUbl still be touted dller,

14. Peis ins ciiivervast sviili (fie efR^Cy
Til I lyhtcoiisness hold tfiut vniiir is the
est e >od. I tie Upaclliyayd is superior (u |
even leu Acliaryyus. 1 lie failier is c<)Udt to
ten Upaiiiiydyds.

15 Ihe molfier is equal to ten fathers o'
■evrii the whole Earth, Ihere is iu» seiMnr
vqiHl 10 tlie innther. Indeed, si e Is above
alt in respect ol the reveicnce due tu tier

16 li IS (herefure, (Imi ptiople reg-tnl the ,
In in deserve su much lespect Alter
ilie demise ut iIh iailieri O Ui.«raia, the
tldest brother shuold be considered as tlie
failier

17 Itlslli^ eldest brniher who should

ntsign (o (hr-m their of s if/port nml

b'nieci <iiid m'liiiiani tlieni All the younger
brill liers shutild boiv (u him end obey Ins
Ciiinmiiiid

t6 Indeed, they slioiild di'pend upon
him, as (hey did upon the<r fiiner duiint;
bis We time bu far os ((le body is Cwii«
terned, O Blurata it is the lather and the
iiioiher i*ha cre-ries ((•

iq that birth, however, which (he
Acliaryya ordains is Considered as the (lue
birth wliicti is,iea1ly iinfading and nhmoital
f he eldest Sister, O chici ol Bl'arute's roce.
Is lilte <1 mother. I lie wife of the efdesi
broilier also is Dlie the inoilier, fur the
younger biolher, ill infanvy, receives tiur>
sin^ fruni her.


CHAFIKB CVl.

(ANUSllASANA PAUVA).—
CowfinMrd

YudhisUthira said —

I O graiidUllier all Uie orders of men,
tniliiding tlie very Mledchlias are natural*
ly dispused 10 observe fasts We, however,
Co not Know the reason thereof.

3. \Vb have heard that only Ofahmanas
and ICshalriyas should observe the vow of
lasts. How, O ],rdndfaUicr, ar. Uic. other


castes 10 be taken as arqnuing any tnerit by
tlie obst.rvunce ol fasts?

3 lla>w hvve vows and fasts come to be
nhwrved by persons of all castes, U kingt
Wliat IS that end wliicb one devoted to Uie
observance of fasts, acquires T

4 It has been said (fiat fasts arc greatly
iiieritoriuus and tliat fa*($ are a great
refuge O king, (viMt is (he fruit that is
acq iired in this world by tlie man who ob*
Serves fills 7

5 Uy what means is one purged of his
siMsf fiy what means dues one acquire

^ virtue. Oy what means, O best 01 tlie
' li laratas, does one succeed in acquiriiiir
I llcavcii and meiit.

6 Alter having obseived a fast, what
should one give away, U king ? U tell me)
what those dunes are by winch one may
succeed iii acquiring obj'-cts leading to
happiness.

(TatahampAyaQa said

7. Kiuiti's son begotten by (he deXy of
Onarma, who was conversanl with every
duty and who said so tu him, Sliaiilanu's
son. filuthmi, wf>o knew every , duly) an*
vwered in the loibwiiig words.

BbUbma said t*-*

8 r»rineily. O king, I hesrd of these
hivh Rieiits, O chief of Biuraia's race, as
btliHieing <0 file observance of fasts ac«
cwidiiig tu the oidmatice.

9 i had, O UiMrata, asked the Rishl
Angiras of great nsceiic merit, the very
Same questions wind) you have asked ms
(O'day.

to Accosted by me thus, the illustrious
Uishi, Who originated frinii ilie sacrificial
fire, answered me eVeii thus abuul the
observance of fasts accoidhig to the ordi^
nance.

Augtras Said —

(I Fasts for three nights tou'ctfieri are
ordamed for Brahmanav and Ksfisinyas,
O dehglier of the Kurus. Indeed, Cl
kmg a fast for one inght, /or two nights,
and fur three nights, may be observed by
litem

14 Fast for one nlghl Is ordained for
Vaisityas and bhdrJras 1 / fhey observe
(asis tor two or ihree ingliis by mistake,
such fasts never bring on their advance*
ment.

13 Fasts for two mclits have been or-
dained fur Vaisiiyas and Shudras (on cer*
tain special uccasiuns) Fasts (or three
nighlS) however, have not been urdained
fur them by persons kneviing duties,


UAfiABHAiTAtA


I4— 15 llie wise mitn wtio, with his
senses and soot under restratntt O Bitarata>
fasts, by abs(ainii)«' from one of the two
meals, on the fifth and the sifcih days of
the moon as also on the day of the full
innon becomes gifted with forgiveness and '
personal be-iuty and knoiVledge of scrip-
iiires Such a person never becomes child*
Jess rtrfd pacr. ,

t6— iS He who celebrates sacriBees tor
svo slnppme the deities on the filth and the
sixth (lays of the moon, becomes superior
to all the members of his family and suc-
ceeds In feeding a large number of Brah-
manas He wlio observes fasts on the
eighth and (lie fourteenth days of the dark
fortnight, becomes freed from diseases ,tiid
pisseased of great energy, the man who
atisl iiiis from one meal every day through*
out the monih called Afargvsfiirsha, shoiildi
\i>ith respect and divoiion, feed a tniinber
of Bralimanas By so doing he becomes
freed from all liis Sins Such a man be-
comes Killed vriib prosperity, and all sorts
of graih become liis,

19 He becomes gifted with energy.
In lacii such a person reaps profuse harvest
from his Tieldst acquites great rKhes and
much corn.

20 that man, O son of Kunti, who
passes the whole monih of Pausha, abstain-
ing every day from one of two meals,
becomes a gamer of good fortune and
p}e»tatt{ leilafes stt<} great fjme.

71 Me who passes the whole month of
M i^ha, abslMiniiiK every day from one of
the two meals, it bom m a lirirh family and
dilaint t> a position of eminence among
hit kinsmen

He who passes the whale month of
niia,.adiiivata, cnnrinrng lumseff every day
II ( Illy unc me-tl, becomes a favuutiie with
t;«ii>cti who, Indeed, readily acknowledge
1 U sway.

3i He who passes the wliofe of the
mniiili Cl/ Chaijca ISkjng every ii*y ime
meal only, IS lisrn In a high faiTnly and
becomes rich »» gold, stems, and pearls

74 1 lie person wl ether male or female,

wlo passes the an mill of Vaish.kha lalriiig
I iipsrU or 1 ersrli cvrrv day one meal, and
keep ig Ins or I er senees under leslrainl,
snrCer-Us ■■ aiuii mg 10 « position of enll-

a ? I he persnn wl.o passes the mantli

t>f jais'ttiy* isliiiii; ) 1 nself every day one

ine^l succeeds m a p isilwii of

rmntive and great riches. II a woman,
si e reaps i»>e same reward

t' He Sit o passes the month el Asha-
UVln;; himitU one meat a day and


wUli senses steadily concentrated Upon hi
duties, becomes possessed of much corn,
great riches, and a large progeny,

*7. He who passes the month of Sra-
vana, taking himseif one meal adiyre-
ceises the honors of AbhisheUa wherever !•#
may happen to live, and attains to a posi-
tion of eminence among kinsmen whom Iw
supports.

28 I Hal nan who lakes himself only
one meal a day lor the whole month of
Proshihapada, becomes possessed of
•Idles.

29 The man who passes the month of
Ashwin, taking JnmseM one meal a dayi
becomes pure in soul and body, possesse i of
many unimals and vehicles and a large
progeny.

30. He who passes the month of K^t-
ilka, taking liimself one meal every d«yi
becomes possessed of heroism, many wir^
and great fame*

31 I have now told you, O lung. *»• **
the fruits are Hut are obtained by nw* ‘’f
observing Usts for the two and ten inuni'is
in detail Livten now, O king, to me as t
ull vouwhal the rules are about the Innsf
days.

3? The man who, absiaiotiig from »t
every d^y, takes tiee at llte lerminaiwn ol
every furtnignl, becomes pissessed of *
great many kine, a Urge progenyi “
long life

33 He Who observes fasts for llf««
nights every inonih .ind acts thus lo*" t"®
and ten years, acquires a postnon of eioi*
iience among his liinsmen and friends, wiih-

oul a tival to cniiiesi fiis claim and wtho A

any anxiety caused by any one trying tJ
rise to t<ie same height.

34 These rules winch I spesk of, O
cImcI ol DiMrata’s race, should be observed
lor twelve years. De disposed to 1*0 it.

35—35 t'hai man who eais once 1 "
forenoon and once alter evening and atn-
tains from dimklni* at the interval, and whs
shows mercy lowaxis all creatures.
t*outs libations of clarified huiter on tus ***
Ctrd fire every day, acqiiles »*cces’. tJ
k««'g. in *»» year* li.e/e r» n > d ‘i •' *!
tins Such a man acqii res the merit O’
the Agnivl toma saciifiLe

37 G fled wiih me.rt nnd freed from

every 90,1 of stai,, he aenu res tl>e

of the Apviras which echo will, ihe so'’''^
ol songs and dvnee, and passes his dvT*
theeompany cl a tbooiand JiUffy beatf*
tiful ladies.

35 He rides on a car of the'cjl^f ^


ANU^f1ASANA f>AAVA.


m


poM and re«»res gfeal Iionors in tlw ^
lepiQn oJ Brahma '

39 — 40 Allerthe exhaustion of that in*rit,
sucli a person returns to Earth and acquires
elevated position I hat man who passes one
'vhcle jear, taking InmseU every day only
one meal, acquires tlie merit of the Atiraira
Sacrifice He ascends to Hraven alter
d-atli and receives great honors there.

41—4? Upon the termination of that
merit he returns to the Earth and acquires
a position of eminence He who passes one
wliole }ear fasting for three days m succes
Sion and taking food ort every fourth day,
and abstaining from injury from every sort,
adhering to trtithfulriess of speech, and
keeping his senses tinder conirnf, acquires
the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.

43—44 Such a person ascends to Heaven
after death and receives great honors lliere
I hat man, O son of Kimti who passes a
wl'ote year observing fasts for five days and
taking food tin only the sixth day, gams the
mentof tie Hnrse sacrifice the chariot
lie rides, is drawn bv Chakr&vakas.

45—46. ^itch a man enjoys every lemd
ef happiness in Heaven for full forty thou
sanJ years He who passes a whole year
olnerving fasts for seven davs and taking
food on only every eighih day, gams the
merit of the Gavamaya sacrifice I he
chariot he rides, is drawn by swans and
cranes

47— 4S Such a person en|oy$ all kinds |
of tiappiness in Heaven fer fifty thousand
years. He who passes a whole year, O
king, taking hod only at intervals of a foil
night, y.ains tt<e merit of a continuous last
for SIX months, 1 his has been said by the
illustrious Angiras Inmself Such a man
lives in Heaven for sixty thousand years. I
4 g He IS roused every morning from !
h‘s bed by the sweet notes of Vinas and .
Vallakis and flutes, O king.

50 He who passes a wliole year, drink*
mg only a little water at (he termination of
every month, acrjmres, O king, the merit of
tfre VhhnojJt sacrifice

51. Such a man rides a chariot drawn
by lions and tigers He lives m Heaven
for seventy thousand years in the enjoyinem
of every sort of happiness.

52. No fast for more ihan a jnonib, O

king, has been ordained Even this, Osoii
of t’rilha, IS the ordinance about fasta that
has been declared by sages conversant with
duties. I

53. That man who unafllicied by
disease and free from every malady, ob-
serves J fast, indeed acquires, at eve*y step,
ttie tneriCs of Jsacrifices


54 Such a man ascends to Heaven on a
Car drawn by swans Gibed with poiver,
he enjoys every sort of happiness in Heaven
fora hundred years

55 -A hundred Apsaras of the most
beautiful features, wait upon, and sport with
Inm

56 He IS roused from Ins bed every
morning by the sound of ihe ICandns and
the Nupurss of those ladies.

57 Such a person rides on a car drawn
by a thousand swans Living again,, m
a region teemiiie with iiu nlreds of the
most beautiful ladies, he passes Ins time in
great joy.

5S— 59 Tfie person irho seels Heaven,
does not want strength when he beenmes
weak, or the cure of wounds when he is
wounded, or the adrninisfrafrori of inedici le
wlikn lie IS ill or soothmgs by others wiien
he IS angry, or ihe mmgaiitm, by the «•
pendiniro of motiet, of sorrows e*if,ed oy
piveiiy.

60 Leaving this world where he snlTers
all sorts of privations he proeeerfs tn
Heaven and rides on cars bedecked will
gold, his body adorned with all sous of
ornaments. Jlirre, m the midst of tnin-
dreds of beautiful ladies, he eiij lys all sorts
of pleasure and happiness, cleaused of
every sm

6 t indeed, absfarning from food and
enjoyments in this world he rrnnnnres this
body and ascends to Heaven as the fruit of
h(s penances I liere purged of alf Ins sms,
be enjoys health and happiness arvi all his
wislies become crowned witfi success

62 — 63 Such a person n f« on a cefes-
lial car of golden color, rfl ilgent hire the
•noriiiiig sun, set wiili pearls an 1 Upis
faciiti resouiidtiig with the music of Vnras
and Miirajas, adorned with banners and
lamps and echoing witli llie •uuiids o( celes-
tral bells

I 64 Such a person cnjiys all sorts of
I happiness in Heaven for as many years as
I ihere are pores in Ins body.

6j. There is no Shasira superior to the
Veda tliere is no person more worti y r>{
respect (tian the moilier there is no ac-
quisition superior to itiat of viiliie, and nn
penance superior (o fast.

66 lliere IS nothing more sacred, in
Heaven or Barth, than Braliinanas S,n>i.
larly there is no penance that is superior to
the observance of fasts

67, It was by fists that the cetesiiaft
have succeeded in becoming dwetleis of
Heaven It is by lasts that the Kisliis
bare acquired hij^h success.


236


MAHABHARATA.


6S. Vuliwamifra pissed a tlmusand
celestial ^ears. l-iki'ig nne meal a day. and
ns the consequence tliereof acquired the
status of a Bralimana.

69 Chyavana, Jamadaeni, Vashishtha,
Gautama and Bungii — all these ereat
Hishis gifted with t'le virtue of forgiveness
>— have attained to Heaven through the
observance of fasts.

70. Formerly Angiras declared so to Hie
great Rishis. Ihe man who teaches an*
other the merit of fasts, has never to suffer
any sort of misery,

71. The Ordinances about fasts, in their
due order, O son of Kunti, have originated
from the great Rishi Angiras ihe man
svho daily reads these ordinances or hears
them read, becomes treed from all sms.

72. Not only is such a person freed
from every calamity, but his mind >rises
above all sorts of shortcomings Such
a person succeeds in iiiHlerslandmg the
sounds of all creatures other than human,
and acquiring eieriidt fame, becomes (he
foremost of men.


CHAPIEU evil.

(ANUSJIASANIKA PARVA) —

CoitlmutJ.

TndliislftWra said

t. O grandfather, you have duly des*
trtbed to us the smijeci ol Sacrifices, mdu*
ding the meriis tii full that atiacu to them
botii liere and hereafter,

3. It should he remembered, however, O
grandlather, that Sacrifices are incapable of
being celebrated by poor men, tor these re*
quire a large store of various articles.

3. Indeed, O grandfather, ihe meiit
nltachiug to bacrifices can be acquired by
only kings and princes. That merit is in-
capable of being nrquired by those who
have no weatili and power and who live
alone and are helpless

5 Da >011 lell u«, O grandfather, what
the orrtinances are about ihose acts that are
Iraugl t with ineiii equal to wliat belongs to
Sactinces and which, iberclore, are capable
cl being performed by poor men.

Sbislimasaidi'^

6 Listen, o Yudhishihira* Tfiose
ordinances that 1 have told you aI,— those.

lliat were first piomiilgaicd by the
gieal Rishi Angiras, and that base refer-
ence lo inetiiuiiAiis lasts lor then s«nl, — are
consideird as eq •«! to basnrKes.


7—8. That man who tatceenne metl n
llie forenoon and one at night, sviit out
taking any food or drinh riuring the inter-
val, and who observes this reBiiUlion for a
period of SIX years successively absiatnug
all the wtiile from injuring any cre-itiire and
regularly pnurtng libations on his sacred fire
every day, attains, forsooih, to success
Such a man acquires here-ifier a car of the
color ol heated gold, and acquires a resi-
dence, for millions of years m the regmn el
Prajapalt, m the company of celestial
ladles, (hat ever edioes wiili the siuu'i’*
music and dance, and shrnes with llie eflu'*
gence ol Bre


9 He who passes three years, tahioff
one meal a day and abstaining *'f
while from intercourse with any other
woman except his own married wife, aliaius
to Ihe merit of Ihe Agnishtoina sacnfrce

10 — 14 Such a man fs tonsidereif at

having pel formed a Sacrifice with pie" /
of gifts in gold, that is deer to Vasar
himself. By practising tnrthfulni-s*
speech making gifts, respecnng the ‘
msnas, avoiding inahce, becimmg fofgw'i.
and »elf controlled, and conq lertrg ,**"**'
a man acnuires llie highest end
a car of the color of svliite clouds .
drawn by swans, he lives, lor milh"'* *'
millions ol years, m t lie company ,1 ’

Fasting for ft whole day and takme J
one meal on the second day, he wl»o

libations upon his sacicd fire for the pefii

of a whole tear,— indeed, he ,

such a fast and aliends every dey t" ^
(ire and rises every day finm
sunrise, acquires tlie merit of tlm Ai!"
lama sacrifice. Such a man acq I'tt* *
drawn by swans and ernnes.

15—17. Surrounded by the
ful ladles, he lives m Ihe region o’
lliat man wl o lakes only one me-l J
third day, and pours hbaiions


, slrrp

' fR


year, — indeed, he who tli'ii* ailrinlii
lire every day and wakes
every morning before sun rise, acq
high merit of the Auralra s-iciifi--«
acquires a car drawn by peacocks *
swans and cranes.

18 Frnceeding to Ihe region 1 *’^
seven Risliis, he lives there surronnojO
Apsarasof great beauty. 1 1
that such residence lasts for lull ‘
Padmasol years

»9— 20 raslmg for three day^
cessively, he who taVe» only onr me-’
Imirth day, and Ip'in* IiImIi-mis r*e»» • *
an InvsaciFil fiie, ucn 1 irs ll.- g«rat
ol the v-j.jrya s^cilbce. I !•< ''


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


»37


arqnlre^ h crac^<l by Incbty bea«liful Cetn*

fi<a( Indies wlio (isve India for tiieir I-tther.

it. He lives m. (he region of Indra far
millions and mdlrnns of years, and enjrjs
(iieat liappioess by wiiiiessing the sporis of
the king of (he gods,

2j — 23 Fasiing for four days me
reSMvely he who eats only one meal twery
fifilt iiay, and pours bbsiRHrson the sacred
Rre every da\ for t>ie peimd of a whole
year, and who lives willHtni cupidity, teHintf
(he (riilh, respecitn^ the Bralintriias.
absiaiiiinj; front every sort of ii))U'y, and
Bvnidiiit; inalice and sin, acquires the merit
of tlie Va]4peya sacrifice.

24 I he car hr rides, is made of ('old
and drawn by swans arid ef?iit('en( like
many suns risiMt; togeilier. He «iq iires,
besides, A pal-ittal Iniilding of pure wuiie

25 He lives there happily (or (ull one
and Rftv P«dmas of years

26—27 He who fasting for five days,
lakes loll only on the sixth dry, ami
pons libations on Ins sacred Rre every
day for uiie year, and who (>«r(oi<ii> three
all! ibons in course of the day for purifying
himself .mil saj log Ins prayers and payi >g
Ins ailoralHiil. and who leads A celibate life,
divested >il niaiice in Ina conduct, acquires
(lie mem 01 (lie G) n-dna sacnfice,

28 He arq nree an excellent car adorn-
ed wiili pure gold r 5 iJgent like a blazing
fire and drawn by swans ond peaeoces

2g He sleeps on (he lap of Apsaras and
Is awa»ened every inorinng by the mefo-
dio It ao'ind of Nnporrfs aii i Kanchrs,

30 He leads such a h'ppy Me for ten
thousand millions of years and three
Ihuu.-nid nuUioiis besides and eight and
ten Padinas and two P-it-rk-rs.

3t. Such a rnan lives also, honored by
all, in the region ui Ur,ihin-i for as many
ycrfrs ns iheie are hairs on the bodies «f
five thousand bears,

32—34 Fasling for six days, he svho
takes only one meat eveiy sev'nih day and
pouis liiVarionv o"" Ole" skefeuf ifVe’ every'
drty. fur a full year, controlling epeecf*
all (he while and observing (lie vow of
criitiacy and abstaining from the use of
fl iwers and ■nignenis and h >ney and meal,
acquires the regi m of the Afaruts and of
India Crowned with the fruition of every
wish as It originates in the mind, tie is
walled upon and adored by Celestial
ladies.

33 He acquires the merits of a sacrifice
in which piofnse gold IS Riven away Pro-
ceeding til Ihe regions named, he lives there
lor numberless years lU the enjoyment of
Rieai^si happiness.


3®^37- He who shows mercy to all
And fasting for seven days eats on eveiy
eighth day for a whole year, and, pouring
labaiions every day on the sacred fiie, wor-
ship the cetesiuls, regularly, acquires the
great merits of (he Paundaiica sacrifice,
llie car lie rides is lutus-mied

38 Forsooih, such a man acquires also-
A large inimber of yotiig ami beauiiliil
ladies, some liavtng complexuins that are
dark, some with c imptexmis like that of
gold, and some that are Shyainas, whose
looks and gestures areof the nvist agreeable
kind

3^—40. He who fasts for eight days and
takes only one meal o« every ninth day for
one full year, and pours libations on the
Sacred Rre every day, wins the great merits
I uf a thousand Horse sacrifices. 1 lie car
j lie rales m fteawNi is beautiful like a lotus.

' 4t. He always journeys, on (liat car,

I accoinp-mird by llie diu^hiers of Rudra
bedecked wiih celestial garUmli and Rifled
wi'h Hie effulgence of the midday sun or
of fires of burning fiiines.

42 Acq i-rntg tlie rogioM of Ritdra, he
lives (here in great happiness for njmber*
less years.

43—44 He who Usis for nine days and
takes only one meal every tenth day for »
whole tear, .riid piiurs libaiionS on his
sacred hre everv day, gams the liigli merit
of a ihouvind Horse tekrifices and attains
to the CO ■ip'Uiioiisiiip of Bratimaiie’s
dangUiers whose beauty cliarin the hearts
of ail creatures. '

45 Ihese^ ladies, possessed of such
beauty, and s'jme ofilhem possessed of Color
of the lotus and some like that of ilie same
iliwer of the blue variety, always keep him
III joy,

46 He Acqnres A beautirnl car which
moves In faeauiifiil rircl-s and which looks
lilie the dense cloud Called Avarta, resein.,
ble also an ocean wave

47. That car resounds wnU the constant
tinkle of rows of pearls and gems, and the
melodious sound of conchs and is adorned
with colum is made uf crystals and dia-
moiids, as as also with an sliar consirucied
of the same minerals.

48 He rides such a -Cxr, drawn by
swans and cranes, and lives for millions and
millmus of years in great happiness ,tn


49—51. He who fasts for ten days and
catsoril) clarified butler on every eleventh
day fur one lull year and pours liUatioiis on
hiss..cred firceverj day, who never, in word
or thought, seeks (lie contpany of otiwr


238


MAIIABIIARATA.


pcopti*'s wives and wlio never niters a lalse-
linoil even for the sake of Ins inolher -ind
iatfier, succeeds in seeing M diadcva of
ureal power seated on his car. buch a
person acquires the great merit of a tliou*
sand Horse sacrifices

5} He sees the car of the Self-create
Biahman himself approach for taking lum
on It. He rides on it accompanied by
celestiaf ladies gifted with great beauty, and
complexions as effulgent as that of pure
gold.

53. Gifted with the bUztng sptcrtdour
of the C^cle fire he lives for many jears in
a celestial mansion in Heaven, full of
every happiness

54 For those numberless years he
txperiences the joy of bending his head in
respect m Uudra worshipped by theceles*
tials and Danavas

55—55 Such a person sees every day
the gieat go 1 That man who haanig lasted
f ir eleven days, eats only a little clarified
butter on the twelfth, and acts thus f>r a
whole year, succeeds in acquning the merits
«( mU the Sacrifices the car he rides, is
• {fulgent like a dozen suns
57—58 Adorned with costly gems and
p-arit and enrats. emhellished with rows of
■wans and snakes and of peacocks an I
Chakravakas uttering their mefodmus notes
n id beautified with targe domes, is the
q larier to which lie attains in the region of
Uiahman

$1) Tlial house, O king, is always fille I
with men and women this is what the
b gbiy blessed Uishi Angiras, knowing
every duly, said

61. That man who having fasted lor
Iw'lve days eats a little clarified butter
ei the thirteenth, an] nets tlius tor a
whole year, succ'e Is m acq nring the menls
of the divine sacrifice

6t, Such a man gets a car of the color
of the new blown lolus adorned with pure
poJJ j»4>d )>eap5 cS feweif and gf/nt

(tj. I le goes to the regions of the Maruts
winch are fu’l of eclesiiel ladies, which
are adnnel witti every kind of celestial
nrnameni, which are filled with celeslul
perlumts, and which contain every element
cl happiness

fi3 Countless is the number of years he
I res in those fiappy regions,

f'l S<>oll<il with the sound of miistc
an 1 Oie sweet vo<ce of G KKlIiarvas and lb«
ads wnd bGre il drunsand ransvas,
•■e IV «rv««ai ify pleas'd by cdevtial ladies
el yiest beauty


65 That man who having fasted fir
thirteen days, eats a little 'clarified b iiler
on the fourteenth day, and acts thus lor a
full year, acquires the merits of the Mtht*
medha sacrifice.

66 Celestial ladies of indescribable
beauty, and whose age cannot be deter*
mined, for llvey Inok ever young, adorned
witli every ornament and wiih armlets of
blamig effulgence, wsu op*i i fiim with ma«y
cars and follow Inm in Ins journeys

67 He is waked every morning from
hts bed by tlie melodious note of swans, the
tinkle of Njpiiras, and t"e highly agree*
able Jingle of Ivanchis Indeed, lie lives m
a superior house, waited upon by sudi
celesiitl ladies, for years as countless' as be
sands on the shores of Gmga.

63 — 70 That man who, keeping li‘S
senses under rntraint, fasis for a ft»rli'i,;''t
and lakes only one meal on the sisteexd'
day, and acts l/ius {or a whole jevr, pour*
ing libations every day on his sacred fire,
acq iires the great merits of a iliousaid
K-javjya sacrifices I he car he nd«b •’
highly beautiful and is drawn by sw*"*
and peacocks

7t— 73 Riding on such a car winch

liesides, adorned with garlands of pr*^”
and the purest gold and graced w''*
bevies of celesnal ladies decked with on'**
menu of every son, liaving one colt®*’
and four vrehes and seven altars exceed*
ingly auspicious, having ihousmds e*
banners and echoing with the sciuno or
music, celestial and of celestial alinbuK**
set With gems and pearls and corals »i'd
cffilgent like lightning, such a man h***
in Ilexven for a thousand cycles, hav'if
elepli;«nis and rhinoceroses lor dnBK"'i*
that car of ins. '

74* I hat man who having fasted for
fifteen days takes one meal on the sitteext"
day and acts ilms for one wivile y**^'
acquires the merits ol the Soma sacrifice-

73 Proceeding to the celestial regro"- •'*
fives u the company of Soma's d*u.*ffrr»*
His b>dy fragrant with ungiienis •»' i"^
perfumes are as sweet as Ihrne of S’'"*
himself, he acquires the power of go'***
immediately to any place he likes

76* Sealed on Ins ear I e is waited iT'’"
bybeauhfutdamwUol agreeable msert”’
and commands all articles of eTijojment

77* He enjoys such happiness for
years.

78—79 That min wl><» having faiirl
for siaiecn days, rats a I life danfi d I”'
on th^ aeveiit**iiiii dar, ard ariv i^us 1 f
I whoV jejf, pouring liba liwi » cieiy «la> ^


Ai7U3tfASANA PAnVA.


-‘39


Ws Sacred Rre, proceeds la the re*r«RS of
Varuna and India and Rudra and the
Maiuts and Ushanas and Brahman him-
sd(.

8o. '1 here he is waited upon hy celestial
ladies and sees the celesiuf Rishi catted
Qfiurbituva and sees the entire universe.

St. the daughters of the king' of the
deities gladden liim Diere 1 hose damsels,
of agreeable manners and adorned with
every ornament, are capable o( assuming
thirtj-two forms.

S3. As long as the Sun and the Moon
move in the shy. so long does iliat wise man
live in those regions of happiness, living
Upon the succulence of ambrosia and

83 That man who having fasted (or
Seventeen days, takes only one meat on (tie
cighieenili day, and acts thus lor a whole
year, succeeds in seeing the scVeu regions
of the universe.

84. Willie making his {ourneya on Ins
car, he IS always followed by a large train
vf cars producing the most agreeable raiile
and ridden hy Celestial ladies shining with
‘Ornaments and beauty.

83 finjoying the greatest happiness, the
car lie tides, is celestial and endued with the
greatest beauty It is drann by (ions anJ
tigers, and produces rattle as deep as (he
mutiering of tlie clouds ’

86 lie lives in such happiness (or a
thousand Sons, living upon ambfOsU that
is as sweet as ne&car itself

8j, I hat man who having fasted, for
eighteen days, eats only one meal on tlie
nnieieenih day mJ icts thus for a full year,
Succeeds m perceiving all the seven regions
of the oniverr-

83 . iiie region to ivhicli he atiains is
peopled by various tubes of Aptaras and
resounds with ihesweei note ol Gandliarvas.
'1 he car lie rides is efTnigeni like the sun

8g ills iieait shorn ul every anxiety,
Jie i« wAUed itoon by ll e foremo*! of
lial ladies. DeCaed Wiili celestial gaiUitds,
and possessed ol beauty, he lives in suCii
happiness lor miHnns and millions of years.

9}— ^t. (hat man who having fasted
for niiieieen da>», eais ouly one inral on
every tvreiiueih day, and acts thus for a
full \ear, observing all ihe while truthlui-
ness of speech and observance of other
(excellent) riiuals, abstaining also Irom
meal, leading a celibate hie ant devoted
to the behoof ol all creatures, acquires tite
extensive regions of great happmesSi be-
longing 10 Ihe Adit) as.

gj. AVhilc making lus journeys on his


own car, he is f<>)lpwed by a large tram of
cats ridden by Gandharvas and Apsaras
decked with Celestial garlands and per-
fumes.

93—94. That man vuho haVmg fasted
for iwciity days, takes a single merl on the'
iweniy first day, and acts thus for a full
year, pouring libaiions every day nn lus
sacred fire, accjnires the regions of Ushanns
and|blialcra, of tlie Ashwms and the Maruts,
and lives there Id uninterrupted happiness
of great measure.

95 Unacqiiainied with all sorrows, he
rides the foremost of cars for making lus
Journeys, and wailed upon by foremost of ,
celestial ladies, and possessed of power, he
sports la foy hke a celestial himself.

9^—97. That mart who fiaViiig fasted
(or twenty-one days, takes a single meal orl
the tweiiiy. second day^ and acts thus (or a
full year, pouring libations on ills sacred
fire every day, absCammg from m/nring w»y
cieaiure, observing truthfulness of speech,
and (reed from maliCe, acquires the regi <ns
of the Vasus and becomes endued with
solar effidgence.

9$ Gifted With (he power of g iiiig every
where at will, hying upon iiecur, and
riding on the foremost of cars, hts body
decked With celestial ornaments, he spirts
m joy m the company of celestial fadies.

99— too. that man who having fasted
for twenty. tiro days lakes a single meal on
tl<e (we'*ty iinrd day. and acts thus for a
lull year, thus regnlati ig his diet and keep-
ing Ins senses u iJer restraint acq tires the
regiinis of (he Wiiid-Ood of Usheiias and
ol Kndras Capable of going everywhere
at will, and always roving at will, he 13
adored by vanuu-. tribes of Apsaras.

lot Riding On the foremost of cars and
hts b^dy decked with celestial ornamenis,
lie sports i ir iiuinberless years in great
fiappmess in the company of celestial ladies,

loj— ‘103 rital irtan who having fasied

for twen<y.(l,ree days ea(s a little ciaiifi-d
butter on the twenty fourth day, and ..co
tlius (or a full year, pouring libalioiis on ■
h>s sacred fire, lives for countless years in
great happiness in the regions of the
Aduyas, Ins body decked with ceirstial
dresses and garlands and celestial perfumes
and nngttenls

I >4 Riding on an excellent car, made
of gold and gifled wlih great beamy and
drawft by swans, lie spoils in joy in the
company of ihousands and ihousatids of

celeaiiat ladies.

105 lliat man who having fasted for
twemy-four days, lakes a single f»7eal on ih«
tvrauy-fiUh day, and acts timt (or full year/


2^0


MAHAmiAKAtA.


succeeds m geUmg a car of ttie (orernost
kind fail of every object of enji^metU.

lo6 — loS He IS followed in Ins |oiimeys
by a large tram ol cars drawn by lions and
liters, and producing a sound as deep as
tile mmiermg of ihe douds, ridden by celes-
tial Udies, and all made of pure void and
endued wttli great beamy. Kimsetf ndmg
ait excellent celcsit-il ctr endued with
great beauty, he lives in those regions for a
tliousand sons, in the company of hun-
dreds ol celestial ladiesi and living upon
ambrosia that is sweet as nectar itself

109-^112 1 hal man who having fasted

for liveiilj -five days ta«es only one meal
On the twenty sixth day, aiid acts thus for a
full year m tile ohiervaiice »f such a regU*
Idtion about diet, keepin* his sbnses under
restraint, freed from atlachment, and pour-
ing libations, every day on his sacred fire.— »
that blessed max '—adored by tlie Apsaras,
acquires the regi >ns of the seven Maruu
and (he Vasus When m-rkt'ig lus j larneys,
he is followed by a Ur^e train of cars
made of excellent crystal and n.lorne t with
ult sorts of gems and tidden liy Gandhar-
Vas and Apsaras who show him every
honor. He lives in (hose regions, in enj >y-
inent of such happiness, and gifted with
celestial energy, for two t<>ousand cycles
113^114 Ibat man who having fasted
for twenty -SIX days eats a single meal on
the twenty-seveiiifi day, and acts tlms for a
full year, pouring libations every day on hts
sacred fire, acq iires gieat merit and pro-
ceeding (0 the celestial regi m. receives
honors from tlie deities Living tliere. he
subsists on nectar, freed from thirst of every
kind, and enjujing every liappmess

1 15. His soul purified of every dross and
making his journeys on a celestial Car ol
great beauty, lie lives (heiei O king, acting
like the celestial llishts and the royal
sages.

116. Gifted wiili great energy, he lives
there XI great h'lppiiiesj III the company of
celestial ladies of highly agreeable manners,
for three thousand cj-cles and x ms

117 — itS That man wlio having fasted
for iweniy-seveii days takes a single meal on
itie twenty-eightii day, and acts thus f«r a
full year, with soul and senses under perfect
restranil. acquires very great meiK, which,
m fact, IS equal to what Is acquired by (he
celestial llisins Having evrry article ol
enjojmcnt, and gificd with great energy,
he shines with the effulgence ot tlie midday

119—120. Sportive ladies of the most
deltcaie teaimes and gilted with spimd Htr
ct complexion, having deep bosoms, taper-
ing thighs and lull and round hips, decked


With celestial ornaments, please him With
their company while tie rides 011 h delighttul
and excellent car effulgent like the siin .-iid
equipped with every article uf enjoyment,
for tliQusaiids and thousands of sions

121—123 1 hat man who (laving fasie <

I for twenty-eiglit days, takes 3 single meal ml
tile twenty-ninth day, and acts tlius for a
. fall year, observing all the while truthful-
ness of speeds acquires uuspicious regions
ot great happiness tliat are adored by celes-
tial Ktshis and royal sages (he car he
obtains IS effiitgeiu like tne sun and the
■noon, made of puie g ild and adorned with
every sort of gem, iidden by Apsatas and
Gaiidliarvas singing ineloJiuusI).

124 Ihereou be is attended byauspi-
Cl ms ladies adorned with celestial oma^
inenis of every Son Uihed with sweet
dispositions and agreeabte features, and
cfidued With great energy, these {,ladJe'i
him with their company,

125 Kndued with every articfe of enj >y»
ment and willi great energy, >iid pos'vS'.e 1
of the splendour ol a buriii ig lire, lie shines
like a celestial, with a celestial lorin luvmg
every excellence.

126 the regions he attains are'^those of
(he Vasus and the Ataiuiv, of the baddliyas
and the Asliwins, of the Kudras and of
Brahman liimsell.

lay that man who having fasted for a
full month, takes a sinvie meal on the first
day of tbe fobownig monen, and acts tliui
fora full year, lousing uii all things nn-
parttaily, attains to (he regions of tiraliinati
Imnselt.

128. I here he lives upon ambrosis.
Gifted with a beauiilul form luglily agreeable
to all, he shines with energy and pruspeniy
like (he sun himself ol a thousand rays.

129 Devoied to Yoga and aJorne t wiih
celeuial dresses and garlands aid smeared
wun ccUslial perlumes and iingnenis he
passes his time m great bappmess, noi ex-
periencing the least sorrow He sin les on
Ins car alteiided by ladies that blase lorlh
with effulgence emitted by themselves.

riiose Udies tlie daughters of tllS
celestial Uishis and the iludias, worship
lum with veneration.

* 3 *- CapaOleof assuming vsrious forms
tliai are highly delightful and highly agree-
able, their speech is characterised by
vari ,us kinds of sweeiness. and they am
aWe 10 please the person they wait wpoir
m various kinds of ways.

* 3 *— iJJ. While making his {ourneys,
he tides on a car that loots like kl'e s<y
iiKlI m color, ill hit rear ate cats wliicti


AttUSItASANA PARVA


24J


loolt like Uie Maon, before liim are Ihose
tviiicl* resemble ibe clourfs , on bis right
are cars that are red , belo'Vybim are those
that are blue | and above him are those
that are of variegated color. He is afways
ft'orshipped by lliose who wait upon him,

134 Gilied with great wisdorrij he lives
In tl e region of Brahman for as many
years as are measured by (be drops of rain
that fall in course of a thousand years on
the insular coiitineiil of Jamvudwipa
13s Indeed, g'ft*^ '*'•**'
a deity, he lives to that region of unalloyed
happiness for as many years as the drops
of ram which fall upon the Earth in the
rainy seasoit

13$, The man who, having fasted for a
whole month, eats on the first day of the
fultowing month, and acts thus f >r ten years,
acquires the status of a great Rtshi He
has not to undergo any change of form
wlitfe going to the celesiul region for enjoy-
ing the rewards ol Ins deeds in this fife

137. Indeed, this is tlie status whieli one
aeqiires by controlling speech, practis-
ing self-denial, subjugating anger, sexual
appetite, and the desire to eat, pouring
fiuations on tiie sacred fire and regufaily
worshipping the two twilights

138, I list man who purifies hifflsetf by
the observance of these and similar vosvs
and practices, and who eats in this way, be- 1
comes as pure as ether and gifted with I
Solar effulgence.

139 Such a man, O king, proceeding
to the celestial region in even lus own cor.
poreal frame, enjoys alt the, happiness that
ir there like a celestial at lus will

>40* I have thus told you O chief of
the Bharatas what the excellent ordinances
ere about sacrifices, one after another, as
dependent upon the fruits of fasts,

141—142 Poor men, O son of PriUia,
may, nevertheless acquire the druits thereof |
(by the observance of fasts). By observmg 1
these fasts, even a poor man may acquire '
enbiCi'ioremosi one di 'd'narata'a
race, devoling himself all the while besid-s,
to the worship of the celestials and the
Brahmanas ( have thus recited to yoii
tn full the ordinances about fasts.

*43 Go not entertain any doubt about
Ihose men who so observe vows who are
so lieedful and pure and great, wlm are so
freed from pride and malice who are en-
dued With such devoted understandings,
snd wjio pursue their end with such firm-
IJtss and fixity ol purpose without ever
deuaimg Irom their path.


CHAPTER CVm.

WNUSHASANHCA PARVA; —

Conhnued.

Yadhiahthira flaid

f, IcfJ me, O grandfather, of that whfcfi
IS cmsidered as the foremost of all flrthas.
Indeed you should expound to me what
that I irtha is winch conduces to the greatest
purity.

Bbisbma saidJ—

3 Forsooth, all Tirthas are possessed of
merit. Listen, however, witli attention to
me as I tell you what the firtha, the
cleanser, is of men gifted with wisdom

3 Following eternal Truth, one should
bathe in the 1 irtlia called Manasa, which
fa unfathomable, stainless, and pure, and
which has Truth for us waters and ibe
understanding for its take.

4 Ifie fruits, in Che form of cfeansfng,
that one gams by bathing in that lirtha,
are freedom from cupidity, sincerity, truth-
ftthiess, mildness, mercy, abstention from
injuring any creature, self control, and
tranqinlliiy,

5 Those men who are freed from at-
tachments, who are sliorn of pride, who are
above ail pairs of opposites, who have no
wives and children end houses and gardens,
etc , who are gifted will) purity, and who
live upon the alms given to them by others,
are considered as Tirthas.

6 He who irnows tlie truths of all things
and who IS freed from the idea of mineness,
IS said to be the highest Tirtha In finding
out the marks of purity, your ffaze should
ever be directed towards these q lalities.

J— 8 Those persons from whose souls
(he qualities of goodness darkness, and
ignorance have been washed off, they who,
not caring for purity and impurity, pursue
the ends they have proposed to themselves,
they who iiave renounced everything they
ase. yw/Mse/l

with universal sight, and they who are
of pure conduct, are considered .ns Tirthas
possessing the purifying power.

9 That man whoseC mbs only are wet
with water, is not considered as one that is
WMstied. He, on the other hand is con.
sidered as washed who has waslied himself
by seir-denul Even such a p-rson is said
to be pure both internally and externally

10, They who never busy themselves
with what IS past, they who feel no attach-
ment for present acquisitions, indeed, (bey
who are free from desire, are said to be
possessed of the highest puniy.


242


MAflAiillAKAlA


111 Knowtcflge iS said to form Ific
rspeci^l purity of the body So also free-
dom from desire, and cheerfulness of nniid

12 Pnrily of conduct forms the purity of
tie mind Hie purity tliat one atquires
by ablutions in sacred waters is considered
asinfeiiir. Indeed that puiily which on-
tamales from knowledge, is considered as
the best

13 Ifiose ablutions nfiieh one performs
vilha burning mind in tlie waters of the
knowledge of Brahma in the lirtlia called
JSldiiasa, are llie true ablutions for trulh-

- knowing persons

14. I hat man who is endued with true
punt) of ciindnci and who is always given
to the preservation of a proper altitude to-
wards all. indeed, he who is gifted terih
attributes and merit, is considered as truly
pure

15 ‘lliese that I have mentioned have
been said to be the lirihas of the body
Lis en (o me as I (efl yon wliat those
sacred tirlhas are that are situate en tlie
brrth also

lS As special attributes of (Ire body
have been satd to be sacred, so there are
paiiiciitar sp tson Barth as welt and par-
ticular waters, which are considered sacred

17 D) reciting the names of the Tirlhas.
by peit< rmiMg ablutions there, and by oRer-
ing oblations to the departed M-tnes in
those places, one's sms are dissipated
'Ihose men whose sms are thus dissipated,
succeed in acquiring the celestial region,
when they leave this world.

18. On account of their association with
pious persons, through llie special efficacy
of the earth itself. o< those spats and of
particular waters, there are certain portions
of the Esrth that have come to be con-
sidered as sacred

19. 1 he mental 1 irthas are Separate

, and distinct from those of the Fartli. I bat

person who bathes iiibolli, acquires success
forthwith

20—21. As strength without eaerimn
or exertion without strength can never per-
form any thing, singly and as these, wb^n
combined can do ill things, so one that
becomes gifted with the purity tlial is con-
tributed by the lirthts III the body as also
by that which is contributed by the 1 iriiias
on llie Earili, becomes duly pure and ae-
quires success. 1 hat purity which is de-
rived from both sources is the best.


CHAPTCn CIX.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Tudhishtbira said —

• I You should. O grandfather, tell me
what IS the highest, tl>e mist beneficMl,
and the most certain fruit of all sorts of
f isls m this woild

Bhisbma said

i Listen, O king, to what was rrcited
by the beJf-create himself and by doing
wbicli a person, forsouth, Htqiires the
highest happiness.

3 That man who fasts on the iwelhh
day of the moon in the month called Marga-
shira and adores Krishna as Kesliava
for the wl'ote day and mglii acquires the
meriis of the Horse sacrifice and becomes
purged nfl of all Ins sms.

4 He who similarly’, fasts on the twelfth
day of the moon m the month of Paiisla
and adores Knsiina as Narayana, for the
whole day and night, acquires the' menis
of llie Vajapeya sacrifice and the highest
success.

5 He who fasts on the twelfth day of
the moon m the month of Magha and
adores Krishna, as Madliava, for the whole
day and night, acquires the merits of tie
Kajasuya sacrifice, and rescues Ins own
family

6 He who fasts on the twelfth day of
tile moon in the month of Phalguna and
adores Krishna as Govinda, for the whole
day and night, acquires the the merit of
the Aliratra sacrifice and goes to the region
of Soma

7. He who fasts on the twelfth day of
the moon m the month of Chaitra and
adorcs Krislma as Vialmu, lor the whole
day and night, acquires tlie merit of the
Pundaeika sacrifice and proceeds to ih^
region of the celestials.

8 Bv observing a similar fast on tl*e
twetltn ilay ol the month of Vatsliakha aob
adoring ICiishna as the destroyer of hfadln*

lor the whole day and night, one acq nres

the merits of llie Agnislitoma sacrifice and
proceeds to the region of Somt.

9 By observing a fast on the twelfth
lunar d^y m the month of Jaishilia and
adoring Krishna as him who had covered
the universe with lliree steps of his, o"*
acquires the merits of the Gomedha sacri-
fice and sports with the Apsaras in great
happiness.

to By observing a fast on the twe'fL
day of the moon m the month il .Asbad ^


ANUSKASANA PARt^A


and adoring KusUiia as the Dw^rf. one
acquires the meiiis r>1 the N-^rainedha
SAcridce and sports i» happiness with tl e
Apsaras

II. By observing a fast for the twellth
tunar day of the month of Shravana and
atiormg Kristina for day and n^ltt as
SSreedhara, one acquires the merits of tl>e
sacrifice calleti PaiiclMyaina and acquires
a beautiful car in the celestial region where-
on he sports in ]0).

12 By observing a fast on the IweUlb '
day of the moon in the month of Bhadra*
pada and adoring KissI na as Hiishikesha
for the wliole dav and night, one acquires
the meiils of the Sauirainam sacrifice and
becomes purged oft of all sin*.

13 By observing a last for the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Ashwm
and adoring Krishna as Padmanabha, one
acquires, forsooth, the merits of that sacri
fice in winch a thousand tone are given
away

It By observing a last for the twelfth
day of the moori in the monili of Kariua
and adoring Krishna as Oamodara, one
acq iires, forsooth, the combined merits of
all the sacrifices.

15 He who, in th.s way, worship
Krishna for a whole )«ar as Pimdan*
Uiksha, acquires the power of recollecting
the incidents of Its pristine births and
acquires much tveallfi 111 gold.

t6 Likewise he who adores Krishna
every day as Upendra, ,acq iires oneness
With him After Krishna has been adored
thus, one should, at ihe conclusion of hiS
vow, feed a number of Bf.4hmanas or make
gifts of clarified butter to them.

17 Ihe illuslnous Vishnu that ancient
Being, has himself said (hat iliere ts no
fast which possesses superior merits.


CHAPIER CX 1

(ANUHASANIKA PARVA) —
Cantiiiutd,

Vaishampayana said ‘—

I. Approaching Bliislima venerable w>
years, vis , Bhishma, who was then lying
on lus bed of arrows, (he highly wise
Yudhishthira put the following questions.

Yndhishthira aaid —

2 How, O grandfather, does one acquire
beauty ot form and prosperity and sweet-


ness of disposition ? How, indeed, does
one acqniie religious merit and wealth and
pleasure? Huw does one wtn happiness?

I Bhishma said

3 — 9. {11 the month of ^fargastllra, wf en

the ntubn comes m cokj mclioit wiih the
avierism called Mula, when Ins two feet
are united with (fiat very asterism, O king,
when Rohiiii IS in his calf, when his knee*
|nii(ts are in Ashwmi and Ins thighs are in
the (wo Ashadas, when Phafguiii makes
Ins anus, and Kriitiki ills waist, when iiis
navel is in Bliadrapada, his ocular region
'in Revad. and his back on (lie Dlianislithas,
wlien Anuradlia makes his belly, when with
his (wo arms be reaches the Visliakhas,
when Ins two hands are indicated by Hasta,
when Puiiarvasu, O king, makes his fingers,
Ashlesha Ins nails when J)e»htlia makes
Iks iiectr, when Shravana makes his ears,
and Push I a Ins mouth, when Swrati is said
to make nis teeth and Ups when Shata.
bluslia ts his smile and Magfia hjs nose,
wl en Mrigashiras is known to be in h>s
eye. and Ctntra in his forehead, when fi s
bead IS m Bbaran;, when A>dra forms his
hair. O king, the vow called Chandra-
vrata should be taken in hand. Upon the
teiminaiion of that vow, gifis of clanged
butter should be made to Brahmanas con-
versant with the Vedas.

to. As the fruit ot that vow one acquires
prospeniy, personal beauty and tiai good
luck winch brings about knowledge In-
deed, one becomes, on account of such a
vow, as lull of atlnbme as the lull Moon
himself.


CHAPTER CXI.
(ANUSHASANfKA PARVA).—
CanlmueJ.

Tadhiahthira said; —

t O grandfather, O greatly wise one,
conversant with all the scriptures, I wish
to know those excellent ordinances by which
mortals have to (ravel through their founds
of re birth.

3 \Vhat IS that conduct by following
■wliKh, O king, men succeed in aequiring
high leaven and what is that conduct by
which one sinks in {felt f

1 3 \Vhen, renouncing the dead body
liiat IS as inert as a piece of wood or cluJ
oi earth, people proceed |o the other world,
wbat arc those which fallow (hern there ?


ftMtlABlMAATA


Bhislima said —

4 Yonder cotnes the tllustnous and
higlily iiUelligent Vrihasp^ti Do you ask
his blessed self, llie subject is an elernal
mystery

5 None else is capable ot explaining
the matter. Ihere is no speaker like
Vnliaspatt.

Vaishampayana said : —

6 Willie the son of Pritha and the son
of Ganga were thus conversing with each
other (here came at the spot from the sky
the illustrious Vilhaspati of purified soul

7 King Yudliishthira, and all others
headed by Dhritarashtra, stood up and
received Vrihaspati with proper honors
Excellent was tlie worship they offered (o
the preceptor of the celestials.

8 1 hen approaching the ittustnous
Vrihaspati, Dharma's royal son, Yudhish*
thira, asked him the question in proper
form, desirous of knowing the truth.

Yudhishthira said

9 O illustrious one, you are conversant
with all duties and all the scriptures Do
you tell me wliat is truly the friend of
mortal creatures'?

10. Is the father, or mother, or son, ot
preceptor, or kinsmen, ^r relatives, or those
ealletf friends, that may be said (o troty
form the friend of a mortal creature? One
goes to the next world, leaving Ins dead
body that IS like a piece ol wood or a clod
of earth. Who u tt that folfoivs him
there?

Vnliaspati said *—

tt. One (5 born alone, O king', and one
dies alone , one crosses alone the difliculties
one meets witli, and one alone meets what*
ever misery falls to his lot. '

13 — 13 One lias really no companion |
■n these deeds Ihe lather, the •noihrr,
vise bs«\*.\st,vV.e son, the peeceyAos, isiisswus,
relatives and friends, leaving the dead
body as if it were a piece of wood or a cotd
oi earth, after having mourned for only a
moment, all (urn away from it and mind
their own affairs.

14 Only virtue follows the body that
Is thus left by them all It is, therefore
plain, that virtue is Ihe only friend and
tliat virtue only slioutd be sought by all.

15 A Virtuous man would acquire ikat
Inch end which is formed^by Heasen. If
Sinful, he goes to Hell.

16 Hence, art {ntelhgent mifi should
always seek to uquire virtue throush


wealth acquired by fair means Virtue is
the one only friend which creatures haire
tn the next world

t7 Moved by cupidity, or stupefaction,
or mercy, or fear, one shorn of knowledge
IS seert to do unfair deeds for the sake of
even another, his judgment thus stupefied
by cupidity.

18 Virtue, wealth, and pleasure, — these
three form the fruit of hfe One should
will these three by means of being free front
impropriety and sm

Yudhiahthira said —

19 I have carefully heard the words
spoken by >our ilhi.trious self, — these words
that are fraught with virtue and that are
highly beneficial I «vish now to know of
the state of the body (after deaih).

30 The de^ bolJy "of man becomes
subtile and unmanifest It becomes mw
sible How IS It possible for virtue to fol*

Vrihaspati said

31—33 Barth, Wind, Ether, Wate^i
Light Mind, Varna (the king of the dead).
Understanding, the Soul as also Day and
Night, all together witness the merits of
all living creatures With these, virtue fol*
lows the creature (when dead),

9 $ When tJie body becomes bereft
life skin, bones flesh the vital seed, and
blood, lease it simultaneously.

34 Gifted wiih merit (and demeru)
individual soul (after the destruction of tfi*
body) comes by another body Alter «he
attainment by individual soul of (hat body
(he presiding deities of the five elements

' once more witness all tns deed*, good
and bad

35 What else do you wish to hear? If
Rifled With viriue, individual soul enjovs
happiness. What other subject, l)elo'|.'"fJ
to this or the other world, shall 1 deicril>«

y ndhishthirft said : —

26 Y«air illustrious self hi$ esplamcf
l,Ow Virtue follows individual soul I
to know how the vital seed u originated.

Vrihaspati said •—

*7—33 The food that these god* O
king, who hve m the body, ri# Farth.
Wind, Ether, Water, Light and Mind ear,
pleases them When those five elefn^tjj
become pleased. O monarch, with blind
numbering as their sixth, their vital
then becomes getjcratcd, Oyffu ot puinf-*
soul. *


ANUSfiASANA PARVA>


*45


* When an act of umon takes pUoe
between male and female, the* vital seed
comes out and causes conception \ have
thus explained to you what you had asked4
Wliat else do you wish (o.hear. > <■

YudUislitliira said —

30. Vou have, O illuslrious one, said
how conception takes place Do you ex
plain how the individual soul that takes
biriJ), grows,

Vrihaspati said

31 As soon as individual soul enters the
vital seed, he becomes overwhelmed by the
elements already meniioned. When tndivi>
dual soul become disunited therewith, he
IS said to attain to the other end («*».,
death).

32 Gifted with these elements, (he in>
dividual soul comes by a body Ihe deities
that preside over those elements, witness
all his deeds, good and bad. What else do
you wish to hear,

Yudhishthira said

33. Living od skin, bone and flesh, and
becoming destitute of alt (hose elements,
in what does individual soul reside, O jllus
(nous one, (or enioying and suRering liap*
pmess and misery?

Vnhaspati said'—

34 Endued with all his acts, individual
soul Quickly enters the vital seed, and avail*
ingot the menstrual flow of women, takes
birth in time, O Bharaia.

35 After birth, individual souf receives 1
woe and death Item the messengers of ,
Varna Indeed, he goes through misery
and a painful round oi re>birth

36 Endued with life, O king, individual
soul in this world, from the moment of hw
birth enjoys and suffers his own (pus*
tiiie deeds), depending upon virtue (and its
reverse)

37 If individual soul according to the
best ol his power, follows virtue from the
day of his birth, lie then succeeds in enjoy-
ing uninterruptedly, when re-born, happi-
ness .

38 If, on the other hand, wrtboui
y following virtue without interrution, lie acts
I sinfully, he reaps happiness at first as the
5 reward o! his virtue and suffers misery
{ alter that.

39 Endued with sin, individual «ouf has
io go to the dominions of Yama and suffer-
“'R Rreat misery there, he has to lake birth
in an'inlermtdute order of beii'S*


40— *4t. Listen to me as I (ell you, what
the different acts are by doing which indivi-
duals soul, stupefied by folly, has to take
birth m different orders of being, as declar-
ed «i the Vedas, the senprures, and the
histones Mortals have to go to the dread,
ful legions of Yama In those regions, O
king, there are places which are fraught
with every merit and whicli are worthy on
tliat account of being tlie habitations of the
very celestials.

42 Ihere are, again, places in those
regiotis that are worse than those which are
occupied by animats and birds. Indeed,
iber^ are places of these kinds in ihe abode
of Yama which is equal to the region oi
Brahman himsetf in merits

43 — 44 Creatures, fettered by their

deeds, suffer various kinds of misery f
' shall, after this, tell you what those acts
I and dispositions are on account of which
I a person acquires an end that is fraught
' with great misery and terror.

4S> If a twiee-born person, having studied
I the four Vedas, becomes stupefied by fall)

I and accepts a gilt from a fallen man, h<
j has then to take birth in the order of asses

I 46 He has to live as an ass for fifteer

ears bliakiog off his atsiiiine form, hi

as next to take birth as an ox and whtcl
state ha has to live for seven years.

47> Throwing off hii bovine form, hi
has next to take birth as a Bakshasa of thr
twice-born order. Living as a Rakshasa
of the twice-born order for three months,
he then regains his status of a Bralimana.

48 A Brahmana, by ofBciaimg at the
sacrifice ol a degraded person, has to take
birth as a vile worm. In tins form he hat
to five for fifteen years, O Bliarata.

49 Freed from Ins worm birth, he h
next born as an ass As an ass he has tc
live for five years, and then as a hog, ir
which state also he has to remain for as
many years,

50 After that, he is born as a cock, and
living lor five years in that form, he is
born as a jackal and lives foe. as many
years m that state. He is then born as a
dog, and living tlius lor a year he regains
his manhood.

51. That foolish disciple who offends
hrs preceptor by in|uriiig him, has cer-
, tauily to undergo three changes jo this
, world,

I sa. Such a person, O king, has in the
' first instance to become a dog. He has
I ilien to become a beast of prey, and then
I an ass. 1 ivmg his assinine form, he has to
I" wander for someum? in great misery as a


246


MAKABilARATA.


spirit After the expirali n of that time,
he IS born as a Brahmaiia
5j That sinful disciple who even in
lh<u(>lit Icnows the wife of his preceptor,
has, on account of such a sinful liearl, to
undergo many dreadful shapes m this
world

54 First taUing btrth in the ranine
Older he has to live for itiree years Ihrow
int> of! ihe canine forin~-w1ien death comes,
lie IS born as a vile vermin.

55 In this form lie has to live lor a
year. Reiinuiicnit; that form he succeeds in
regaining Ins status as a human being of
the lwice>borii order.

56. If llie preceptor kills, witlioul reason.
Ins disciple wfio is even as a son to him,
he has, on account of such a «ilful deed of
sill on his part, to lake biith as a beast
of prey.

57 That son wlio disregards his father
and mother, O king, is Lorn after reiioun*
cing Ins human form as an ass

$8 Assuming the assinme form he has
to five for ten years After that he is born
as a crocodile, m which form lie Ims to five
for a year. After that he regains (he
human form.

59 Hat son witli whom hts parents
become angry, has, on account 0/ his evd
thoughts towards them, to take birth as
an ass

60. At an ass he has to five for ten
months He is next born as a dog and has (o
remain as sucti for fourteen munihs Afier
Itiat he IS born as a cat and hvn g in that
form tor seven months he regains his liuman
form.

6t. Having spoken ill of parents, one is
born as a Sarika Sinking tliem one »
horn, O king, as a tortoise

62 Living as a tortoise for ten years,

he IS born as a porcupine Alter that lie
has to take birth as a snake, and living
for six months in that form he regains
human form. i

63 That man wfio, while living upon
the food that Ins royal master supplies,
commits deeds injurious to the interests of
his master, stupehed by folly, lias, after
death, to take birth as a monkey.

64 For ten years he has (0 live as a
monkey, and alter that for five years as a
mouse After that he is born as a dog,
and living in that form for six months he
succeeds m regaining Ins human form.

65. rhat man who misappropriates
what ts deposited with him in trust, has
to undergo a hundred births. He at {aS(
takes bulb as a vile worm.


66 ill tliat order he lias to live for
fifteen years, O Bharata. Upon (lie ex*
haiistion 0/ his sin III tins wny, be succeeds
III regatiDiig his human form.

6j [hat man who has malice towards
others, has, after death, to take birth as a
Sharngaka lhat wicked man who becomes
guilty of breach of trust has to take birth
»s a fish.

6S Living as a fisfi for eight years, he ts
born, O Bliarata, as a deer. Living as a
deer for four months, hejs next born as
a goat,

6g After tlie expiration of a full year,
lie reitounces Ins goalisti body, and is
then bofii as a worm. After lhat he sue*
cceds III regaining his human form.

70 — 71 lhat shameless insensate man
who. dirough stupefaction, steals paddy,
barley, sesame, Maslia, Kulattha, oil seeds,
oats, i’Cafaya, Afudga, wheat, Atasi, ain^
other kinds of corn, ts born as a mouse.

7* Afier leading the life for sometime,
he IS nvxi born as a hog. As soon as he
IS born as a hog he has to die of disease,

73 On account of Ins sm, that foolish
man IMS next to take birth as a dog,

0 king Living as a dog for five years,
he theii regains Ins human form.

74 Having committed an act of aduf*
leiy with the wife of another man, enets
bom as a wolf. After that he lias to as-
sume the forms of a deg and jackal and
vulture He has next to take birth as a
snake and (lien as a Kaiika (a bud of prey)
and then as a crane.

75 i hat sinful wight who, out of foolish*
knows his brother's wife, has to lake

birth as a male Coel and to live m ikat
foiMi for a whole year, O king.

76 He who, through lust, knows the
wile o( a friend, or the wife of preceptor,
or the wife of liis king, has after death to
lake the form of a Jjog,

77 He lias to five in this form for five
ye-rrs and then to assume that of a wolf
for ten years For the next five years lie

1 as to live as a cal and then for the next
to years as a cock.

78 fie IS next born as an ant, for three
months and then as a worm for a month.
Having undergone these birili*, he has next
to live as a vile worm for fourteen years.

79 When his sm becomes exhausted
py »u<:h punishment, he at last regains the

liumanjorm

80 When a marriage is about to take
place, Of a sacrifice, or an act of gifts »s
About to be made, O you of great power,


ANUSHASANA PARVA


ill** m»n o pills m iny itnp^dimenl, hai
(o uke birili in Ins next bli* as a vite ^orm

8o Assuming such a form he has to
live, O Bliarata, for fifteen years Wtien
his siu IS exhausted by such suHenng, he
re-gains the human form.

8i. Having once bestowed his daughter
in marriatre upon a person, he tvho seeks
to bestow her again upon a second husband,

IS competed, O king, to take birth among
vile worms ^

83 Assuming such a form, O Yodhish*
Ihira, I e fias to live for thirteen years
Upon the exhaustion of his sin by such
sufferance, he re gams the human form.

84 He who eats without having per*
formed the riles in honor of the celestuls
nr those in honour of the departed Manes
or wilhoul having offered (even> oblations
of water to both ilie Hishis and the departed ^
Manes has to take birth as a crow,

85 Living as a crow for a fiundred |
years, ha next assumes the form of a cock,
His next change is that of a snake for a '
inonih, After this, he regains tfie human :
form,

85 He who disregards his eldest brotlier
who IS like a father, has, after death,
(0 take btrtfi as a crane,

87. Having assumed tliat form he has
to live in It for two )ears. Renouncing
that form at the conclusion of that period,
he re>gains the human form,

83 Tiiat Sfiudra who knows a Br^hmani
woman, has, after death, to take birth as
a hog

89 As soon as he takes birth in that
order he dies of disease, O king, I he
wrelch has next to take birth as a dog,
O king, on account of that sinful deed.

99. Renouncing hts canine (arm he se*
gams, upon tfie exhaustion of tus sin, th«
human form The bhudra who b^ets
offspring upon a Brahmani woman, leaving
off ins human form, is born again as a
mouse.

91. Ihe man who becomes guilty of
ingratitude O king, I as to go to the region*
of Yaina and there to suffer very painful
and severe treatment at the hands of the
emissaries, provoked to fury, of the grim
king of the dead.

91—93. Clubs with heavy hammers and
mallets, shaip.poDiiBd lances, heated jars,
dreadful swoid bUdeS, heated sands, thorny
Slialmahs,>-these and many other cogjoes
of loiture such a man has to suffer m the
trsitusof Yama, O Bhacata.


247

94 O chief of Bharata’s race, having
suff.*red such dreadful treatment m the
regions of the grim king of the dead, Ihe
ungrateful person has to return to this
world and take birth among vif vermin.

95 He has to live as a vile vermin (or »

' pert «d of fifteen )ears, O BlMraia He has
I then to enter the womb and die prematurely
^ before birth.

91S After this, that person has to enter
I the womb a hundred times successively.

I Indeed, having undergone a hundred re-
'birilis, he at last is burn as a creature in
some intermediate order between man and
inanimate nature

97. {laving suffered pnsery (or a great
many years, he has to take birth as a hair*
less tortoise.

98 A person who steals curds is born
as a crane One becomes a monkey by
stealing raw fiih. Jliat intelligent man
who steals honey, is born as a gadfly

99 By stealing fruiis or roots or cakes,
one become* an ant By steahng Mishpava,
one becomes a HaUgolaka.

too. By stealing Payasa, one becomes,
in ins next birih, a ruHri bird By stealing
cakes, one becomes a screech'owl.

loi. Thai little wilted man who steals
iron, has to lake birih as a cow That man
who steals white brass, is born as a bird
of Ihe Hania species.

los By stealing a silver vessel, one
becomes a pigeon By stealing a golden
vessel. One has to take birth as « vile
vermin

103 By stealing a piece of silken cloth,
one becomes a Kiikara By stealing a
piece of doth made of red silk, one be*
comes a Vaitaka

104 By stealing a piece of naislin, one
becomes a parrot By stealing a piece of
cloth that IS of fine texture, one becomes a
duck after renouncing his human body.

103 By stealing a piece of cfoih made
of cotton, one becomes a crane By steal-
ing a p ece of clutli made of ]ute, one be-
comes » aheep in tns next hfe.

I06 By stealing a piece of Imen, one is
born as a liare By stenting different soils
of colouring matter, one is burn as a pea*
cock.

t«7~"t®3 By stealing a piece of red
cloth one IS born as a bird of thejiva*
pvaka species By stealing unguents (such
as sandalpasie) and perfumes in tins woitd,
the avaricious man, O king, 15 born as a
mole Assuming lie form of a mote one
t as ta hie in it (01 fifteen years.


218 MAIIAfiUARATA.


109 After the exhaustion of hia sin by
such siifferin);, he regains the human form*
B> stealing milk, one becomes a crane.

110 That man O kingi who, through
stupefaction ol the understanding, steals
oil, IS born, after renouncing this body, as
an animal who lives upon oil as Ins form

111 That wretch, who, himself well*
armed, kills another ivliilethat other is un>
armed, lor getting his riches or out of
hostile feelings, has, alter renouncing his
human body, to take birth as an ass.

112 . Assuming that assinme form, he
has to live for a period of two years and
then he is killed by a weapon Renoun*
cing his essinine body, he has to take
bmh, in Ins next Me, as a deer always
anxious (for fear of being killed)

113 — tt4 Upon the expiration of a
year from the time of his birtii as a deer,
he IS killed by a weapon* Thus renounang
his form of a deer,Mie next takes birth as a
fish and dies on account of being dragged
up in a net, oit the expiration ol the fourth
month He has next to take birth as a
beast ol prey. He has to live in that form,
for ten years and then he takes birth as a
bird m which form he has (o five for five
years

115, Actuated by the change that Is
occasioned by time, he then renounces that
form, and his sm having been exhausted,
he re*gains the human form. ,

116 That man of little understanding
who slays a woman, has to go to the regions
of Yama and to suffer various kinds of
pain and misery. He then has to pass
through full twentyone liansformations.

117 After that, O king, he has to take
birih as a vile vermin Living as a vermin
for twenty jears, he regains the human
form

ll&*.*llp By stealing food, one has to
take birth as a bee Living for many
months in the company ol other bees, his
sm become exhausted *ard he re gains the
Initnan form By stealing paddy, one be*
conies a cat

120 lhat man who steals food mixed
with sesame cakes, is in his next biith born
as a mouse large or small according to
the largeness or smallness of the quantity
stolen

121. He bites human beings every day
and, therefore, becomes sinful and passes
through a varied round of re birihs. lhat
foolish man who steals clarified butler has
to take birth as a gallinule.

122 That Wicked man who steals fish
lus to take btiih as a crow. Oy stealing


salt one las to take birth as an inlitalirf^
parrot.

123 That man who misappropriates
trust property, has to suiTer a dimmiluon nt
the period ol his life, and dying has to take
birth among fishes

■ 24 Having lived for sometime as a
ilih, he dies and re gains the human form
Regaining, however, the human form he
becomes short lived,

t2j Indeed, having perpetrated sms, O
Bharata, one hal totake birth in an order
intermediate between that of humanity and
vegetables those people do not know
the principles of virtue who take their own
hearts for their guide.

126 Those men who commit various
sinful deeds, and then seek to etpiace
them by continuous vows and observances
of piety, enjoy happiness and suffer misery
and live m great anxiety of heart

127 I hose Sinful men who yield to the
influence of cupidity and stupefaction, are
surely b^rn as Mleclichhas wiio are un
worthy of being associated with

128 Those men, on the other hand, who
abstain from sin all their lives, become
free from disease of every sort, gifted with
beauty of form, and possessed of riches

129 Women also, when iliey act m this
way attain to births of the same kind
Indeed, they have to take births at the
males ol the animals 1 have mentioned.

ijo t have lold you all the lauhs of (he
misappropriation of Others' properties 1
have described to you very briefly the sub-
ject, O sinless one

* 3 * — ' 3 * In connection with some other
subject, O Bliarata, you will again liear of
tiiose faults I heard all this. O kmgj
formerly from Bhrahman himself, and I
asked all about it m a proper way, when he
described it in the midst ol the celestial
Rishls I have told you truly and in detail
all lhat you had asked m*.

*33 Having listened to alf this, O kmg*
do you always set jour heart on virtue.


CHAPTER CXII.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CcnlinueJ,

Yndhisbthira eaid —

1. You have told me, O twice born one,
what the end is of virtue or sin I wish
now to hear, O foremost 0/ speakers, of
uhat the end is of virtue. *


ANUSIUSANA PARVA,


249


» Havme committed various sintui
deeds, by what acts do people succeed in
Ocqiiinng an auspicious end in (Ids world?
By Hhat sets also, do people acquire auspici-
ous end in the celestial region 7

Vrihaapati said —

3 By committing sinful deeds with per-
verted mmd, one elves way to the mfluence
of sin, and accordingly goes to HelL

4 That man who, having perpetrated
iinfui deeds through stupelaciian of m>nd,
eels the pangs of repentance and sets his
‘leatt on meditation lof the deity), has not

0 suffer the consequences of his sinj

5 One becomes freed from his sms {n-
ismuch as he repents for them.

6. ff one, having committed a sm, O
long, mentions it before Drahmanas conver-
sant with duties, he speedily becomes freed
from the obloquy arising from his Sm.

7 Accordingly as one wienuans his sms,
fully or otherwise, with concentrated mmd,

1 e becomes cleansed therefeom fully or
otherwise, like a snake freed from his
diseased slough.

8 By making, wnh a concentrated mmd
gifts of various kinds to a Brahmana and
concenirating (he mmd (on the deity), one
attains (0 an auspicious end

9 1 shall now tell )ou what those gifts
are O Yudhiihthira, bv making which a
person, even if guilty of having commuted
sinful deeds, may become gifted with
merit.

10 Of all kinds of gifts, that of food is
considered as the best. One desirous of
acquirii g merit should, with a sincere heart,
make gifu of food,

11 rood IS the vital air of men. Trom
It all creatures originate All the norlds of
living creatures are established upon food,
lienee food is liigl ly spoken of

13 The deities. Ristiis, departed ^fsnes,
•nr) meq. j»ll .toad J^ormeejv -kruf

Raniideva, proceeded to the celesiial region
by making gilts of food

>3 Good food that has been acquired
by f«ir meant, should be given, with a checr-
|ul heart, to Drahmanas possessed of Ved»c

tf That man, whose food, given with a
theerful (wart, is taken by a iliousand
Drahmanas, lies never to take birth in an
Intermediate order.

*5 A person. O king, by feeding ten
Ihousand Drahmanas, becomes cleansed of
sin and devoted (o Y«^a practice*.

tC A Brahmana knowing the Vedas,


by giving away food acquired by' him as
alms, to a Brahmana devoted to the study
of she Vedas, succeeds in acquiring happi-
ness here

ij — jS That Kshafnya who. without
taking anything belonging to a Brahmana,
protects his subjects lawfully, and rrrekes
eifts of food, obtained by his strength to
firahmanaj foremost in Vedic knowledge,
with concentrated -heartr succeeds'by such
conduct, O you of righteous soul, in cleans-
ing himself, O son of Pandu, of all his
sinful deeds.

19 That Vaishya who divides the pro-^
duce of ins fields into six equal parts and
makes a gift of one of those shares to Orah-
manas, succeeds by such conduct in cleans-
ing himself from every sm.

20 That Shudra who, acquiring food
by hard labour and at the risk of life itself,
makes « gift of It to Brahmanas, becomes
purged oft of every sm

31. That man who, by dmt of Ins physi-
cal strength, acquires food without doing
any act of injury to any creature, and
makes gift of it to Brahmanas, succeeds in
avoiding al) calamities.

37 A person by cheerfully miking giUs
of food acquired by lair means to Brah*
mana^ pre eminent lor Vedic le arning,
becorn« purged*oif oratttiffsina,~

23 By treading in the path of the pious,
one becomes freed from all sms A person
by making gifts of such food as creates
great energy, becomes himself endued with
great eriergy.

34 The path made by charitable per-
sons, IS atways trod by the wise They who
make gifts of food, are coniidered as givers
of life The merit they acquire by such
gifts, IS eternal

35 lienee, a person si ould, under all '
circumstances seek to acquir- food by fair
means, and having got It to make always '>
gifts of It to worthy men Food is the ..
great support of living creatures.

sQ Dy making gilts Of food, one has 1
never to go to tiell. Hence, one should [
always make gifts of food, basing got it by |
lair means. *

3 y. The house* holder should always try r
to eat after having made a gift of food to a I
Brahmana Every man should make the (
day fruitful by making gifts of food.

35—39 A person by feeding. O king, a
thousand Brahmana* who are alt Conversant
With duties and the "script ures and Uie
sacred bluorics.has not to go to Hell and to
return to (brs world for going through


250


MAIIaOIIABATA.


re-btrlfis. Gifted with tbe fruition of every
desire, tie enjoys great happiness in the next
uorld.

30. Gifted with such merit, he sports
in happiness, freed from every anxiety,
possessed of personal benuty and great
fame and endued with we>iUli>

31 I have thus told you all abnul the
great merit of gifts nf food This is the
root of alt virtue and merit, as also of all
gifts, O Bharata.


ciiAprE;R cxin.

(ANUSIIASANIKA PAUVA)-
CoHhuutd.

Tudhishthira said

1. Winch amongst these is more efllca*
emus to a person, namely, abstention from
injiiry, the observance of the Vedtc riiual,
meditation, control over tl e senses, penances
and obedient services rendered to tlie pie*
crptors.

Vnhaspati said — j

3 All these six are meritorious. They
are different doors of virtue I shall dis*
course upon tl em now Do you listen to
hem, O cliief of the Bharstas I

3 1 sliall tell you what forms the hiahesl
jood of a human being, that man who
sractises the religion of universal mercy,
icquires his highest good

4 That man who keeps under restraint
the three passions, vt* , lust, anger and
avarice by throwing them upon all creatures,
Bcquiies success

5 He who for ins own happiness kills
other innocent creatures with the rod of
punishment, never acquires happiness in the
next world

6 That man who considers all cteatures
as his own self, and treats them as his own
self, laying aside the rod of punishment
and completely controlling his anger, sue*
ce>ds in acquiring happiness

7 The very celestials who are desirous
of a Fxed habitation become stupefied in
ascertaini ig the road of that person wIm
forms himself the soul of all creatures, and
considers them alt as h s own self, foe sucb
a person leaves no track behind. j

8 One should never do that to another
which I e considers as injurious 10 his own
sell. This, in brief, is the rule of virtue.
One by acting in a different way by givuig
way to desire, becomes guilty of sin, ^


9 In refusing and giving, In weal and
woe, in the agreeable and the disagreeable,
one should judge of Iheif cfToCts by con*
sideriiig bis own self.

10. When one injures another, the In*

jiired tn return iiij ires the iiijurer. Like*
wise wtieii one cherishes anottier, that other*
cherishes the chensher One should form
his own rule of conduct according to tins
1 I ave told you what virtue IS even by this
subtile way. ''

Vaishampayana continued —

11. tie preceptor of the celestials endued
wiih great /nteJfigence, havnig sard th» to
king YuJIihblliira the jnsi ascended up*
wards for proceeding to the celestial region
before our eyes.


CHAPTER CXIV,

(ANUSIIASANIKA PARVA)-*

CcnltnueJ,

Paisbampayana said .*-'

t. After this, king, Yodlushthira 8»fi#d
wuh great energy, and the foremost 01
elnqiient men, addressed hts grandfather
lying on his bed ol arrows, h> the following
words

Tndhishthira said

3 O you of great inietlrgenee, the Rishis
and Brai manas and the celesinls led by

the auihoriiy of the Vedas, aU speak highly

of the religion of tnercy

3 But, O king, what I ask you » this s
bow does a man who hay perpetrated acts
ol injury to Others m woid ihou^ht and
deed, succeed m purifying himself from
misery.

Bbisbrna said

4 Brahinavadins have said that there
are fout kinds of mercy or abstention from

injury If even One of those four kinds be

not observed the religion ol mercy, H »
said, IS not observed

5 As all quadruped animals are m*
capable of Standing on three legs so the
religion of mercy cannot stand ;if any of
those four divisions or parts be wanting.

I 6—7 As the foot prims of afl other
animals are sunk In those of the clephait,
so alt ''other religions are said to be co»*
tamed in that ol mercy A person becomes
guilty of injury through acts, words, and
tlwughis. *■


ANUSftASANA PARVA.


ast


B t3iscardirK it menially in 0 e be«»n
one si>ouM next discard u m word
and thought. He who, according to tins
rule, abstains from eating meat is said to
be purified in a three fold way.

9 (t Is heard lhat||Brahmavadins point
«m three causes (for the sin of eating
meat) 1 hat sin may attach to the mmd
to words, and to deeds

10 It IS, iheretore, that wise men who
are gifted with penances refrain from eating
meat. Listen to me O king, as I tell you
what the faults Ore Which ailaCh to ifie
eallng of meal.

tl. Tlie meat of other animals is tike
the flesh of one’s son that foolish person,
stupefied) by foIly,<>wha eats meat is con
sidered as ihe^vilest of human beings

15. The union of father and mother
produces children Similarly tliecruehy that
a helpless and smful wretch commits, pro
duces Us progeny of repeated re*butli$
frauBlit with great misery,

t3 As the tongue U the cause of sen«a
lien ef taste, so, the scriptures declare,
attachment proceeds from taste.

f4< Welt dressed, cociced with sale or
Without sale, meat, in whatever form one
may take n, by and by attracts the mmd
and enslaves tt.

15. How will those foolish men who live
up..n meat succeed in li<tening to the s,keei
music ol celestial drums and cymbals and
lyres and harps f

(6 They who eat meat iKghly speak of
It, allowing ihemselves to be stupefied by us
taste wtiich’th ey declare to be soniethnig
mconc civsble. undescnable, and unimaci
nabte.

17, Such praise even of meat iS strtful
Formerly, many pmus men by givmpthe
flesh of their own bodies protected the flesh
of other creatures and as a result of such
deeds of merit, tiare proceeded (o tl>e
Celestial region.

iS fn this way, O king, the rclik'On of
mercy is surrounded by four considerations
1 base thus declared to you that rci>,ion
which GQiilains all other religions wilhm it.


CHAPTER CXV.
(ANUSHAsANIKA PARVA).—

CutifiiiHri/.

Yudliislilhira saU i—

1 Vdu have told it many times that
abstention from injury Is the highest Religion.
In Sliraddlias, however, that are performed
til honour of the departed Manes, persons
for their own behoof, should make ofTermiis
of various kinds of meat,

2 Vou have said so while discmirsmi*
formerly upon the ordinances about Shrad<
dhas How can meat, however, be pro>
cured without kilhirg a living creature?
Vour declarations therefore, appear to me
to be contradictory,

3 A doubt has, therefore, sprung jn tme
mtfid about the duty of abstaiuiiig from
meat. Wliat are the sms that one commits
by eating meat, and what are the merits
tlut one acquires t

4 What are the demerits ol him who
eats meat by himself slaying a living crea«
lure? What ere the merits of funt wlio
eats the meat of animals, slant by others?
What the merits or dements ef him who
kilts a living creature lor another t Or of
him who eats meat buying it of otliers 1

5 t wish O sinless one, (hat you sliould
describe 10 me this subject in full 1 wish to
ascertain this eternal Religion with certainty.

6 How does one acquire longevily f
ffowdoes one acquire Strength 7 How does
one acquire lauhlessness of limbs ? Indeed,
how docs one become gifted with excellent
marks 7

Bbisbma said

7 Listen to me, O Scion of ICurii'» race
what the merit is of abscentfoti from meat
Listen to me as 1 declare to you what ilie
excellent ordinances, in sooth, are on this
subject,

S Those great men who desire beauty,
faulllessness of limbs, long hie, undersun*
ding, mental and physical strength, and
memory, should abstain from acts of tiijary

9, Numberless diKOurscs took place.
bvCtwcen the Rishis, cm tins subj*ct, O
s ion ol Kuru’s rack Listen, O yuJhtsh-
^"ira, what their opinion was,

i« The merit acquired by that person,
O Yudl ishthira, who, with the tretd/ncss
eg a vow, worsh p the celesltals every
month • I Ifiicae sacnriccs is equal to (uih
who di>caids heney and meat.


MAflABIlAflATA


2ii

H. The highly wise seven ceteslial
Rishis the Valakshillyas, and those Rishst,
who drink the rays of the sun, all speak
highly of abstention from meat.

12 The Self create Mana has said that
man who does not eat meat, or who does
not kill living creatures, or who does not
cause them to be killed, is a friend of all
creatures

13 Such a man is incapable of being op
pressed by any creature He en}oys the
confidence of alt living beings He always
en]oys, besides, the praise ol the pious

14 The virtuous Narada has said that
that man who wishes to multiply his own
flesh by eating the flesh of other creatures,
meet with disaster,

15 Yriha<pati has said that that man
who abstains from honey and meat, gams
the merit of gifts and sacrifices and
penances.

16 In my view, these two persons are
equal, vta , he who worships the celestials
every month in a Horse sacrtRce lor a
century and he who abstains from honey
and meat.

17 On account of abstention from meat,
one IS considered as one who always wor«
ships the celestials in sacrifices or as one
who always makes gifts to others or as one
who always practises the severest auste*
rities

18 That man who having eaten meat,
gives It up afterwards, wins merit by such I
a deed that Is so great that a study of all I
the Vedas or a performance, O Bharata
of all the sacrifices, cannot give its tike

19 It is very difficult to abstain from
meat after one > as known it staste li deed
It IS extremely d fhcult for such a person
to observe the gi eat vow abstention from
meat, a vow that assures every creature
by removing all fear.

30 That learned person who gives to all
living creatures the gift of complete assur.
ance, 1$ Forsooth regarded as the giver ol
life breaths in this world

31 . This is the high Religion which
wise men esteem very highly 1 he vital airs
of other creatures are as dear to them as
those of his own self

33 Men gifted with intelligence and
purified souls si ould always treat others as
they themselves wish to be treated

33 It IS seen that even those tnen who
are endued with learning and who seek to
acquire thfe greatest good m the Shape of
Liberation, are not free from the fear of
death.


aj What necessity there be*said 0
those innocent and healthy creatures gifted
with love of life, when they are sought to
be killed by sinful wretches living fay
slaughter 7

34 Therefore, O king, know that the
discarding of meat is the highest refuge of
Religion, of the celestial region, and of
happiness.

25 Abstention from injury is the high-
est Religion. It IS, again, the highest
penance It ts also the highest truth from
which all duty emanates,

36 Flesh cannot be had from grass or
wood or stone Unless a living creature is
killed. It cannot be procured Hence is the
fault in eating flesh.

37 The celesluls, who live upon Swaha,
Swadha, and nectar, are given to truth
and sincerity ihose persons however,
who are for satisfyi ig the sensation of taste,
should be known as Rakshasas pervaded
by the quality of Darkness

38—29 That man who absUinsf from
meat is never put m fear, O king by any
creature wherever he may be vs* $
terrible forest or inaccessible fastnesses, by
day or by night, or at the two twilights in
the open squares of towns or in conclaves
of men, from upraised weapons or in places
where there is great fngl t from wild
animats or snakes.

30 All creatures seek his protection.
He IS trusted by alt He never causes any
anxiety in oti ers, and himself has never to
become anxious

31 If there were nobody who ale flesh
there would then be nobody to slay hvi ig

creatures The man who sla>5 living crea-
tures kills them for the sake of the person
who eats flesh

32 If flesh were not considered as
food there would then be no destruction of
living creatures ft is for the sake of the
eater that tie destruction of living crea-
tures IS earned on in the world

33 Since O you of great splendour,
the period ol life is shortened of persons
who k II living creatures or cause if em
to be k lied it is clear that the person
who seeks his own behoof, should give up
meat altogether.

34 Those dreadful persons who are
«ngagedii the destruction ol living crea-
tures never find protectors when lh»y are
in need Sucli persons should always be
molested and punished even as beasts of
prey

35 Through cupid ly or stupefaction
of sense, lor the sake of stkengik and


ANUS1IASANA VAKVk.


253


energy, or itirough assoctalion with the
sinful, men show tendency for commuting
sm.

36 That man who seeVs to muJttply
his own flesh by (eating) the flesh of
others has to live in this world in great
anxiets and after death has to take birth
in indifferent races and (amihea

37. High Rishis Riven to the obser-
vance of vows and self control have said
that abstention from meat is worthy of
praise, productive of fame and Heaven, and
a great satisfaction itseif,

38. Ills I heard formerly, O son of
Kunti, from Alarkandeya when that Rishi
discoursed on the sins of eating flesh*

3g He who eats the flesh of animats are
who desirous of living but who have been
slam by either himself or others commits
the sm of slaughter for his this act of
cruelty

40 He who purchases flesh, kills living
creatures through his money He who
eats flesh, kilts living creatures through
such act of eating He who binds or seises
and actually kith living creatures iS Ibe
slaughterer. These are the three sorts of
slaughter, each of these three acts
being so.

4t He who does not I imseff eat flesh
but approves of an act of slaughter, be*
comes stained with the siuof slaughter.

42 Dy abstaining from meat and
ihowing mercy to all creatures one be
^mes incapable of being molested by
any creature, and acijuires longevity, perfect
health and happiness

43 The merit won by abstaining from
(neat we have heard is superior to that
of one who makes presents of gold, of
kine, and of land.

44 One should never eat meat of
animals not dedicated m sacrifices and
that are, therefore, killed uselessly, and
tl at has not been offered to the gods and
departed Manes with the help of tl e ordi-
nances 1 here ns not the least doubt that
s person by eating such meat goes to Hell.

45 If one eats the meal that has been
sanciilted on account of its having been
procured from animals dedicated m sacn-
nces and that have been killed for the
purpose of feeding Brahmanas, one incurs
> hide fault Dy behaving otherwise, one
becomes stained with sm.

45. That wretched man who kills (ivme
Creatures for the sake of those who would
cat tfem, commits great sin. The eaters
»»n u not*o greet.


47. That wrelchsed man who following
Ibe path of religious riles and sacrifices
laid down in the Vedas, would kill a living
creature from desire of eating its flesh,
would certainly go to Hell.

48 That man who having eaten flesh
abstains from it afterwards, acquires great
ment on account of such abstentun from
sin

49 He who arranges for obtaining
flesti he who approves of those arrange-
ments. he who kills, he who buys or sells,
be trim cooks, and he who eats, are a]J
considered as eaters of flesh

50 ! shall now cite another authority,
depending upon the saying oi the ordainer
himself, that is ancient, worshipped by the
Rishts, and established in the Vedas.

51. It has been said that that religion
which has acts for its marks, ha$ been
ordained for house holders, O chief of
kings, and not for (hose men who are
desirous ol Liberation.

52 Afanu himself has said (hat meat
winch IS sanctified with Mantras and
I properly dedicated, according to Ibe ordi-
nances ol the Vedas, in iites performed
in honor ol the departed Manes, >-is pure.

53—54 All other meatjis useless slaughter,
and Is. ihereforr, inedible, and leads to
Hell and infamy. One should never eat,
O chief of Bharata’s race, like a Rakshasa,
any meal that has been procured by
means not sanctioned by the ordinance,
indeed, one should never eat Aesli obtained
from Useless destruction and that has not
been sancilfied by the ordinance

55 That man who wishes to avoid
disaster should abstain from the meal ol
every living creature

56 It IS heard that in fhe former ^ >n
persons desirous of acquiring regions of
merit hereafter, celebrated sacrifices with
seeds regarding such animats as dedicated
by them

57. Doubtful about the propriety of
eating flesh, the Rishis asked Vasu the
king of the Chedis, for removing their
doubt King Vasu knowing that flesh
should not be taken, answered that it was
edible, O king, '

58 Trom that moment Vasu dropped
down from the sky on ihe Earth. After
(his he once more repeated I is opinion, with
the result that he had to go down below the
Eardi for it.

59 Desirous of doing good to all men,
the great Agasiya by ihe help of his pen-
ances ded cated, once for all, all wilij deer
to the celestials.


254


KfArtADIf/ RATA.


to H*nce there «s no longer a*y neces-
sity ol purifying itiose aniin»ls lor offering
tliem to the celestials and the departed
Manes Served with flesh accdrdtnj, to tlie
ordinance, the departed Manes beoime
pleased.

6 l. LtsCen to me, O king of kings, as I
tell you tins, O sinless one There is ab-
solute happiness m abstaining from meat,
O king. '

€2. lie who practises severe ausleniies
for a century, and he who abstains from
meat, are both equally menturious. Ihis
IS my opinion.

63. In the light hall o! the month of Kar-
tika m especial, one should abstain from
lioney and meat It has been ordained,
that there is greet merit m it.

64. ke who abstains from meat for the
four months of the rainy season, acquires
the blessed achievenienis, vts , ioa^evny,
fame, and power,

65 He who abstains for the whole
month «( Kartika from meat of every kind,
gels over alt sorts of woe and lives in com-
plete happiness

66 They who abstain from flesh by
cither months or fortnights have the region
of Brahma ordained for them on account of
their absieiuion from cruelty.

67 Formerly many kings, O son of
Pritha, who bad formed themselves (he
souls of all creatures and nfio has known
the truths of all things, vis , Soul and Not-
Soul bad abstainrd from flesh eriher for the
whole oE the month ol Kaiiika or for ihe
whole of the light fortnight in that
month, j

63—70 They were Nabhaga, Amvaiisha
the great Qaya. Ayu, Anaraiiya. and
Dwilipa, Ra),liu, Puru, Kariavrrya, Am-
ruddha. Nahusha. Yayati, Nriga Vishwak-
sena, Shasavindu Yuvanashwa, Shivi the
son of Ushtnara, Muchukunda, Mandhatri,
and* H^arisricliandra

71. Do you always speak the truth
Never speak an untruth Jroih a an
eternal duty. It is by truth that Harnb-
chandra roves through the sky like a
second Moon

72—77. These other lings also, vra ,
Shyena^itra, O monarch, and Somaka,
Vnka, Raivara Raniideva, Vasn, Srinfaya, ,
Dmhmanta, ICarushma, Rami, Alarka, '
NaU. Virupeshwa, Niroi, inleUigeni janaka, '
Alla, Prithu, Virasena. Iksltaku, Shambhu, J
Shweta, Ssgara, Aia, Ohundliu, Subahu, j
llaryyashwa.Kashupaand Bharata, Omon- {
aich, did not eat flesli for theroonUiofl


I Kartika, and, therefore, attained to thecelet*
tidl region, and gifted with prosperity, blaie
I forth with effulgence in the region ol
I Bralimaiia^ worslupped by Gandharvas
and surrounded by a thousand^ beautiful
ladies.


7S riiose greit men who pracuse this
excellent Religion which is marked out by
abstention from injury, succeed in living >n
tlie ceJesital region.

79 1 hose pious men who, from the lime

of birth, abstain front honey and meat and
wine, are considered as ascetics.


80 That man who practises this religion
consisting of abstention from meat or who
recites it for making others hear it, wu*
never have to go to Hell, even if he b® *
great wicked man.

81— Sa He, O king, who always reads
these ordinances about abstention from
meat that are sacred and worshipped by
H e Ristns, or hears it read, becomes purged
oR ol every sin and acquirea great liapp<’
ness on account of the fruition of every
desire Forsooth, he acquires AU eroK'*'R
position among kinsmen.

8s When afflicfed with caleuuty, lie
immediately gets over It. When obstructeo
With obstacles, he succeeds in ^teetneh'"*
self from ihem with the utmost ease. tVhen
suRering from a disease he becomes qu***
ly euied, and afflicted with sorrow m
becomes liberated from U vnih greatest
ease.

84 Such a man hasnever to take birt^h
in the iniermediate order of animals
birds Horn in the order cf men. i'® •***' ,
to great personal beauty Gifted with gr*
prosperity, O chief of Kuru's race, he • •
qmies (.real fame as well.


85 I have thus told you, O
that should be said about the ,►,»

abstention from meal, together *
Ordinances about both the religion of aeu
and inaction as fumed ixv the Rishis.


CHAPTER CXVI.

<ANUSHASANfKA PARVA} —
ContinufJ.

Yadlttshthira said:—

t. Alas, those cruel men, who het
caring lor various other sorts of f'jod, •
only flesh, are realfy like great R«ksMJ»

» Alas, they do not relrnh
of cakes and diverse sorts of pbt-herbs*


ANUShASANA PAAVA


^55


various species of Khancfa witf*
flavour so mucli as tliey do flesh

3 1 canriot understand this at all >1
1) inJt ihey feel that there ts nothing so
lasieful as meat

4 I wish, therefore, O powerful ^one, to
hear whai the merits are of ahsleutiori Iroirt
flesh and the siri about the eating of flesh,

O chief ol Qharata’s race

5 You know every duty Describe to
me, m full, according to the ordinances on
duty, this sut>]<*ct. Do tell rne what, indeed,
is edible and what inedible 7

C Tell me, O grandfather, what is flesh,
cl what substances it is. the merits of absten*
tion from i|, and the sins for eating meat.

BhiBbma said —

7 O mighty^arrned one, what you soy
■struel Ihcre is nothing on Earth that
1 superior to meat in taste
8. There is nothing that is more bene*
icial (tian meat <a persons who are lean,
ir weak, or afflicted with disease, or ad*
licled to sexual union or exhauited with
ravel,

o Meat quickly increases strength. It
srdains great development, lliere is no
ood, O scorcher of enemies, that is superior
>0 meat.

to. Out, O del ghter of the Kurus, those
who abstain from it, win great merits.
Listen to me as 1 describe it to you. |

II. That man who wishes to increase .
his own flesh by the meat of another living
creature, is such that there is none meaner
and mote cruel than he,
ir In (Ms world there is noth ng (hat
is dearrr to a creature than hi> hie Hence.
01 e should *)ioiv merer to (he lives of others
as he does to his own life

*3 rorioolh, O too, flesh has irs origin
In the vital teed There is srrcai airs at-
taching to itt eating, as, indeed, there is
f'em in alistainuig from It,

14 One d*ei not, however, commit any 1
tjn by eating flesh tanct Tied according «•
l'*« ordinances of (he V'edas ThedTlrirrt
that animals were created foriacrifice.
^hey who eat fljth tn nt%j other way arc
stid u fallow the itakshasa praciKC

<S t.>sten to me as 1 tell you what the
crd nance Is (or ihe Kshainyas Ttey do
nat commit any iln by caimg flesh lliai bat
been aerju red by power,

tfa All Sold deer have been dedicated
•'* Ik* edetlials and the rteparied Manes
•" dajv of old, O king, by Agsst)-a Hence,
shg hurling e4 deer is isot cevtured'.


17. There carj be no hunting without
risk of one's own life. There is equality
of risk between (lie killer and the killed
Eillier the animal is killed or it kills tl e
hunter.

t8 Hence, O Bharain, even royal sages
take to huniing By such conduct they do
not.become stained with sin. Indeed, the
practicw IS not considered sinful

f9 There is nothing, O dehghter of (he
Kurus. (Iiat IS rq lal in point of merit,
eiihcr in (his world or in the riezt, to (he
practice ol mercy to all living creatures.

ao The merciful man has no fear.
Those innocent men svhoare endued with
mercy, have both this world and the next.

ai. Persons conversant with duty say
(hat that Religion ts worthy of being called
Religion svhtcn is characterrsed by ahsren*
tion from cruelty. The man of purified
soul sliould do only such acts as have mercy
for their sou)

31 That flesh which is dedicated in
sactiflces performed ii> honoar of the dentes
' and the departed Manes n called Havi
lhat man who is given to mercy and who
behaves with mercy towards ethers, has no
fear to entertain from any creature.

33-~S4 It IS heard that all ereatnres
abstain from caosing any fear to such a
creature All crealiires protect I im when
he IS wounded or fallen down er eresirated
or weakened or brunrd Indeed (hey do
so, under all ciicumslancev, whether he is
on even or uneven ground Neither snakes
nor wild animals neither Puliachas nor
Rakshasas, ever kill him. ,

95 When circumstances ol fear origi*
nale, he becomes freed from fear who frees
others from silaations of fear. There has
never been, nor will there ever be, agift
w) Kh ts Superior to the gift ol life.

s6 Xl IS certain that there is nothing
dearer (o oneself than hfs Ji/e, Death, O
bharata. is a disaster to all creatures.

\\’hen the tune cemes for Death,
a tcrmbt ng o( t) e entwe body is seen in all
ciealwes Lfi.drtyomg bitlli m (f.e uterus,
decreptude And tuflecings ol all sorts m
this ocean of ihe world. Irving creatures
may be seen to l>e continually g%inf forward
and coming hack ITver^ erearure It adic-
ted by Death While TiTirg in the utcrui, all
grratu'eS are cook'd in the fluid }wrt,
that are alkal ne and snur and burr, e(
wime and pMrgm and fr'rt.— juice* whKh
produce painlul aensjtw* and arcdfli-ult
to bear It err in the uttius. tl<ey have fo
Irve in a state of helplessness and arc even
repeatedly torn and pwreed


256


MAHABHARATA/


30 They who are covetuous of moat, are
seen to be repeatedly cooked m the uterus in
such a state of helplessness. Going through
all sorts of birth, they are cooked in the Hell
called Kumbhipaka

31. They are assailed and killed, and in
ibis way have to travel again and again
There is nothing so dear to one as his life
when one comes to this world
3 J — 35 Hence, a person of purified soul

should be merciful to all living creatures
1 hat man, O king, who abstains frnm every
kind 0! meat from Ins birth, forsooth, ac-
quires a large space in the celestial region
‘Ihey who eat tl e flesh Of animals who are
desirous of life, ere themselves eaten by
the animals they eat 1 his is my opinion
Since he has eaten me. 1 eliall eat him in
return, this, O Bharata, forms the character
as Mansa of Mansa The destroyer is
always slain After him the eater meets
with the same laie ,

3®~”37 hostility to-

wards another, becomes the victim of similar
deeds done by that other. Whatever acts
one does in whatever bodies, he has to
suffer the conseq leneea thereof m those
bodies Abstention from cruelty is the
highest Religion Abstention from cruelty
IS the greatest self-restraint.

38. Abstention from cruelty is the high-
est gift Abstention from cntelty is the
highest penance Abstention from cruelty
is the highest sacrifice. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest power.

39 Abstention from cruelty is (he great-
est friend Abstention from cruelty is the
greatest happiness Abstention from cruelty
IS the highest truth Absienuon from
cruelty is the highest iSAruti

40 Gi/is made in all sacrifices, abluiions

performed in all sacred waters, and the
merit which one acquires from making all
kinds of gifts mentioned in the scriptures, —
all these do not equal abstention from
cruefty in merit. I

41. I he penances of a man who abstains I
from cruelty are endless 1 he man who
abstains from cruelty is considered as '
always performing sacrifices. The man
who abstains from cruelty is the father and '
mother of all creatures
43 Even these, O chiel of Kuru's race,
are some of the merits of abstention from
cruelty. Altogether, the merits ol it are so
many that they are incapable of being ex-
hausted even if one were to speak fora
century.


CHAPTER CXVit.

j ( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA

I Continued,

Yndhishthira said —

t. Wishing to die and wishing to live,
many persons surrender their ]jves m the
-great sacrifice (nf battle) Tell me, O
grandfather, tvbat is the end that these at*

tain to

4 — 3 To give up life in battle is fraught
with sorrow for men O you of great wis-
dom, you know that to give up life is d fii-
cult for tneii wfiether they are rich or poor,
or are in happiness or misery In my opi-
nion, you are gifted with omniscience Bo
you tell me the reason of this.

Bbishm&said: — ’

4 In prosperity or adversity, in weal or
woe, living creatures, O king, coming
into this world, live according to a parti-
cular method

5 Listen to me as I explain the reason
to you I he question you have pul to me,
ts, indeed, excellent, O Yudlnshiliira I

6 Regarding it, O king, I shall explain
to you the old discourse that took place
formeily betneen the Divaipayana Rishi
and a crawling wotm

7. Formerly when that le/irnti Drah-
mana, vie, tlie Krishna! D«v>«ipa>ana,
having identified himself with Brahma,
roamed ever the world, he saw on a road
over winch cars used to pass, a worm
moving quickly

8 The Rishi knew the course of every
creature and the language of every animal
Oifted with omniscience, he addressed the
worm he saw in these words.

Vyasa said —

9 O worm, you appear to he
aiaemed, fo fie m gnracAasW.

me. where do you run, and whence h*'®
you been afraid 7

The worm said

10. I am stricken with fear on hearmff
the rattle of that large car. O you of great
intelligence, It makes a feaifut roar, f* '*
almost come.

II- The sound IS heard Will it not kill
me 7 I am flying away for this. 1 hear
the sound of the bulls.

la. They are breathing hard under ih®
whip of the driver, as they arc carrying the
heavy load. { hear aJyo the various sound
made by the men who are driving the bu”**


258


MAilAQHARATA,


mpnt from desire of fruU. The very oc*
complishments that one seeks (0 acquire
are sought from desire of the happiness
they will produce.

5 Learned or ignorant (m a previous
existence) the creature that is, mthiahfe,
shorn of speech and understanding and
hands and feet, is really shorn of every'
thing

6 He who becomes a superior Brah*
tnana worships wh le alive, the deities of the
Sun and the hfoon, uttering various sacred
hfaiuras O worm, you will come by that
stale of existence

7. Acquiring that status, you will enjoy
all the elements converted into articles of
enjoyment When you have acquired that
state, 1 shall impart to you Brahma Or,
if you wish, 1 may place you m any other
status. 1

Agreeing to the words of Vyasa, the
warm d d not leave the road, but remained
on It. Meawhile, the large car which was
coming m that direction came tl ere

9— It, Tern to pieces by the assault of
the whreU, the worm died Born at last
in the Kshatrtya order through the grace of I
Vyasa of immeasurable power, he proceed* I
ed to see the great Ktslu He had, before I
becoming a Kshatriya, to pass tl rough ^
various orders of birth, such as hedge hog
and Iguana and boar and deer and bird,
and Chandala and Shudra and Vaishya
Having given an account of his various
changes to the trulh'telhng Rishi, and re*
membering the Uishis kindness for him,
the worm (now wnh joined hands fell at
the Kishi s feet and touched them with his
head

The Worm said —

13 My present stilus is that great one
whKh IS coveted by all and which only
persons having ten well known attributes,
can get Indeed, t who was formerly a
worm have thus acquired tlie status of a
prince.

13 riephants of great strength decked
With golden chain* carry me on their backs.
*la my tars are yokra Kamvoja horses
of lugh i^tile

14 Numerous cars to which are attached

camel* and mules bear me. With hll my
fctalives and Inends I now eat food rich
With neat,

15 Adored by all, t sleep, O highly
I Inred one, on iieh bed* In charming rooms
to whKhd lagreeabte winds cannot blow.

I 16. Towards the dawn, bards and cn* I
I Cor Marts Slug my praiiea even n (he deities !


utter the agreeable praises of lifdra iheif
chief. ) <

17. Through your favour who ate firnt
in truth and gifted with immeasurable
energy, 1 who was before a worm have now
become a Kshatriya

iS 1 bow my head to you, O you of
great wisdom Do you command mo as ttf
what I should now do Ordained by the
posver of your penances, 1 have come by
this position ^

Vyasa said:— r

19 I have to-day been adored by j0u,O

kmg, with various words expressive of
respect Clianged into a worm, )Oiir
memory had become clouded Tliat memory
has again appeared, , '

> The sin ynu hid eommitled in a
pristine I fe, has not yet been dissipated -*
that sin, VIC which was acquired by ynU
while you were a Shudra covetous of nenra
and cruel m conduct and hostile to the
Brahmaiias <

?i— 33 You were abletoobtamasight*
of my body That was an act of merit
youwhileyou were a’worm Ort accounr
of year having saluted and worshipped me,
\ou shall rise higher, for, from the
inyn order you shall rise to the |

Btahmana, if only you die on lh«
battle for the sake of feme or Brahman** ,
33 O prince, rnjojing much happm<»»
and Crlebrating many sacrifices with prolu*
presents, you shall aitaift to Heaven an »
changed into eternal Brahma, ym*
enjoy perfect beatitude.

74 . riiose who take birth in *^*-^"*5*]*
mediate order, become Shodras I'he Shtid
rises to the status of the Vaishy*?

Vaishya to that of the Kshatriya in*
Kshytnya who takes a pride in the on-
charge of the duties of hw ea*te. succew
In acquiring the status of a Brahman '
The Urahmana, by following « of

conduct, acquires Heaven which 11 full
happiness.


CHAPTER CXIX.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Catitinutri

Bhislima said —

s Having rrnotinecd llie staloi of •
worm and taken birth as a K*halfiya *
geeal energy, the person femembeiing h
previous changes, O monatch,
pracuse sevete luiienucs.


ANU^IIASANA


3 Seeing tlioie ^cvce anftentte^ nf ilte

Kiliatrlya who was well conversant with
Iteli^ion and Profit Kruhna-Dwiapayana,
(hat foremost of Bratimanas, went to hint.

Vyasa said:—

3 1 he penances. O worm, of (he Ksha>
Utyas consist of the protection of all crea*
(ures, Cixisider these duties of the Ksha*
triya to be the penances laid down for you.
Vou shad come by the status of a Brahmana.

4 Ascertaining* what is right and what
is wrong, and purifying your soul, do you
duly cherish and protect all creatures, yndi*
ciousfy satisfying alt good desires and
correcting all that is unholy ^

5 De you of purified soul, be contented
and be aevoled to the practice of virtue.
Acting thhs, you wifl t)>en, when you die,
become a Brahmana.

Bhishma said

6 Ahhoiii,h he liad retired Into the
forest, )et, O Vudhishthira, fiaving heard
the words of Uie great Uishi, he began to
cherish and protect hts subjects righteously.

y. Soon, O best of kings, that worm,
en account ef the duty of protecting his
std]*c(s, became a Brahmana after re*
nounemg Ins Kshatriya body,

‘8, Seeing him changed Into a Rrah*
mens, the celebrated Hishi, pie, Krishite*
Dwalpayana of great wisdom Came to him.

Vyasa rUd

9. O chief of Drshmanas, O blessed one.
he not (routfed. ife wfo acts piously,
comes by a respectable birth. Me, on the
other hand, who acts impiously comes
by a low and vde birth. .Oyou who are
conversint wiih virtue, one attains to misery
according to the measure ef, his sin.

*o Therefore, O worm, da not be
treuUed through fear of death The only
fear you should cnlrrtain, Is about the loss
of vkuw- JX'yiAij .sKsvtnv} ^ .np,nw-
tuifif virtue.

The worm said

II. Through j-our favour, O tidy One.

I have aiuined from 1 appy ro happier
r^sulonsl Having obtained auch pros*
rrrxy as Is established in Virtue, 1 ihinK my
•iemeriis have been lost.

lillilbmil KOid •—

I*. The worm having, at the command
the holy Bishl. aerju fed tl< statin of a
Bra) mana that li so d fTuru}! to aitain
Caused sAt Earth lo he tnatked with ■
tOip.isand ucTificial sUkes ]


259

’13 ' That foremotl of all persons con-
versant with Brahma then gained n resi-
lienee in llie region of Brahman liimseif.
Indeed, O son ol Bntha. the warm acq iired
the highest status vtr , that of eternal
Brahma, as the result of his own deeds done
according to the counsels of Vyasa.

14 Those foremost of Kshatnyas, also,
wtto have renounced th«ir life breaUx,
eaerijng ihrir energy all ihe white, have all
acquired a meritorious end. Therefore, U
king, do not mourn on their account.’' r


CHAPTEB CKX.

(ANUSIIASANIKA PARVA) —

YndhisLtljIra said;—

1. Which amongst Ihrso lliree is
superior, via , Knowledge, Penaners, amt
Gifts T I ask you, O foremost of piou> men.
fell me this, 6 grandlatlier.

Bhislima said

2. Regarding ills cued the old rjsnver*
cation between Maiireya and Krishna*
Dwaipsyana

3 Once en a lime, Krishna Owaipsyana,
O king, while wsndtnng over ll e world in
drtguxe, pfoceedrj to llutnau and waned
upon hisitreya wlio belonged by birth to a
race o( asceiKS.

4 Seeing Vyasa arrive, that foremost
of Rishis, ne , Miiireya, gave him a s-il
and after adoring him wUh due riles, enter*
tained him with eacelient food.

5 Having eaten (hat good food nhirh
was very wholesome and which gave every
kind of graiificatlon, the preat Krishna
become I ighly pleased and as lie sat there,
lie even laughed aloud.

6 Seeing Krishna Uugh, hfsitreya
addreiied fum, caymg,— r<II me. O
Itighlcous Souled One, what the reason is
of your laughter I You are an ascetic, g fted
w,ih power to control your ernuiions.
Great loy, >1 appears has come over you.

y. Saluting you and adaiing you With
bent head. I ask thir. vir, wbat (he

C iwer is of my penances and what the h g'l
essednets it that is yours.

8 The acts f do, are d IT*ren( from
ihm« el youts. Veq are already man*

. sipasvd ihoukh af've. I, howtvrs. ant t
' let freed ^ot aJ! tf«‘, I thnk (hat there


26b


'MAtlABllARATA.


IS not much difterence between yon and
me. I am, again, distinguished by biith.

Vyasa'said

0 This wonder that has fitted me has
originated from an ordinance winch appears
Iil<e a hyperbole, for the comprehension cf
o( the people I he declaration of the
Vedas seems to be untrue Bui why should
tile Vedas say an untruth 7

ID. U has been said that there are three
toads \vhich form the best vows ot a man
One should never injure , one should always
tell the truth , and one slioutd make gift.

II. The Itishis of old said this, follow*
ing the ordinance^ laid down iplhe Vedas
'i hese injunctions of yore, should certainly
be followed by os even in our times

t2. Even a small gift, made under (he
circumstances laid down, yields great fruits
Vou have given a little water with a sincere
heart to a thirsty rnan. ‘

13 Yourself Ihirsiy and hung^^, you
have by giving rne such food, conquered
many high regions of happiness O powir*
ful one, as one does by many sacrifices. ‘
14. t am g'eatly delighted with 'ypur
very sacred gift, as also with your penances
Your power is that o( virtue , Your appear*
ance is that of virtue. ,,

15—16 The fragrance of virtue, .is
about you. 1 think that all your acts are
performed according to (he ordinance. O
sorj, gift If superior (0 ablutions m sacred
waters and (o the accomplishment of all
Vedic vows Indeed, O Brahmana, gilt
IS more nuspicioiis than all religious rites
II It be not more menlonouf than all reli*
yjon rites there can be no question about
Its supeiiorityi

17. All those riles laid down in the
Vedas which you highly speak oi, do not
equal a gilt, for, is undoubtedly fraught
Willi very superior merit.

tS. The road that has been made by
those men, who make gifis is the road that
IS trodden by the wise 1 hey who make
gifs ate considered is givers of kven the
hie breaths Pie duties that form virtue
are estsbiisl ed If) tf em

jp. As the V'tdts when welhstudred. as
the controlling of the senses, as a life of
univrrst! Rcntmciaiion, so is Gilt which Is
fraught with wy superior meiitl

■20. Vou, O son, will rise frorrs Joy to
greater Joy (for performing the duty of
"’•'‘’"R gdl’ ) the Intelligent man Cer-
tainly rises from Juy to greater joy.

ai. We have undoubtedly seen many
Insiances rl Ihu, Men trifled with |>rc»>


pertly succeed in acquiring riches, making
gifts, celebrating sdcnfices, and acquiring
liappiness as the result thereof i

92i It IS always observed, O you of great '
wisdom to happen naturally that happiness ♦
IS followed by misery, and’ misery is fol*
lowed by happiness. '

23 Wise men have said that humkn ^
beings^ in (his world have three kinds of ^
conduct ‘Some are righteous, some ire^
sinful, and some ar^ neither righteous nor^
i sinful. , ^ '

[ 24 The conduct of the person who rt

I devoted to Brahma is not considered either
way. His sms are never considered as sms. >
So also the roan who is devoted to the’
duties laid down for him, is CoiisiJercd as
neither pious nor sinful. , '

25 1 T hose men who are devoted lo ,

fices, gifts, and penances, are tonsidered
as pious Ihese, however, who injure pther.
creatures and are unfriendly to them, are
considered tinful ,

26 Hiere are some men who apP™*,
ptUte others’ properties. Ihese ceriatulV
fall into Heff and meet wifli mesery A»
other acts tliat men do are indiHerent, beintf
considered as ne iher rigiiteous iibr si iiul. ,,

27. Do you sport and grow and rejoice
and make gilts and celebrate lacnficefc
Neither men ol knowledge nor those 8’*'**'
With penances will then be able to get Ibe,

I better of you. , J


^ C^fAPTER tXXI. J

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAJ- ^ >

iConhnued.

Bhislima said

I. Thus addressed b) Vyasa, hfa'I’^**
who was a worshipper of deeds, who n»J
been born in a family gifted with 6'®’*
prosperity, wha was wise and endued <•'1''
great learning, said lo him these words. >

JSaitroya said

a. O "you of great wisdom, it «*
you have ssid. O powerful one, with
permission f wish lo say something.

Vyasa said

3 Whatever you wish (osay, O M ''•*■*)*
«n what way so even, doyOu sky, D man
of great wisdom, (or I wish to hear you. i

Maitrcya Baid:*—

4 Your words on ihe suhjeft of ^ {
are faultless and pure. FofSOot/r, )00»


ANUSIIASANA fARVA


has been pnrified by knowledge* and
penances

5 On account of your soul being puri>
Red, even this is the great advantage I reap
from It With the help of my understand^
mg I see that you are gifted with high
penances.

6 As regards ourselves we succeed in
actjuiring prosperrty (hrongh onfjr ««n«g
personages litre you I think, that it due
to your favour and originates from the
nature of my own acts

7. Penances, knowledge of ihp Vedas,

and birth in a pure tamlh , these' are the.
causes 6f the status which one acquires nf
a sBrahmana When one is possessed of
these three qualities, then does he come to
be called a twice born person, , ,

8, If the Brahmana be pleased, the de*
parted Manes and the deSlies afso are
pleased there is nothing superior to a
Urahmana possessed of Vedic learning.

^ ,

9 Without the Orahmana all would be
darkness Nothing would be known The
four castes would not exist > he dis.
tmctien between virtue and sin, Truth and
Untruth, would disappear,
to Men, when they sow on a well cuUi.
vated field, reap art abundant harvest
Even bo, nne reaps great merit by malcmg,
gilts to a Brahmana endued wnb great
l earning ,

If there were no Drahmana gifted
with Vedic learning and good conduct
for accepting gilts, the wealth possessed by
ricit men would be useless,

t 3 . The Ignorant Brahmana. by eating |
the food that Is offered to him, destroys |
uliaiheeats Tfie food also that is ea'rn j
destroys the eater. Thai is called food '
which IS given away to a worthy man m all
other cases he who takes n, makes the
douor'a gift tl rown away and the reteivCr
IS likewise rurned for hi< unduly taking it

13 The Brahmana endued wnh learning,
^lectlmes 0 >e tubjugatok of the food that be
cets Having eaten “fr*” hd 'Begets other
olhf f food t be Ignorani mao who e»ia |l»e
food offered to him, tmes his right id the
chiljftn he procreates, for the latter btemnw
his w( ose food iias enabled the prot^e, iior
to beget them. Tl is 1* the shortcoming of
persons eaimg oil er people s foisd when
they have not the power to conquer that
food,

'it The rnetit wh ch the giver wink by
niik iig the gift h rq lit lo what the taker
»fq« in* hy accapling the food Both the
giver jy>d the laWrr depend rqus'ly Hponract*
ctUr. 11 IS IS wlial the Hisias have sasi.


2C1

15 There where Brahmans exist, gifted i
with Vedic learning and conduct, people
are enabled to acquire the sacred fruits of y
gifts and to enjoy them both in this world
and the next.

I hose men who are of pure birth, |
who are devoted to penances, and who make
gilts and study the Vrdas, are considered
as wortfiy of the most respectful adoration,

ly It IS those good men who have
chalked out the path by treading on which
Cite does not be^me stHpehed It is titose
men who take others to the Celestial region,
they are the men who carry on their
shoulders, the burthen of Sacrifices and five
for good


' CHAPTER CXXII.^

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVAj —
CotitiniieJ

Bbismasaja —

t. I hus addressed, the Holy Ore replied
to Maitrrya, skying,— By good luck, s ou are
gifted with knowledge By good luck, )eur
inideistaihng is el this kind

a. Oood men highly speak of nghteeuf
qiahtirs By your yo^fuck yon are net
overwhelmed by personal beauty, youth
and prosperity,

3 Tin* favour done tn you Is dOeto
kindness of the celestials. Listen to me, as I
describe to you what is even superior \o gift.

4 All sciiptures, religious treatises, and
riles that are seen m the woild, have all
oiigmated from the Vedas, according to
their due order.

5 foflowing them I highly apeak of gift.
Vou highly speak of penances and Vedic
learning. Penances aie Sacred. Penances
are the meant by which one may acquire
the Vedas and the celestial region.

d Wfth the help of penances and of
kiMwledse one acquires the highest truils.

It IS by penances (hat one dissipates fiis
am* and all else that is ev,).

7. We have heard that with whatever
puipose m vkw one performs penances, one
wequ res the Iruitinii thereof on account of ^
th ise penances. The same may be aattl of
knnwfedg*

S i atever IS tl fnculc (a do, whatever
IS d 1* ciJr lo cooq Jrr, whsievrr j» iT/Teu'j 10
Atlain a id wl atever is 6 Ficuli to Cus*. ca,i
; all be done with the 1 -clp of penaictt. Of


262


MAHARtlAdATA


all tilings, penances are of very superior
power

Q The man who drtnVs alcohol, or he
vvlio tJkes forcibly other men’s properties,
or le wl o IS guilty of fceticide, or he who
violates the be^ of his preceplor, succeeds
in crossing with the help of penances In*
deed, one becomes purged off of all these
sins through penances

10 One gifted with all knowledge and,
therefore, having true vision, and an ascetic
of whatever kind are equal One should
always bow to these two

II. All men who have the Vedas for
their wealth should be adored Likewise
all men gifted with penances deserve to be
adored They who make gifts get happi*
ness in the next wodd and mucli prosperity


20 Maltreya" 'then* walked! round W#
ilhistnous guest and bowed his head to him,
and joining Ins hands m Respect, said, — Let
blessing be to you also, O Holy One!


in this world


13 By making gifts of food, righteous
men of this world obtain both this world
and that of Brahman Inmself with many
other regions o! superior happiness


13 Those men who are worshipped by
all, themselves worship him who makes
gifts 1 hose men who are honored every*
where, themselves honor him who makes


s own praise
14 He who does acts and he who
omits (0 do them, gets each 'What is pro*
portlonate to hts acts and '1 emissions.
Whether one lives tn the upper regions or
in the nether, one always acquires those
places to which one becomes entitled by
Ins deeds. ,


15 As regards yourself, you will cer-

tainly obtain whatever food and drink you
may covet, for you are gifted with intelfi*.
gence, good birth, Vedie learning «nd
mercy ' J

16 You are possessed of youth, O
Maitreya ' You are observant of vows
Be devoted to virtue. Do you take ins*
truciions from me about those duties which


17 . That house in whch the husband
11 pleased with His married wife and the wife
fteased with her husband, alt auspicious
results ensue.

18' As filth IS washed away from the
body wuh water, as darkness is removed
by the light ol fire so is sm washed oil
by gifts and penances

ip. Bless you O Maicreya, may
s-ou have palaces I I depart hence in peace.
Do yon remember what I have tfid You
stiatl then le able to reap many adran*
t*E«»l


CHAPTER CXXin.


< ANUSHASANIKA PARVAJ-
ConUnued

Tudhislithira said.— f <!

1 O you who know nil duties I wish
to hear, in full, what forms the excellent
conduct of good and chaste women
you, O grandfather, describe this to me


Shishma said •— ' ^

•4 Once on a time, in the celestial
n, a lady named Sumaiia of Ivekayas


region, a lady named Sumaiia .

race, addressing Shandili gifted with great
energy and conversant with the truth r**
garding everything and gifted with em'»*
science said —By what conduct, O


cious lady, by what course of deeds have
you succeeded in acquiring the celesua^


yvu awvwccu.,.. acquiring t-- . .

region, purged off ol every sm 7
with your own energy like a fle?* ® '

You appear to be a daughter of the X.ord
of stars, come to Heaven m your own
effulgence,

5 You put on dresses of pur* white,
and are qute cheerful and at yoor o*_*
Seated on that celestial car, you *hine,
auspicious dame, with energy multipi'M
tliousaiidfold. ^

.6 ^You have not, I understand, attamw


Do you ,1


7. Thus questioned sweetly by Sumana,
Shand li of sweet smiles, addfcssing h


fair iiiterrogatrix, thus answered
silently. 1 did not wear yellow roD«*
norbarks of trees I did not shave my


head* It is not on account of these -
that I have acquired the status of «
celestial.

9 I never carelessly addressed any
harsh words to my husband.


to I was always devoted to the adora*
tion of the celestuls, the departed 'I*"**/
' Ih» Rrahm>n.< Alwsys carcful I


■nd the Brahmanas ^ . —

waited upon and served my mothef-in law
•nd faiher.m law.


tt. This was my resoTullon tlMt T

isutJ ntser act decsiifally I never useds^


AttUSKASKNA PARVA


263


f6 stay at Hie door 0! our house net did I
^peak Jong with any body. fi

12 I never did any evil deed | never
Unghed aloud, 1 never did any injury.
1 never gave out any secret. Tims did I
myself act

13 When my husband, having left home

upon any business, used to return, 1 always
served him by giving him a seat, and
adored him with respect. ,

14 I never ate food of any Itlnd witch
was unhnown to rny husband and with
which my husband was not pleased.

15. Rising early in the morning 1 did
and caused to be done whatever was
brought about and required to be done for
the sake ot relatives and kinsmen

)

t6 When my hushand leaves home for
going to a distance place art any errand ( 1
remained at home engaged In various kinds '
o( auspiaous deeds for blessing his enter* I
piise. ^ I

17. During the absence of niy husband i
I never use ooUyrium, or ornaments | I '
never wash mysell properly or use garlands '
and unguents or adorn my feet with laedye 1
or body with ornaments. '

18 When my husband sleeps In peace
1 never awake him even if important bust* |
ness wanted his attention. 1 was happy 1
to sh by him lying asleep

tg I never urged my husband to work
hard for acquiring riches to support Its
family and relatives I always kept secrets
Without gwlng them out to others, I used
to always keep our premises clean ,

30 Thati woman who, with rapt alten*
lion, follows her duty receives profuse
honors in the celestial region like a second
Arundhaii ^

BhiBhma said^— ' ^

31 Ihe illustrious and high'ly blessed
Shandli, of pious conduct having said
these words to Sumana on the subj ct of
woman's duties towards her husband d>s
appeared there and then

33. That man, O son Pandu, who reads
this discourse at every fall moon and new :
moon, succeeds m acquiring the celestial
ngion 'and enjoymg great happiness in the |
boaers cl Naiidana I


CHAPTER eXXIV.

(ANUSHASANiKA PARVA) —
Canttnuei,

Tndhishtliira said —

t In which is superior eRicacy. Con*
cifiation or Gifts ? ' Tell me, O chief of
Bbarata's race, which of these two Is
superior m cfRcacy.

Blxisliina said — j ' 1 1 >

3 Some bteome pleased by CaiiiiUatian,
while others are pleased by Gifu Every
man, according' to his own nature, likes
the one or the other.

3 Listen to me ,'<0 king as I explain
to you the menls of Conciliatlan, O chief
of Btiarata’t race, so that the most furtouS
creatures may be cooled dowA by ft. t

4 Regarding ft is ciied the ancient
narrativ^ ol how a'’ BraKinana, .Aho had
been seized iq the forest by a Ralishasa,

I,. ,,lr

5 A certain Brahmana gifted with elo«
qucnce and intelligence fell {into distress,
for he was seired in a lone forest by a
Rakshasa who wished to feed on biffl, ^

C The Brahtmna Billed aa he Wai wkh
understanding andilearnmg wAsnotAtali
moved Without allowing hinself to jbe
stupefled at the sight of that terrible canni-
bal, he resolved to apply Conciliation and
see Its effect on the Rakstiasa. j ^

7. Respectfully saluting the Rrahnsana
with words, the Rakshasa put to hint this
question < Vou shaft escape, but (ell me
why 1 am so pale and lean.

8 Reflecting for a short lime, the
Brahmana accepted the question of the
Rakshasa and replied in t 1 e following well*
spoken words

The Brahmana said

9 Living in a place distant from your

krtiuyt nruvTTg- tn ^-ithrtnVrnfminftyour
own and deprived of the company of your
friends and k nsmen you are enjoying vast
nches It n therefore tl at you are so pale
and lean ''

so Indeed O Rakshasa your friends,
though well treated by you, are suit not
Well disposed towards you on account of
iheir own VICIOUS nature it is lor ibis tliat
you are so pale land lean

tf. You are gifted with merit and wis-
dom and a well controlled soul Yet it la
your lot to see others who liave meric and
wwdocn honored tn preference to yourself.

It IS lor U IS that you are so pate and lean.


264


f V riAHABtlA&ATA. *.


t2 Peisons liaviog ricYies much greater
than youis but inferior to you in meni> are.
Indeed, disregarding you / It la (at tins
that you are so pate and lean<

13 Though distressed (or want of tie

means of support, yet you areiaciuated
by the greatness of your mind to disfcgf'*!
such means as are open to ^ou for getting
^our sustenance, It is (or this that you are
so pale and lean r

14 On account of your snrtuous nature

you had deprived yourself for dotng good
%o another. This person, O righieous
f^akshasa, Considers 'youi deceived 'and
defeated.! It is (or this that ydu are so pale
and lean. i i

15 1 think you tare grieving fof those
persons who with souls possessed by lust
and angefi are suffering misery in this
world It 19 for this that you are so pate
end lean

t6 Though wise, you are rtdtcnled’by
oUiers wbd are entirely destiiuie ^o( it
Persons of wicked Conduct are vlifyng
you It IS for this that you are so pale and

' , 1 '

17 Indeed, some enemy ef yours, w|th
a friendly tongue, coming to you behaved
Bt first like a pious man and then has
left you, beguiling you like a knave It is
for ibis that you are so pale and lean

18 You are well conversant wiih the
course of world's affairs Yod are well
skilled in all mysteries You are gified w til
power itiose who know you to be such do
pot yet respect and praise you It if lor Uus
that you are , so pale and lean, jr 1

I9J Staying in the midst of trad men en>
gaged together in some business, you had
discoursed tO'them, removing their doubts
’Slill they did not admit your superior
merits It is for this that you are so pale
and lean.

20 Indeed, though destitute of riches
and intelligence and Vedic learning you
wish yet, wiih the help of your ener(.y
alone, to accompi sh something great It
IS (or tl IS that you are so pale and lean

21 It appears that although you are
re*olved to practise severe austeitiyes by
retiring into the forest, yet your k nsnicn
are not favourably d rposed towards this
project of youfs It is for this that you are
BO pate and lean

22 Some rich neighbour of youcy eit«
dued with youth and handsome features
covets your dear wife It is (or tbiittiat
you are so pale and lean.

ay Tlie words spoken by you even
wiien cxctIUnt, in the niidst of rich men,


Are 'not regarded by Iherrt as wise OhWelt*
timed. It IS for this that your $0 pile and

'“"n i - 1

24 Some dear kinsmar) of yours ^horil
ff intelligence though repeatedly instructe 4
III (h« scriptures, has become angry Ynf
have not been able to pacify him It is for
this that you are ^o pale dnd lean,
j 2$ indeed somebody having first set
yoir to the accomplishment lof some object
desirable to you, is now trying to deprive you
of the fruit tl eieof |t is for this that yoU
are so pale and leap. ,

26 1 hough possessed of excellent qiisli*
ties and adored by all on that account, you
are yet considered by jour kinsmen as
adored for their sake and not for yoUr own
It IS for this that you are so pale and lean ^

27 Indeed, through shame you are un
able to give out some purpose (n y^^^
heart, moved also by] the inevitable deUy
that will take place 1 1 its accomplishment
It IS for tills that you are so pale and lean ^

2^ Indeed, yon wish with the help of
your lnlelhgence,*to Comrof vanoUs persins
with various ''kinds of understandmilS
Kchnations ’ It is for tins that you af*
pale and lean 1 I

29 Sliorn cl learning, wjliout courage,
and wuhout ^lnucl| riches, you seek fueli
fame as Js won by kpowledge and prowest
and gifts Ipd^eo, it u for this that you are
so pale and lean. r

30 You have not been able to get

sOinelfiiig which you have long been srek

Ing for Or, what you try ip do i» sought
to be undone by somebody else It b f®^
this that you are so pale and lean.

31 Indeed, without being able to see
any fault on your part, youJhave bwn
cursed by somebody. It I3 for *****

you are so pale and lean, t i'

32 Havi *g no wealth and accomplish*

meins you try in vain |o remove the Crw*
of your (r ends and the sorrows of sorrowing
men It is lor this that you are so paleana
lea 1 ■> ,

33 Seeing virtuous persons living
householders unrig) teous persons I'Vi K
according to the forest mode and I berate
persons ailed ed to do nesticiiy and fixed
abodes, you have become so pale and ieao

34 Indeed, your acts connected w‘***

Virture, Profit, and Pleasure, as also t"®
wetMimed words spoken by you, da not
produce fruit It » for this that you arc
so pale and lean.

33 rtmiigh cifted w th wistlom, >'*
actfircus ol living, you live with wc*’*"


AKUMtASANA I'AKVA.


2C5


'nWftinetJ by ymJ Ift c»ft Tmm somebody «*f
tvit conduct tt is for this lliat you are
to pil« and ie^tn.

36. Sffing sinful persons mnlfiplytnjr on
every side and vKtne Ungiitsiiine, yoa are
titled with enef. {t is for tins ttiat you are
so pale and lean.

37, Urged by tbem 'you seek to please
alt your friends even ailien they are quarrel*
ling and opposing one anotiier. it is for
tl IS (bat you are so pale and lean.

3S Seeing persons gifted with Vedic
t'-aniing engaged m improper deeda, ami
lesriitd persons unable tr> keep their senses
under control you are filled wilh griei. It
IS for this that yon are so pale and lean

39 T hns praised, the Uakshasa adored
that learned Brahmana in return, ami
in-rking him bis friend and bestowing sufTi
tietit riches upon him m gift, sent him away.


CHAPlCn CXXV.

( ANUSUAStNlKA PARVAJ-

^ Coii/oiiftii

YudliiBUthita said'—

I, lell me. U grandfatfier, liow should
a peer nisn, desirous of achieving luf own
behoof, act after having acquired the status
of liumaiiiiy and come into tins region of
acts (bat IS so difRcult ro acquire. •

3 lell me elso wlist is ilie best’of all
gilts, anti what should be giVeii Under what
ciicumstaiices T lell me, O son of Ganga,
w)>o are iruly worthy of honor and adora*
tion. You should describe these mysteries
to us.

Vaiahampayaua cootinaed

3 Unis accnsied by that famous king,
fit , (be son o< Paiidii, Uliislfma raplaiiietl
to that king lliese .great niysteiies about
•ihi'y.

Bhtslima attd •—

4 I iKen to me with rapt, attention O
""'g. ss { exfitaiii to you, O llharati, <l*ese
mysteries of d ilics as the holy Vyasa hod
cxpUined iliem to me iorinetly,

5 Uiis snb|eci IS a mystery to iHe very
frlr»tial», O king Vami of pure deeds
villi the 1 elp r,( vows well otiserved and
*Oga inrdltstion. ha 1 acq iitc I the know-
Ie0,,e of these mysicries as tlie high fruits
cf Ins penances

6—8 t Wliai pleases what deity, what
f leases (> e dcpaited Alenes, tbs Rishrs, the


companions of Mahadeva, the gnd‘l*ss Siiri,
Chicragiipta, and lb" powerfuf Efrphants
whicif ride the cardinal points of the coin-
pass. what forms the religion of the Rishts,
—the refigton, vis, which has many mis>
teries and which yields high fruits,— -the
mentsof what are called great gilts, and
the merits of all the sacrifices, he who knows
these. O sinfess one, and knowing acts
according 10 (ns knowledge, becomes frenl
from stains if he has stains, and acquires
(he merits fndiCateii.

p One olbrno i« isl trt ten bufebers,
Eqii^l to ten oilmen is one drinker pt
•IcoIkiI Equal to ten drinkers of alcohol
IS one harlot. Equal (a ten harlots 13 a
single idiig. _

10 — It Agreatkmg Is said to be equal

to half of these alt Hence, one should
not accept gifts from these. On fbe other
hand, one should attend tn the science,
winch Is sacred and which has virtue for
Its marks of the (hreefofj objects of life.
Amongst these, Wealth and I’Jeasiire are
naturally ottraclive. Hence, ode should,
with rapt aiiention, listen to the sacred
expositions of Religion .for (he fruits of
listening to the mysteries of Religion are
very great One slmnf t certafnfy hear every!
siibjrct hearing on Religion as ordained by
the ceie«iik1s il emselves,

le. In It IS contained tlie ritual about
the Shraddha m winch have been declared
the mysteries of the departed M ines The
mysteries ahoU the deities have also been
explafned there ‘ ^

r^ It contains the duties and practitfee,
productive of great m^nt, of the Risius also,
logeilier whli the mysteries aitaclnng in
them It Cfliitams an exposifi in of the
merits of gre it sacrifices and ait kinds of
Rifts. ^ •'

14 Those men who always read itio
scriptures atwiit (liete subjects, thosu who
hear them prnpeily in their mind and be
who, having listens 1 to them, follows them
III praci’Ce, are all considered In be as
holy anil sinless as tlie powerluf iSarayans
himself. 1

l3 ! The merits of tin* gift of kin-* those
that belong to the prrlijrmancc of sblitioos'
in sacred waters, those that are act{ tired 1
by ihe eelebraiion of sacrifices — ill tbeso
are acquired by lliat man who treats guests
witli resp«l.

16—17 They who listen to lliese scrip,
lures tiiey who are pitted \ ih (siih, and
they who have a p ire I, .art it is welt
Cm iwn, conq ler many regions of felxify.

I hose pious men, who sre eifted with faith,
become clemsed of all sins and on 'in can
touch (lic<r> Such men always increase In


£56


MAUABHARATA


virtue and succeed in attaining to llie
celestial region,

18 Once on a time, a celestial messen-
ger, coming to tlie court of Indra of I«i3
own accord but remaining invisible, ad-
dressed tlie king of ilie deities m these
words * —

19 At the command of Asliwtni Kunars
(ike celestial physicians) and who arc gifted
with ever> desirable quality, 1 have come
to U is place where 1 see human bemgs the
departed Mines and the celestials as-
sembled together.

3/ Wit}, fideed, is sexual intercourse
interdicted for the man who performs a
Shraddha and for him also who eats at a
Sliraddha 7 Why are It ree rice-balls offer-
ed separately at a Shraddha 1
31 , To whom should the first of those
balls be offered 7 lo whom should the
second one be offered 7 And whose lias
It been said is the third or the remaining
one? Iwishtohnos alt this!

33. After the celestial messenger had
e^id these words connected with virtue and
dut}, the celestials who were sealed towards
the east and tlie departed Maoes ,ilso.
praising that ranger «i the sky, began as
fellows.

'XhePitris said*—

as Welcome are >ou, and blessings
upon you* Do you listen, O best of all
rangers of the sky I llie question you
have put Is a high one and Iraught with!
deep import,

34. The departed Manes of that man
s^ho indulges in sexuaf intercourse on the
day he performs a Shraddlia or eats at a
Shraddha have to lie for a whole montli
on his vital seed

35 We shall explain the classification
ol ilie rice balls nflereJ at a Shraddha
fhe first rice ball should be thought of
a^ being thrown into ilie walers.

36 The second bat] sfiould be given to
one of the wives to eat Ilie third ball
sliould be ttirowii into ll e burning fire,

37 This is the ordinance about tlie
Shcaddtia This ts the oidmance of tlie
rites of religion. Tl>e Puns of that man
wlio acts according to this ordinance be-
come pleased wiiii turn and remain alwats
theeifol

33 Tlie Jifegeny of such a man m-
creases and he a1wi)S commands endless
iiches

The Celeitial ilessjngrer *aid:—

••J You hare rxptiiitrd the d viusts of
tl>« rice bat's and tlieir cami,,nn»ent ©ne


after another to the three, fogeiher with the
reasons thereof.


30 Wliom does that nee bill which is
thrown into the waters, reach 7 How does it,
by being so thrown, please the deities and 1
how does it rescue the departed Manes 7
31. Ihe second ball is eaten by the wife.

1 iMt has been laid down in the ordinaiiCCi
Ifow do the Pitiis of that man become the
eaters tl ereof 7


33 1 lie last ball goes into the burning

fire How does that ball succeed in finding
Its way 10 you, or who is lie to whom it
goes? 1

’33 I wish to hear this, — that is what
are llie ends attained by tie bills offered
at Sliraddhas when ttius disposed of by
being thrown into the waters given to the
wife, and thrown into the burning fire.

The Pitns said : —

34 1 he question winch you have asked
Is of deep import. It involves ain)siCTy
and IS wonderful We have been highly
pleased with }ou, O ranger of the sky

35 Ihe ver} celestials and iheMim'*
applaud acts done in honor of the departed
Manes Even they do not knew what the

i certain conclusions are of the ordinances
I about the acts done u\ honor ©f Pitris


36 Excepting Ihe great, Immortal, and

(cellent M3rkande}a, that learned Braj^

lana of great fame, who is ever devoted
I the Piifis, none amongst them 11 con*
rrsant wiih ll e mysteries « the ordirtanies


37 Having heard from the holy
wbai the end is of the tliiee rice bans
offered at tl>e Shraddha, as explained by
tl e Piins themselves in reply to tl'O que»*
tioW of the celestial messenger, 1 shall
plain tl e same 10 you Do jcu hear, W
hing, what the conclusions arc about lb®
ordinances about the Shraddha.


3S Listen wiih allenilon. O Rharaia,

I me as I expUm what the end is of th®
Ihrce rice balls Ihai rice liatl wh'ch goes
water is considered as pleasing l*'*
deity of the Moon.


39 Tliat deny being pleased O jcu of
great mulliRence gral fes in rel.i.n »»«
olt er deities and tl e P ins also wiih •'

ll I as been laid do »n that tl e s«i-0 id r>«*
ball should be eaten by the wife.

40 The Piliis wlta always wish f^
I progeny bestow ct dd'en on the woman o*
[tlot-u.c Listen .vow tome as I leH r*”*

what becomes of Ihcruc-ball, that n T iro* I
' lololhe burning Tre.


AKUSIlASANA PAAVA.


4 t WitU lh\l ball tbe Pitns are pleawd,
an<l ai the result thereof, grant the fruiiioit
of all desires to the person ofTerinKit I
have thus lol ! you everyll mg about the end
of the three rice*t>alls offefed at the
Shraifdha and consigned to the three (vit ,
water, the spouse, and the Bre)

42 I hat Brahmana who heenmes the
priest at a Shraddlia forms himscU by that
deed, the Picrt of the person perform! ig the
Shraddlia Hence, he should nbsiaiit Otat
day from sexual intercourse witli even Ins
own wife

45 O best 0/ nit ranpers nf the sty,
the man who eats at a Sliraddlta should
remain pure for that day By acting other*
wue, one surely commits the sm ] liaye
indicated It cannot be otherwise
4t Hence the Brahmana who is in*
vned to a Shraddlia for eating the offer*
mgs, should eai them after purifyim; him*
sell by a bath and remain pious for that
day by ahstainipg from every icinct of i«
)nry or evil I he progeny of such a person
inuliiplies and be also who feeds him gels
*ttie same reward. •

BUiflhma, said:—

45 A6er the Pitris tiad said so a
Jlishi of austere penances, na ned Vidyut*
piabha, whose form was effulgent like the
bun, spoke

46—47 Having heard those mjsteries
ef religtan as explained by (he Pitn*. >e
addressed Sliahra, saying —Stupefied by
folly, men kill numerous creulnres born in
Ihe intermediate orders, such as worms
ants, snake*, sheep, deer and birds They
commit a great sill hy (hese acts What,
however, is the remedy 1

48 Wlien this (] lestion was artred, all
the ^ads and Rishis havii g penances for
w«riUli and tlie lu^l ty blessed I {tiis praised
that ascetic

Sbakra said —

49 lliinliing in one's mind of Kuru
fill etra and Grija and Ganga and Pr-'bhasa
and the lakes oi Pushkara one should dip
his head in a piece of w,i|er.

50 Dy so doing lie becomes purged o 0
ol all I IS sms like ll e Moon freed from Ital u
He should liiiis baihe for tfiree days sue*
Cessively and tlieii fast lor every day,

51 Besides this, be should touch (after
bathing) the back of a cow and bow his
lead to her tnfl VidiKprabha, afrer His,
once more addressing Vasava said, — I si all
describe a rue thnt IS more subtle listen
to me, vyou of a hundred sacrifices*


zCf

52 Rubbed with the astringent powder
of the hanging roots of the banian and
axiiomted with the oil of Priangti, ode
should eat the Shashtika paddy mixed with
milk By so doing he becomes purged of!
of all his sins

5 3 Listen now to anolber mystery un*
kn iwii to many but which was discovered
by the Kisliis with the help of meditation.
1 heard it front Vnliaspati while he recited
(t before Maliadeva.

S 4 — 55 O king of the celestials, do yon
hear it with Rudra in your company, O lord
of Sfischi If a person, ascending 3 moan-
tain, stands there on one foot, witli arms
upraised and pined together, and, abstain*
mg from food, looks at a burning fire, — lie
acq iires the merits of severe penances and
obtains the rewards of fasts.

56 Healed by the rays of the Sun, he
beco nes purged nff of all his sms One wlp
acts il us III both the su nmer and the winter
seasons, becomes freed from every sin.

57 Purged off of every sm, one acquires
asplend ur of complexion for all lime buCh
a man burns wiili energy like the Sun or
sbmes in beauty like l)ie Moon,

58 After this, the kmg of Ibe eetealials
rf/fheol A hundred sacrifices, seated fit
the midst of the gods, then sweetly aef*
dressed Vriliaspali, with these excellent
w>rds —

O H >ly One do yoil describe those
mtstenes of religi ni which are fraught with
I appi less to human beings and what the
faults are wine) they commit, together with
the mysteries of (hem,

Vnbaspati said —

do— dt 1 hey who pass urine facing ifie
Sill they who do not sliow respect for the
wind they who do n)t ^nur libanons on the
burrimg F «< they who ridk a cow wl ore
catt IS Very joung, aclusled by theidesire Of
obtamiiig from I er as much m III as pos-
sible, co»»mil many «i is I sh 4 ll describe
what those faults are, O lord of Sliaclli

6*— 63 riie Son Wind tlie carrier of

s.tcrificial ObUlions, O Vasava and kiite
who are the motf ers of all creatures, were
created by the ScU Create hunsdfr for res*
cumg all the worlds, O Shakra. lliese are
the deide* of human beio^s Listen alt
to the conclusions of religion, ,
j 64 I hose wicked men and wicked
' women who pass urine facing the Sun. live
so great infamy lor eighty. six years
Cj That man O Skalcra utio cherishes
no respect for the Win d. gtu children |I at
come out picmatufcl) from the womb of


mahabharata.'


26S


liis wfe Tho«e inen «l>o do not pour Itha-
liOKS on tl>e fire, find (hrii tbe fire,

when lliey do lii'lil it up for such ns

they wish to perform, refuses tu eat their
lihalions. I '

66 T liose men who drinU the milk ol
kine whose calves are very ynun^ never
gel children for popeluating their races
67. Such men see ihcir children die and
thnr families slmnk lliese are the conse*
qiieiices of llie acts refeired to| ^s Observed
by llM<.e>buMi peisons, veneribte for age in
jlheif respective fiiiuihea i >' I } i ’

65. Hence, one shoidl alvvays avoid
that which has been uilerdicted, and do *
unty Ihaiiwlnch tias been directed to be
done, if olie is desirous of securing Ins
■prosperity. 1 ihis that 1 say to ^ou is very

69*^70. After the celestial preceptor
■^bad said this, the I ighly blessed celesiials.
tvilli the Maruls, and the highly blessed
Rishis questioned the departed hlane say.
mg, Ye Puns with what acts of mnnaii
I beings, who are generally gifitd wiih Imle
‘Understandings, do you > become pleased?
\Vliat gifts, made ii> course of such iiies as
are perfo>ni«d for improving the posiiioiv
of deceased persms in the oilier world, be*
come inexhuastible in efRcacy ? ,

71. By doing wl<at acts Cjtn tnen be*
cotne freed from the debt (liev owe to ilieir
ancestors? We wish to liear this. Great is
our curiosity.

The Pitris said

72. Ye highly hlessed ones, the doubt
existing in your muds has been properly
explained. Listen as we drscrtbe lire deeds
of riglileous men with which we become
pleased.

73. Blue*hued Bulls slmnld be liberated
Gilts should be made tu us, on the day of
the new moon, of sesame seeds ^nd water
111 the season of ruins, lamps should be
lighted. By these deeds of ii>eii, they can
tree themsefves from the debt tfiey owe to
tl eir ancestors.

74 Such Rifis never become vam. On
the other hand, lliey yield greut and end.
less flints, ihe grutificauon we derive
from thrill IS considered to be inexhaustible

75. Ihose men, who gilted with lailli,
beget offspring, rescue their deceased 1
ai ceslors from miserable Hell, I

76—77, Heanng lliese words of the Pilris, I
Viiddha Gargja, endued wiih penances
nod Ingh energy, became Mied with wonder
S' t<*a« the hair on his body stoml erect. Ad
dre sing tliem he said.— Ye having penances
lur wealth, tell us wlut tl< meriu aic ot


I setting free BnlU havmg bln* comptexloiw.

I Wtui merits, agnin, are of Ihe gift of la ups

1 111 the season of rains and (lie gift of water
with sesame seeds ? r 11'

The .Pitris said:—

78 If a bull of blue complexion, upon
being liberated, raises a (sin II) q laiiiiiy of
water wtili its tail, ilie Pitiis become
pleased wiUi that water for full Sixty ihoo-
saiid years ■ 1

7^ Hie mud such'a bull raises with Ifs
hams from tlie banks (of a river 01 lake),
succeeds, firsooth* ih sendtng llw Pitris lo
the reguiii uf buma. . '

80. By giving lampa iiv the season H
sains, one bhnies witli elTiilgence like Suns
I imseff I lie man who gives lainp>
never siih]«-cl to ifiequHlit) of Darkness.

81— Sa ‘I l'osc,*nien who make gifts. OO'
llie day of the new muon, ol sesame seeds
and wrier, m xed wiih honey and nsm),' «
vessel" of copper, O' you 'liaviiic penance*
for wealth,, are coiisn'ered as duly perform*
log a Shraddlia with all its injsietirfc
lliese men gel children of sitnno health
and cheerinl nimds. . * IT

8j Ihe merit acquired by the Ri*et of
the Piiida tak'-s the foitu of the growlli rif

Ins family. Indeed, he wIk) perfurnis (lieso

acli vMili faith, becomes freed from tij*
debt he owe* to Ihe ancestors.

■84 ■'Ihus have been laid down the pro*
per time for the performance of lI'O
bhraddha, the ordinance* about the me*
to be observed, the proper person that
should be fed at the Shraddha, and the.
meriis that belong to It, 1 have described
everyiliHig to you m due older.


CHARIER CXKVf.

( ANUSHASANIKA RAUVA).—
ConttimtJ.

Bhishma said

I. 1 he king of ll»e celrtiials, V'r . Indra»
after the Runs Ind ceased to speak, ad-
dressed the povvfrfni Han saying—
Ijird, wliat are those deeds winch pJe*’'-
you? Hnw, indeed, do men succeed m
pleasing you T

Vislmu said *— '

I 2 that winch 1 greatly hate, t*

I detraction of Brahinanat ' P irsnolh, if H'e
I Brahnianas are adoied, 1 cons^tcr mysru


270


MAIIAflHARATA.


PilriB, t^e deities Oie ^ACred fires, atl
reiiini disappointed on account nf such
tre>itinent of tlie^itest.


27 That ^n-«n who does rol perform
the dimes nf li ispit-iliiy Inward* the R<i**it
arrived at Ins lioii'e comes to be c onsi leied
r«s eq>i 11 ) moFiiI wiiIi those wlio are sUyers
ofwiinenor of ktiie, aIio are ungrateful
towards benefactors, who are sia)ers of
Brahmanas, or who are Violators of the beds
of ihetr preceptors. '


Agni said

28—30. Listen ye with rapt attention.
I shall describe the demerits of that man ot
wicked understanding who lifts up his feet
lor striking tlierewitli a cow or a liighiy
I lessed Brahmana or a burning Rie. live
infamy of such man spreads throughout the
world and reaches the bouiidacy of tfeaven
Itself. His Pitris become filled with fear.
*1 he deities also become highly dissatisfied
vt< him. Gified with great energy. Fire
reiuses to accept the hUjtions poured by


3I< For a hundred lives he hastorotin
Hell. He is never rescued at any time.

33—33 Ojie should, therefore, never
touch a cow with Ins feel, or a Brahmana of
high energ), or a burning Are, if he is gifien
wUli fwlh and «eeks Ins own belioof. these
are the demerits declared by me of one
who lifts up Ins feet towards these three.


Viabwamittra said i—

3 f — 36. Listen to a great mystery that
IS unknown to most of men and which i»
connected with religion. He, who olTers to
the departed Mane*, rice boiled in milk
and sugar, sitting with face dnecied to the
south at noontide, in the shade caused by
an elephant's body in the menih ol Ohadrn.
pads, under the constelUli n Ma^ha
acquires great merils Hear of Ihnse merits
'Iheman who makes such an oflenng to
(he Pitrts under kuch ciicumstHiices is con-
wdeted as petlotmmg "a gftat Shiaddlia
each year lor thirteen years successively.

Tbo kme said

37—39 fhal man becomes purged off of
all Uis sms wl o worships a cow with these
Mantras. —nr ,— O Vahula, O bamanga
O you who are tearless every where, O you
who are forviving and full ul auspicious*
ness. O friend, O source of all plenty, in
(he region ol Brahman, formerly you were

f resent with your call in the sacrifice of
iidra the holder of the thunderbolt ! Vou
were sialwmed in the sky and m the path of
Agiii' liie cetesiMis with Narada among
them woisliipped you Oil But occasion


by calling you Sarvamsaha ! — Such a man
aUaiiis to the region of Puraiidara. He
acquires, besides, the merits that belong to
kme. and the splendour of (he Moon also
4s Such a man becomes freed from
every siii, every fear, every grief At the
end, lie acquires resnfence in the happy
regi n ol the lliousaiid eyed Indra.


Bbisbma said-— ‘

41. After this, the highly blessed and
ifliistrtoiis seven ftishw, lie^Hed by Vasin*
shiha, rose and going raund the loius*
born Brahman, stood arouixl him with
liands joined in respect.

42 Vashishtha, > that foremost of «H
persons conversant with Brahma becanm
tlieir spokesman and put this qnestum which
conduces to the be' oof of all creatures but
especially to (he Brahmaiias and Kshatnyas.


43 By doing what acts may viriunns
men who have no 'worldly belongings
ceed m acquiring llie merits of sacrifices i
44. Hearing tins question of thrifS, the
Grandfather Brahman began to say wh*l
foUowrs. '


Brahman said'—

45 Excellent is tins qu»#llon, ye ^"8*'
bIes»edone»I It is at once auspicious •
high and lull of mystery IhjS

that yon have put is subtile and tonouces t
the welUbeing of inankiiid. ^

46 Ye Ris'iis having penances
wealth, I sImII recite everytlung

full Do you listen with allenlion to wh« *
say as to how meii acquire the merits
sacrifices. _ j

47-4S In the lighted fortn'Rht of ‘le
,moi.ili of Poosa when the con$iellati«n
Ruhimisin conjunction, if one, punl>"’>-
liamselt by a bath, lies, under the csn'’py °
heaven clad in a single piece of ehth. wi
faith and rapt attention and dunks 'h*
of the Moon, he Wins the merits O' 8^*
sacrifices ,

49 Ye foremost of twice born
this IS a great mystery that I declare u
you tn reply to y lur question, you w
kiiuw the trullis of 4ll subjects.


CHAPinU CX'CVIL

(AHUSHASANllCA PAUVA) —
CoMfirirrrJ.

Vibbavasa (the Sun) said
1—2. Ihcre are two 1 fleiiii|.a\
tlic»c consists ol a palmful of water and ine


t*AkVA,


0\1ier calle<l Aksliata consuls o! rice«gram 4
Vith clarified bulier". OnesliQtilil.oi* Uh* day
. tif the full moan, si^tnd faciiiic that
[ nrb and make to Inm the two ofTeniiK*
tnenlioned, ns , a paliMlu] of water , 4 nd tbe
tice*grams with cUnfied biiiter called
Akshata, 1 tie man who presenis these
tiflenny^S IS said to worsi ip bis sacred fire
Iiideeb he is considered as one who lias
fiogred libations on the lliree (priiTCipal)
fires.

I 3 That man of hitle understanding who
Icuis down a Uri,e tree on the day of ilie
|new moon, becomes sullied with Che sin of
f ffralimanicide. By killing even a single
! feaf one commits that sm

4 That foohsh man who chews a tooth*
brush on the di>y of the new moon is con.
Sfdered as iniurnii! the god of Che moon by
such a deed I be departed Manes of such
a person become annoyed wuti him.

5 . The celestials do not accept the liba*
lions poured by such a man on days of the
full moon and (he new moon fits de*
parted Manes become enraged wiili Inm,
ATid lift family become extinct. '

Shree said ,

6 —), 1 be celestials and departed Manes
leave that sinful house, in winch eating and
driiikmg vessels and seals and beds lie
scattered, and in whicit women are beaten.
Without accepting the ofif«rmgs made to
ibem by the owners a( such houses, the
celestials and the departed Manes fly aw«y
from such a sinful liouse.

Attgiras said:— ^

8 I he offspring of that man mnltiphes '
Wl o stands eveiy nixh! for a full } rar under ,
a Karaii| 4 ka tree with a Ismp lor hgliting

and holds III Ins hands the roots of the
Suvatcliala plant.

largya said —

9 One sliould alwajs do the duties of'
uspiiality to bis guests One sbould give

amps in the hall or shed where sacrifices i
*'e celebrated, One sliould avoid sleep I
lining the day, and abstain from all sorts |
>< flesh or food.

to One should never injure htnr and
Dralimanas One si oiild alw-iys rtcire tic ■
* amis ot ll e Pusl kaia lakes ai d the oil er
sacred waiers huch a course of duty is ihe
foremost Even ll is fount a I igb religton
*i>th 1(1 riiysieiies If observed n> ptaccice.
H IS sure lo yield Rreal results

5 It ll a person celebrates even a hun*

drtd sacrifices, le is doomed to tec U«
ext ausiioli of ibe n-erits belonRn g to lire
'ibaiigiis poured ll erein IbedoHes, how-


2?t

ever, winch I have tneniioned are such that
whrn observed by persons having laitn,
tlieir merit beenines endless

12 — 13 Listen n iw to anniber creat

mystery Unknown to many Ihe c^feviMfs
do not eat iVie libanms on ocdasi nis of
ahraddlias and rites in tbeir tionir >r o t
occasions of tb >se rites w ulIi are performed
on ofdmsry hi Mr days iir on (he espically '
sacred days t>f the ill!) mion and the new
moon, if they see a wiman in her meaies
' or one who IS the daughter of a muther
I suffering from leprosy.

t4 i he ancestors of the man who allows
I such A Woman to com' near the place where
Ui« Sliraddlia is being perfoniie 1 by him,
do not become pleased with him hr thirteen
years. '

15 Clad in while clothes, and becoming
pure in body and mind, one should invite ,
Brahma.ias and make them utter their
benedictions' Oo such occasions one should
also recite (be the Bharata It is by obser* ,
vmif all these that t)m ifteiings iiuile at
bhraddhis become endless. ,

Dhaumya said •—

tO Brotten utensils, broken bedsteads,
cocks an 1 ilovs as also such trees as have
grown within dwelling houses, are all In*
auspicious objrcls. ' * '

tj In a broken utensil exists Kali him*
self, while in a broken bedsieid iS I >as of
money When a cock or a d is seen, the
celestials do not eat the offerings made to
them. Scorpions and snakes find shelter 1
under the roots of a tree. Hence, one 1
should never pUnt a tree within his home.

Jamadagai said

18—19 Ibat man whose heart is not
pure, IS sure to go to flell even if he wor.
slops Ihe celeslUls m a Horse Sacrifice or In
a liuixlred Vaiapeya Sacrifices, or ff he
practices the severest austerities wnb head
down most Purity of heart is considered
as cq««l to Sacrifices and ! ruth.

2). Avery poor Orabmana, by giving
only a portion of powdered barley with a
pure heart to a Urahmana, acquired the
reeioi of Uralinidn fnniself. llns is a
sufli^ier t proof


nAnAftffAffATA.


* CKkVUl.

(ANUbHASANlK\ PaRVAJ.—

CvttUiiiied. , • ,

Viiytt said t— ’ .

t. l slv;iU rfclie smne duties i)te dlKef-
\<ii>ce ol o/liirli p'O iilLCN liappiite^s tn mail*
ki»iJ, t) I ><>0 fi-'ldi atso, 'bull rapt al(6ii>i
tlDii, to cr-rlaiii UansgitssiuUs tJpui) Which
tliey depend.

2—^, lUal man Who ■ fftrs for the lour
months ol tl>e laiiiy season sesame and
water (to the Funs), and food, according
to the best of Ins p >wer, to a Bralimana
thoruu}>hly expert In duties. Who duly p>>nrs
libnlions on the sacred fire, and makes
rltctings of nee hulled in sugared milk who
gives lamps in honnr of the ancestors, with
sesame and waier, nidsed t>e wftud>esaft
tins witli faith and rapt aileniion, acquires
ah the, merits of a hundred sacrifices in
wfncli animals ate offered up'ic the Celes*
Hals. ^ ‘ ,

5 Listen to this ether great mystery
that IS unknown lu all that man who
thinks It all right when a Shudra lights up I
tlie Rre upmi which he is to pour libations j
or who dues not see an) fault when women
wl o are iticompetem to assi»t at bhraddhas
and orftier rhes ire aJIuwed (o assist at (liem,
Cummit a sin.

p. llie tfifee sacnBcial fires become
enraged with stidi a per>on. In !•>> next
life, he IS born as a bhiidra, H'S departed
Manes, lugether wnh the celestials, are
never pleased wnh Inm, ,

7. I shall now recite what the rxp'ations
are winch one mnsi pcffnrm lor ptirilying
hnnsell iiom such s'lis l.istcn tu me with
atienlioii, I 3 y peifnrnung those expiatory
riles, one Incomes happy and /rec /rom
fever.

8 rasting all the while, one stimild, for
three days, wiili rapt attention pnirliba*
Ixms, on the sacrrd rire, ui the urine ol the
tow mixed with cuwdung end indk and cl i*
tifird blitter.

g I he celesifals accept the I'fTrrings of

Such a m*n • n ii e 4 full year.

His deprited MaiiRt aUo, when the lime

c.otirv fur hill* for pi-tf irmiiig the ShraddlM,
htcoiiie pleiteil with linn

to I hive thus rrciied what is ngliteons
and whai nnnghienus, w,i1, ail then un-
koowii details, ahinit I uintn beings delimits
of altan in*> In Heaven. Men wlxi abslaiit
from ihe»r sms or wl o hasmi; committed
tliem peilurm the txpixlury riles p.imied
oil, sccfred m attaining to the CCfcStiaf
tieiau when lUej leave tl it wutIJ.


CHAPTER CX>tlK.

( ANUSH ASANIKA PARVA).--
Continued. '

liOmaslia said: — i

1. file rlepartnd Mines of ifiosC mert
who, wulioitt having wives Of their owii,
kiiiiW the wives of other peciple, are dtsap*
pointed wlieii the lime for the ShraJdiit
comes.

2. He who knows the Wives of oijief
people, be who mdiilges in sexual imnn
with a barren woman, and he who appro-
priates what belongs to a Brahtnini, are
equally sinful.

3 Forsooth, the departed Mines of such
people cut them off williout wislnng tn hive
any intercourse with them. Hie nfFernics
they make fail to please the cclestnh ai’u
the departed Manes.

4* Hencet one should always abst*"'
from sexusi union with women wId are I'le

lawful wives of others, as also with woiiie 1

wb5 are barren, the man who seeks 'i»
own good, should not app^opl^4le wlial
belongs to a Bralimana.

S I.isten now lo another myslery, im*
kmwi. to nil. abmil Uellgioti One sh.'iiMi
liaving fadh, always do the COinniand of hi*
preceptor and oiher elders.

6. On the twelfth lunar day, as also i"l |

tlie day of ihe lull moon, every month, oue |
should make gifts lo Urahtnanaa of eliim*'* f
butter and 01 Akshata. Listen tome "* |.l
say What llie ineisiiie is of the metd Ihsi
such a person wins. ■

7. By such a deed one is said to Increase
Soma and the Ocem. Vasava, ihe kmi *'
the celestials, confers upon him a fou'l™
part oJ the pieiiis of a Jiurxe-Sacnfice.

8. By meking such gifts, a person he*
eorvies gifted with great energy and prow*-'*-
\V«tI-plea»eJ wnh him, llie divine Sun’S
gianis him tl>e tiuiliun ol Ins desires.

9 Listen now to another rJuiy, togrthef

wnh the lonndaiinn on which it depcrid*.
wi.«h yields great merils In ihis igc vf
Kali, tint dill) , li peifuriiled, , gives l»uS"
happiness tu nieii ,

10— n rhit man who, rMng al d'«'M

ani p.,.d) 5 .n; h„nselt hy a hith. dresses j
liintitll m while cluihee an t with concenU*' ,
led attention mikes aifts «<» llrahmams ^ ,
vessels lull ol sesime seeih, who inx***’ i
eif!erincs to the departed Mines of "
Willi sesame seeds and bane), and who cl''* j
l<mps as also the food cal{,iJ Krish''-*’
acquires great meriis. I.ivlcn tS me *’ * '
tay wl at U cse luttiis a«c.


ANUSHASATIA l>AIiVA


273


18—1^ Hk* thusMser o( Paka

\ attributed tbese merjis to the gift of
ve>>els of copper and brass filled wttli
Sesame seeds He who makes gifts of kiu*
he wlio m-ikes gifts of land which yield
etern-^l merit, lie who performs the Agol*
shthoma sacrifice with profuse presents in
the form of Dakshma to the Bralinianas are
all considered by the celestials as acquiring
merits equal to those winch one acquires
by making gifts of vessels ftifed wiili sesame
seeds

14 Gifts of water with sessme seeds are
considered by the departed' Manes as yield-
ing eternal pratificatfon In tiem, I he
grahdfalhers all become highly pleased with
gifts of lamps and ICrishara.

13 I have thus recited the anaent ordi
nance laid down by Che Kishis, chai is
highly spoken of, by both the departed
Manes and the Celestials in their respecitve
regions. '


CHAPIBK CXKK.

f ANUJjHASaNIKA PAIlVAj —

Continntd. } > • r

Bhithma said:-'- , '

I. I he diverse Rishis there assembled
tegettier with the departed Manes and itie
deities, then, wnh rapt attention, asked
Arundiiaii who was gifted with great asce-
(k inerii

2 Having penances /or wealth Arun-
dhati was cqu^l to tier husband the high-
souled Vasliisiitha in eiiergy, for both in
vows and conduct she was her husband s
«q lal.

3 Addressing her, they said,— We wish
to tear from you the mysteries of duty
and religion. Vuu should O aruMble lady,
tell u> vriiat you consider as a great mys-
tery.

-*

4— S I he great progress f have been able
to mase in penances is owing to your con-
sideration for me in thus remembering my
poor sell With your gracious permission I
sliall now describe dunes that are eternal
and ace gieut mysteries I shall describe
them w,tb the causes on which they depend
Listen to me as 1 drseribe them Co you in
full A knowledge oI Cliese should be com-
municated to him only who has iailli or wins
has a pure heart

d these four, »>« , lie who is bereft of 1
faith, he’ who i» full of pride, he who is j

35


guilty nl Brahmanicide, anile wlm violates
the bed of his precepior, dio iM n^v^r he
talked to Keligiori and duty aliuuld _i)evcr
be coinmuiitcated tu them. '*

7—8 The merits acquired by a person
who gives away a ICapiU cow every day for
twelve years, or by a person wl o warship/
the demes every month in a SHcrifice, or hw
him wl 0 gives away hundreds of thousands
of Irrne rn tie great Pushk-rra do iioc eqdat ^
those that are his wuh whom a guest is i
pleased I ' ^ I

Q CJsten now in another duty whose ob-’
Servance yields liappiness to mankiint fci
should be observed wuh us secret rjtU’il iby
a person having faitti.^ Its merits are cer«
lainfy high. - il 1 I ' 1

to — >2 Listen to what'they are ’ If a J
person, rising at dawn and talcing with hint J
a quaiiKty of water and a few blades of I
Kiisha grass goes to a cowpen and arriveif |
there, washes a cow’s liorris by sprinkling '
titereon that water with thuie bUdes of
Kusiia grass and then causes the Water t</ <
drip down on his own he,<d lie is considered, j
on account of sucli a bath, as o|ie who hav ‘
performed his ablutions jn all the sacred
waters that the wise h-rye heard lo exist,,)iY
the throe worlds and tlut are fii> inred and
resorted lo by the Shiddhas and Chbranas

13 After Arundhuti had aan/ 'tfieia^
wordt, all the deities aiKl ancestors ap«
plauded her, saying — Bxcellei t,| Excellent.
—Indeed all th6 beings there wire highly ^
pleased and all of iheiii adored AruudiiaU.,f,

Brahman said ' *

14 O hlglify blessed one, excellent Is
the duiy Ihaf you have described together
Willi its secret rilu4l Piaise be to yon*.

I grant you this boon ire. tliut your
penances will continually Increase.

Yama said .-*•

15 i have iieard from you ah eXcelleri^ ’
and agreeable s ibject listen nnwlowlat
Chiiragupta has said and what is agfeeahle

j to me

16 Those words touch on duly Wnh its
^ secret ritual and are worthy of being heard
, by the great Itishis as atm by men having

faith and desirous of achievi ig their own
I good. , j ^ , }

1 ly Nothing IS last of either virtue or
sin that IS committed by hreaturef 'On
daySoMheloli moon and ih« niw tnao *
those acts are taken to (he Sun where they
rest. r t ,

18 Wl en a martal goes mto the regions
of the dead the bun wi Inttics all I is deeds


274


MAIiABIIARATA


H« who IS virluaus, acquires the Iruiis of his
virtue there.

19—30 I ahall no^Y you of some aitspi«
cious duties tliat are approved of by Chitra
pupta. Water for dmh, and lamps for
darkness should always be Kiven,
as also sand ils and umbrellas and KapiU
kme with due rites In Pushkara especially
one should make the gift of a KapiU cow
to a Brahmana convesant with the Vedas

St One should also always maint^ip his
Agnihotra with great care Here is ano.
tber duty which was proclaimed by Qmra*
gupia.

32 The best of creatures should listen
to what ttie merits are oCthat duty sepa
rattly. In course of time, every creature is
de^yned to undergo dis^ojupon,

35 Ihe little witted meet with great
distress m the regions of the dead, for they
become stricken with hunger and thustr
Indeed, they have to rot there in pain
There is no escape for them frorn such a
disatler. 1

34 Tliey have to enter into a 11 ick
darkness \ shall now tell you of those
duties by discharging which one may sue*
ceed m getting over such disasters.

as The performance of those duties
costs very! litOe but yields, greM rneni
Indeed, such performance yields great
happiness tn Um other world The merits
of the gift o| water for drink, are excellent
In the next world, in especial, those merits
I are very great

a6 A large fiver full -of excellent water
IS ordained in the other world lor (hp m who
make gifts ol water lor drink Indeed, ihe
w^tcr contained \n that river is endless and
cool and sweet as nectar.

37 He who makes gifts of water in this
world drinks from (hat river in the next
world when he goes Oere Listen now to
the profuse merits acciumg frop g’ft
of lamps.

aS. The man who gives lamps in this
world, has never to even see (he ihick dark,
ness (oi Hell) Ihe bup .snd the Moon luid
tlu! God of rire always give I tm Ihetr light
when lie goes to the oth^r world,

39 The celesitsis ordain that on every
side of such a petson (hue should be burn
in,j light. Indeed, when the giver of I ghis
goesiothtwofid of the dead, he himself
shines m pur*, effulgence Ike a second
Sijn,

S'! Hence, one should give I ghts while
here and weier for drink m eipeciel I islen
nyw to wKss the are ot the person


who makes the gift of 'a Kapila Cowio fl i
Brahmana knowingThe Vedas, especially if
the*' gift be made in PusI kara.

3 ! S ich a map jS considered as having
made a gift of a hu idred kine with a bull—
a gift that;^teld$ piernal menb

32 lUe gift of a Single Kapilawwts
capable cleansing whatever sms the giver
may be gii Ity of, even if ihose sins be as
t,raye as Braliinrmiside, for the gift ol a
single Itapila coiv is considered as equal m
meiit tu that of a hundred ki le

33 Hence, ote sliould give awsy a
cow at that Pnshkara which I*'®*'*

S| 4 ered as Ihp senior, on the day of the fiiH
moon in the month of Kartika Men "ho
succeed in making such a gift hav^ nevev
to meet with distress of any kind, or sorrow,
or thorns giving; pain ^

34 That mai\ who gives awv ® P*"’
sandals to a superior Brahmana who »*

I worthy of the gift, acquires similar merits
i By giving away an umbrella, a person gets
I coinloitable shade in (he 7 i«xt world


33 A gifl made lo ft worthy per*®'*
never goes TdV nmhl tg • ft Is sure to y f'd
agreeable resulls”"!'’ the givC , Hex**"'*
these opnuoifs ol ‘Chitra^uta, Ih® Suns
hairs stood erect,

36 Gifted with great splendour

addressed all the celestials ai d the depsiie®
Manes, saving,— Ye have heard the niysler.
le* about duty, as explamed by the grr*t
Omragupta •'

37 Those human be ngs who P’f***^
with faith, make these gilts to great Br*"*
roXnas, bicoirtc freed from f«*r o* every
son. ■’

38 n>ese five kind* of men, inU

VICIOUS deeds, have no escape , |j
these wrelcl ed men ol sinful conduct.
never be talked to Indeed, they $hot»W
always be avoided ‘

Those five are I e who is the dcsiroy*
Orafmaiia he who is the destroyer
_ Jow, he who 15 addicied t® S'*®*
union w ih other peopIrpS wives, he "“I*®
befeft ol faith (in t) e Vedas) and he w ®
maintains lumsclf by selling the Virtue o
his wife ^

40 These men 0/ sinful cofsduel.
they KP to the region of ttie dead, rot m h*
like woim* which /ive upon pass and td

4t These five are avoided by the drr*'*
ted Man^s, the celestUls, t* e Sn*t<«
Deahmanas, and otter twice b->m pe'****
who are given to the practice of pena <es.


,S.


AMtlSHASHNA PAKVA


Sf75


CHAPTER CXXXl.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
• Co/ittHoed,


Bhislima said — '

V — i ' al! 0»« blessed celes-


tials and tbe departed' M-rnes, and the
liighl^-blessecf Rt->>i<s aUa addressing' tlie
Pramaihas said,— -Ye are all highly blessed
beioi^s Ye are invincible ntgl t fanaers
Why do you afflict thnse men who are vile
and irnpure and that are unclean 1

3 Wfiat acis areconstdered as obstacles
to )i»iir power T 'Whar, indeed are those
Acts on account of twii ctr ye cannot affl ct
men T What are those acts liiat are des-
tructive of Raitsliasas and which prevent
you irom influencing the dwellings of men T

4 Vi night rangers, we wisli to hear alt
Ifns from you


Pramathafl eaid

5—6 Men are rendered unclean by acts
«tf stxuil uuercourse Ihey who do not
purify themselv^ after siiOt derds they
wli> insuli tf etr rWers tfiey who from sttt
pefaction xat different sons of meat, the
man hIsq wtio steeps at tl e foot of a tree,
lie wild keeps any animal mailer under his
piffow wliife fyii'g down fur sferp, and he
whu lies down or sleeps puitng tie head
svfieie Its feet should be placed or I is
fret where lus liead should be plated,— these
men are considered by us , as unclean
Indeed, thesd nlen I aVe mahy holes

7—8 Ihose also are classed amongst
lliose who throw tl eir phlegm and otirer
uncle an secret! ns into the waie'. Foisonih,
thesg men deserve (o be killed arldeatFri up
h/uS indeed \4e afflict lliose human heuigs
who are endutd with such cortdcrct Listen
now to what tl ose acts ard which ate coit-
S’drte} MS aiiitd tes and oft account Of
winch we fail to do anynijury on men

S'"!! Ihose men on whose body are |
.nvi-ilv oi' ijorocilana or' wil r ilcnl^ 4'acrtav j
m their hands, or who make gifts of clarified >
butler with Akshata or wtio place clarified
butler and Altshata on their heads or
Ihose wlio ahsiaifi from meat, are incapable
of bei ig afflicted by us Tliat mao in
whose house the sacred fire burns day and
mglit without being ever exlu'giiislied or
who keeps the «km or teeth of a wolf in Ins
house or a fuff tortoise, or from whose
bouse the sacrificial smoke is seen to Ctrl
upwards or who keeps a cat or a goat that
IS mther tawny Of bUck in colour, » free
from our power.

■> » Those hoiisehofders who Veep ll ese
tliingj in iheit lioiucs always fulJ Oiein lice


from the dttactfsbf cv^n ihk most dreadful

spirits tfiat five <ni fcarritm


t J Those bemgs also, (ha( like ^ rang*
through difTerent worlds seeking pleasure,
are uiiabfe to do any harm to such houses-
therefore, should men keep such articles in
llieir houses as are destructive of Rakshasas.
We have thus told you everything in solut
tion of your greatdoubts f


fcxxxii.

(XNUSllASXfJIlU PAliVAi^


Bhishm& aaiil i

I — 2 After this, ifie C'anafathet HrSl/»
fit*'* sprung /foitj fhe primeval lofus pod
resembling the lotus fin a^reeabUness and
frag^nce), addressed the celestials hrsfled
by Vasava. ihelmsbsnd of Sselu,—V under
sits the powerful Naga who lives in the
nether regions, Gifted with great .strength
and energy, and w»ih greet proweis^alfe,
I IS name is Renuica He is cectaiiity a
great perrt^ ' ■- ,

3—3 riiose powerful elephants grei^t


ba*i|ti with hef hills wAtet'i, arfd fikes,
should be seen by ffiit Rtifdk'a it Yo fr
reqiesl' Let Retiuka gd fo theny and hits
tliem aboilt the myslends of religioh dr
diyy ’—Hearing tl>ese words of the Grand-
f-tther. the celesiuts, well pleased, sent (the
elephant) Renuka tu where those upholders
ol (he wuild are i ,


6 Going whrrc those elephants are,

Keouka addressed them, sa}iug — Ye

powerfid creatures I have been commind-
ed by the celestials and ihr departed
Manes to ^nrvtioiT))'oa about fhe master, es
of religion and duty I I d's re to hear )nu
disciurse on that subjvct n deiait j Ye

AiVvwid jnvir ^b'ya'istwouvairoir ohr
sub)ect as your wisdorrr miy d cute.

7 Standing iinthe dlghl q»ia/fe>s llTe
elephants said— On the sacred eighth dsy
of (he dark fprinight in the month of
Kartika whep the constellation Ashtesha is
in llie ascendant, one should make gifu of
treacle and nee.


S— ft. Renouncing anger, and living
on regulated diet, one shoutj make these
rRerin(,c at Jt S> raddlin, uttering these
Mantras — Let Valadevaand other Nagas
endued with great strength let other power-
ful enakes ei huge IxMies that th'e indesr
UUCttMs and ctcinalrond Jet aJ) {he otlid-


MAtlABlIARATA.


^76

{•rbat lint have laken their btrih

in their family, make Vati offerings to me
for the increase of my strength and energy.
Indeeo let my strength be as great as that
of the blessed Narayana when he raised
the submerged E-irth Uttering these
Mantras, one should make Vali offerings
ii(>on an anthill After sunset, offerings of
raw Sugar and rice should be made on
anthill selected 1 he anthill shbuld previ*
ntisfy be strewn with Gajendra flowers
Offerings should.also _be made of blue
clothes and fragrant unguents,

13, If offering^ are made thus, those
beings that live in the nether regions, car*
rying the weight of |t e upper regions upon
Iheir heads or shoulders, become well*
pleased and graliBed. As for ourselves, we
niso do not feel the exertion of upholding
the Earth, on account of such ofTeriugs
being made to us

J 14 Abided with the burthen we bear,
this IS what we think (beneficial for men),
'sviihoiit the slightest selfish end By obser.
vtng this rule for a full year, fasting on each
occasion, Brahtnanas Ushatriyas, and Vmi«
shays and Shudras, acquire great merits
from aueh gifts ^

15. We think that the making of such
Vail offerings on the aiuhill is really Crauglit
with very superior merits

^By making such offerings, one is
considered as doing the duties of liospitaliiy
^or^a liundred ye<irs to all the powerful
elephants which exist in the three worlds.

'^177 Hearing these words of the powerful
efephants, the celestials and the departed
Manes, and the highly blessed Rtshis, all
spoke highly oi Retiuka *'


CHAPTER CXXXHI

<AN(/SHASAiVfKA PAKVAJ —

Cantinued.

Maliesliwara said

1 You have reciied excellent duties from
) out memory Lisien all of you now to tne
as 1 declare some mysteries about religran
and duly. ''

3, Only those persons whose understand*

gs havelicen fixed 6n religion and who are
endued uiili fa ill, should be instructed
about these mysteries of duty and religion
lliat are fraught wilh liigli inerits

^ Hear what the mentS are tlial become
bis, who, wuli hcait vlioin of anxiety, ^isea


food every I day, for a month, tokine, and
contents liimself with one meal a day
throughout such period /

4 Ihe kine are highly blessed They
are considered as the most sacred of all
sacred things. Indeed it is they who are
upiiolding the three words with the celestials,
Astiras, and human beings ,

5 Respectful services done to them,
yield great ment and grave resuks ilwl
man wtio everv day gives food to kine daily,
acquires accumulated religious merits

6 Formerly, m the golden age, I had
expressed my approval of these creatures.
Afterwards Bralman, sprung from the
primeval lotus req tested me (to slmw kn'd*
ness towards kine)

J U IS therefore that emblem of bull
stands on my standard overhead I always
sport with kine Hence, should kine be
adored by aff

8 Kine are endued with great power
H>«) are givers of boons If ad red, I’ey
wcKild grant b ons I hat person who
gives food to kine even for a siiel«"*7»
receives from those beneficent creature*, f^
that deed a lonrlli part of Ihe meriii he
may acquire by all Ins good acts m bfe


CHAPTER CXXXIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

, Continued I

Skanda said —

1—2 1 shall nnw describe a duty tha'

IS approved of by me Do ye listen to it witn

rapt ^tUcinion. that person who *

little earth from the horns of a bull ofb'i*
color, smears his body iherewiih for three
days and llien performs Ins ablutions, wins

great meuls Hear what those merits are

fJ> Such a deed lie would wash away ciery
stain and evil, and acquire sovereign sw*y
hereafter

3 Every time he is born m this world
he beoines celebrated for Ins hero»m
Hear of another mystery unknown to all

4 I aking a vessel of copper and pl*c ng
the tin some cooked fo>d after havu g

m«x»'d It with honej , one should offer It •*

ufFei it, g to tlie rising Moon on tie evening
of (he day when that luminary is at full

Doj* learn, with faith,
merits are ol tl e person who acts tl *>*
Saddhyas, tl e Rudras. the Ad^ty"»- >''«
Vuiiwsdsvak, the f .1 Ashwuis, the Ma'Ut'’


ANUSttASANA >ARVA.


Art/J if« Vattif, al! accept that rfienng. By
ftucli an ofTering, Soma increases as kIso
ocean that great receptacle of waters llm
fluty that IS declared by me and that is ui»*
known to all, tf performed, ceiuinly yields
great happiness

Vishnn said:-*

7 — 8 That person who, gifted with faith
and freed from malice, fisieiis every d-»y
wiili rApt atleiilioii to the mysteries about
rehgi m and dui) that are preserved by lire
great deities and those ttiysleries mIso of
thesj/iw Jf/nd that are preserved by t)»e
Hishis, has never to succumb to any evil
Sucli a person becomes also fr «d from
every fear.

9. (hat man who, with hfs senses under
thoroiigli restraint, reads these seen ms ties*
cubing these auspicious and meiitorimis
duties, ti getter with their mysieries,—
fluties that have been described ^by the
pievious speakers), — acq nres all the mcrus
of their actual performance.

i 10. Sin can never lord over him tn>
deed, such a man can never be slHiued with
lauUs of any sort Indeed, one acquires
profuse met us hy reading these mysteries,
or b> reciting lliem to olhera, or by heating
them recited.

tt, the Celesiists and the departed
Manes eat for ever the I favi and the Kavt
t ffered by such a creature U iih on

nicein 1 of the Virtues of the < ffrrer, become
insXtMUstible. Even such is the me n ol
itn; person who, iviih rapt attenimn, recites .
Iliese mysteries lo farrinast at OraimMias'
on days of the lull moon or Um new
Tnoon, , "■ *■

tj Such a person, on account of such a
deed, becomes steady m tlie performance
of all duties He also enj lys peisouaf beauty
and prospenty He succeeds besides this,
in becoming the lav iiirite for all lime, of
the itisbis and the cefestufs and (he depart'
ed Manes

»3 ff a person becomes gtiilly at att sms
except those which are classed as grave or
heinous, he becomes purged 1 fjcf them »H by
Only listening lo ii e reeitstlou ol these mys*
In les ahuui i ehgion and duly. i

Bhishma said

•4—15 Even these, O king, are the
mysteries aboil religi m and duty living In
the breasts of the deities Held in high
esteem by all the cetesiisls and promuh
Rated by Vyasa, Itiey have now been de»

dared by me lor your behoof. One whn is

Conversant with religion and duty thinks
that ihu excellent kiiuwled^e ls even


277

superior to (he entire Earth full of rrdies
and wealth. ,

16 I his knowledge should not be* Riven
to one who has no faith, or to one who is an
atlirist, nr to one who has faifen away from
llie duties of his caste/ or to one/wlio is
shoin of mercy or In one who is given lo
the science of empty disputations, or lo one
who ta hovido t» >MS p>BC plors, »r 10 one
wli > thinks all creatures to be different from
oneseff.


THAPIER CXXXV.

(ANU^HASANIKA PARVA).—
ContliifttJ.

Todhishthira Eaid

I. Wbo aie those persons, U Bliarata
from whom a Brai mana in this world may
take his food? Prom whom may a Ksiia*
inya. a Vanhya, and a &liudra take llieir
iMd lespectivsly T

BblsbmA said >’*■*

t A Dr.ihm-rna may take his food from
another Brshniana, or from a KshalTiya, or
Irom a Vaishya, but he must never lake food
from a bhadta

3 A Ksliairiya may take li» food from
a Brahm-'iM, a Xshairiya or a Vaishya.
lie must, h ><»ever, not take food given by

I blnHlr,is who are given to evil W4}sand
who partake ol all sorts of food without any
liesitation.

4 Drahmanas and Kshalriyas can par.
take of fartd t,ivei> by such Vaisbyas as serve
the sacred Rie every day, as are UidiTess in
character, and as perform the vow of Cha>
turinasja.

g Bui <f*e man wfio accepts food from a
Shudra, swallaws the very abomination of
the Earth, and drinks the excreti ms of the
human body, and parinkes of the filth of all
(he world

6 •'He partakes of the very filih of the
Earth who lakes his food thus from a Shudra .
Indeed, tliose Urahmanas who accept their
food from Shudras, take the din of the
Earth,

7. If one engages in the service of a
Shudra, lie IS doomed to perdition, though
l« may duly perform all (he riles of his
caste A Brahmana, a Kshairiya, or a
Vaishya, so engaging, u doomed, although
given to (lie propei perhrmaaoe of religious
rites


,378


.MAHABHARatA.


8 It IS said a Bralirpana‘s duty

"coitsisi^ in s(ud} ti’ttf tlie Vedas and seeking
the belio >f of huinanuy , tliat a Ksliatrija's
.duly coiisisisbi" in^n and that a

jVarthjA’s m piomowng iheir rnavetval psos-

iPenty. ^ , I . 5 I t

9 A Vaishya liver by dst'ibdim^ the
{riiic» of Ills ourr deeds and agricoltiirt
I lie hreedii>8 of hine and (fade ^re (he le>
yi'imate duties m winch a VAishya may
engage without feat of censurd

10 I he man who gives up his own pro
per occiipaiion and do s that of a ^hudra,
should be regarded as a Shudra, and, on
no account, should any food be accepted

It. ProFessors of mediune mercenary
soldiers the prirst wjio acts as^ warder of the
louse, and persons who dexote a ulmle
year to study without any ’ pru^l, are all to
be regarded as Sliudras ^ ■"

IS—tS And those who * (oohsUly par. I
false 'of food uSered at ceremonials In a |
Stiiidra's houstf, suffer from, a dreadful |
dtssfter. 'On account of partaking' Silch
fo'i'btdd'eri ‘food, they (oo»e fteir family,
strength, and energy, and arq ifre the
status of lower animals degenerating iq (lie
position nf dogs, fallen in Virtue and devoid
of all religtood obsOrvatices. '

I 14. He who takes food from'a phssician,
takes but an excrement , the food of a
ballot IS like unne, that of a skilled media*
me IS lihe bfood. '

15 ,ll a good Brahmsna takes the food
of one who lives by his learning, he is on
Sidered as taking tlie fond of a bhudra. All
^ood men should axoid such food.

t6 The food of aperson who is censured
by all. ts Slid to be like a dunk fro n a p oi
of blood (he , acceptance of food front a
wicked person is as heinous ai the killing
of a Ifrahmana.

17. Oni* should not accept food if he 1$
slighted and not received with due lioiiors
by the giver. A Brahmana, who doeS so,
iff sooiT possessed by disease, 'and Ins family
soon becomes extinct.

. 18 By accepting food from the warder
pfja cil), one degenerates to Uie status
of the lowest oiitcaste. , 1 ,c t ’ f

ip. If a Brahmana accepts rfood frorti
one who IS guilty of sUjing ciifier a cerr or
a«Brahmana, or iron\ one who lias com.
muted a hihery ;vah Ins perccpier's wife,
^or from a drunkard, , he helps 10 piomote
, the family of Kekshasas. ,,

' ' 20.' 'By' faking* food frorn a eunuch, or
'from* aif uh£i*>ittful person, or from one


who lias rmsapproprialed money entrusted
to h>s care, one is born in the country of the
Sawfas situated beyond the limiliof llie
midtlie country i

* 2t/ ) have thui duly described to >oa
Be persons from whom food ln^yheac-
<*pted and from whom it may not Now
(ell tne, O son of Kiinti, what efse do
wtsb to hear from me to-day.


CHAPfER CXXXVI.
(itNirSHASANtKA PARVA)-


CottUtitied,

Yudhishthira said ' '

1* You have told' me fully of those nod
/aad tun f be lakeex stdd ol those I’Ont
'“bont tt st'outd not be? laUeit?

* But I liave grave doubts on one poiob
Do joo O sire, enlighten me, do
•ell we what expielioire Brahmamr slioula
m^ke upon accepii'ig the different kind* of
food, those especully offered 111 honor 0' IJ**
oe'eMials and ilhe oblatrans made (O' Ih*
depsiied Manes I „ . ( '


BhUhma said —

_ 3 - f shall tell yon,^ O' prince. J'®"’
Brai.nianas may be freefl from all ?in* i'**
cutred by accepnng fb'od from ollieri. ,


4 In accepting clarified * <<«Uef, life
expiation is made by pouring ohlaiiO"*
«>'• the fire, reciiing the Savitri hymn m
accepiTixg sesSmum, O Yudhishthii'a, the
same expiation has to be made.


S In accepling meat, 01' lionej, '*
* B atiinana beenrres purged off of alt sm*
by Standing till the rising of tlie Sun.


6—7 If a Brahmana accepts g'nld./t®'®
n'y line, he beconfts cleansed of alls''’*
•> Silently reciting thegieat GaytBi, ahJ
*y holding a piece of iron in hw hand,
wfnre the public In accepting money or
Jothes or women or gold, the porificalion


8 In accepting food, or nCd boiled in
•fdic and sugar, or sugarcane j tice, or
’"giirgatie, or oil, or any sacred thing, one
br«i>Tnei purified by baching thrice during
the day, , ai morn, noon and eve.


9 If one accepts paddy, fl jwers, fru'lS
**iter, ripe barley, milk, or curdlw
mdk. nr anything made of meal or flnur.the
**Piaiion IS done by reciliiig the (layairt
pt*'.]rcr a hundied (iiiHS. ,


A»USf1ASATIA rArVA.


279


'to |ij jicCfplinff i^>oes br ctolJ'M St
ceremonies, the sin is ^issipaied
by teciimg devoutty llic Same hymn a him*
'tired limes,.

ti. The acceptshce aI the gUl 6t !and
duitni; an ectipv* or darmt; tliepeiiodof
impurity, is expiated by observing a last
dating three successive nights

t2 *1 he Brahmana teho partakes of ob«
iaiions oJTered to departed Manes in comma
of the dark foTtniglil, is purified by tasting
lor « whote day and night

13. Without performing his abfnnont «
Brahmans shontd not recite his evming
prayers, nor eneagt In religious m'diiaiion,
nor take his fond a second time, Uy so
doing he IS purified

t4< I hereCore the Shraddha of departed
hlanes has been ordained to be periormcd
in the afternoon and then the Urahmana
Viho has been invited beforehand should be
treated «>ith food

t5’ The Brahmkna Mio tikes'food at
the house of a dead person on tl e third day
•Tier the death, is penfied by batfitng three
limes daily for t«elve days

fd After the eepiraiien of twefve days,
•nd perlormmg the purification ceremonies
duty, the sin ts dissipated by giving clarified
butter to Brahtnanas

\J. If a man takes any food m the hnose
«f a dead person -anthtn ten days alter the
death, he should Bcfhem a}i the expi-tttcfts
before meniioneo, end slioold recite the
Savitn hymn and perform the sm destroy
ing ]s1 ii and Kushmanda penances,^

18-“I9 The Brahmana who lakes lit
food 111 the house of a dead pers n for
Ihree mghis becomes piirified bj' J>erlif<ni«
Ing his ablations thrice daily lor seveiji days
and thus Rains all the objicts of h»S ‘desire,
«nd IS never uoiibted^by misfortunes

I So Ihe Brahmann wi»o takes i Is fond
tin il e company of Shudras,'i$ purged irons
tail impiitiiies by dujy peilaifiu >g thecere'
Wonies of purifiiatipii ,

31 The Brahmana wfxi takes this fo«) |
ip the company of V^ishyas, la purged »fl ®l
■II sms, by living on alms tor three sueces*

■S've nightf, j

33 If a Brahmana takes his food wAb
K'Hatiiyas, he sh<M,ld deiform e»p*at»" by
baiiimg wnh h» cioilies on '

aj By eating w at Sliudfa on lire
kame ptaie tlie bhudra loses 1 Is family pres-
tige { the Vaishya by eaimg on the same
plate with a Vaishys, loses Uis cattle and
friends The Jvshafrrja loses hi» prospe-
kify , ard the Brahmana, his effulgence and
power.


i| In ench cases exmallons shonl i he
petlormed, and propitiatory rites S'lon'd lie
observed and obUciutis offered la {hr*
tl-rls n e Savitri hymn she dd he recilrd
and the Revaii rites and Ku hin-to U pen-
ances sliouid be performed for destroying
ttie sin

^5 If any of the above four Castes par* i
take of food partly eaten by a person rf
any ether caste,, the exptatun is^ forsooth,
made by smearing the fiody with sacred
anicles like lUcliant, Durba grass, and
tuitnetic,


CHlPrER CXXXVIl. >

( ANUSHASANItCA PAKVA J.-*

Cvn^tnned,

Tndhhtithira flatd ^

t O If^arata fcmrlfy I'll me winch of
the two IS better, vir , cliarAy ordevotioii?
By this expell a great dotibtTrum iff my
mind *

Bbl«braa said *— ,

3 L»iei) to me as ! recite the nafPM of
the pri ices who hav ng been deVnted to'
virtue, and havi ig pu fied their hearts by
penances and practised gifts mid oilier wets
of Virtue, undoubtedly acq tire llie differ*
ent celestial re^iuns

3 Tlie ills' i Alreya respecfed 'of all,
attained O Ki ig, (o ihe ex enetil CefestiXt
mions by imparling the knowledge of the
limitless bopreme Being to hispupils,r ;

4 By‘vlTeiing the fife pf his dear sdn,'

lor tlie bet nof of a Brahmana Kfng Shivi
tlic son of Uihinara -wasiuken frent 4his
world to the ceiesttaf regnsn M 1 if

5 Pralardan'a (he ling of Kasiii secured

to » intsclf un que and ..elernal fame in^this
as wcH as u» »i« other world by g'V'pg, his
son to a Brahmana zfj

6 Baniideva the sen of Ssngkrtti at-
(a led 1 1 the I e>) fiesfen by duly mwkhig
gifts (u the great Vast ishtfia

y Devaviiddha too went to the ceies-
M) vegion by giving a hundred-riltbed -nod
excellelii eotden Umbrella ti> a Bral matsa
iar» sacrf/ice j , 4^11

8 Ihe worshipful Amverisha, ioe, has
acquired the ceteslial region by making a
gift of all bis kingdom ioa \vg\)y poweviu]
Bral mana*

ph King Jansmejay;! of ihe'folar cSce,
went tr> the tiighest heaVen by making «
giftof earrings, fine veliicies, and cows*to
Brabmanas,


280


MAUaBHARATao'*


to. Hie Royal Sii('e Vruliadnfvt wentto
Die celestial region by m lUiii}' ^ifts of van*
ous jewels aiiii beautilul houses to Brali*
iiiaiias. <

It. Kinj; Nimt of Vidarva, acquired llte
celestial region wuli Ins sons, f< tends and
cattle, by giving his daughter and kingdom
to liie great Agastya. >

' t 3 . 'riie illustrious R«ma, tlie son ol
Janiadagni. acquired the eternal regions
Tar beyond his expectation by giving lands
to Brahmaiias.

13 Vashishtha, the greatest ol Brah*
manas. saved all the creatures at a tune ol
great diought when the Rain God did not
bestow Ins gratelul showers upon the Eiith,
and (or this deed he has secured eternal
bliss (or himseK, ^ ^ ^

(4 1 he highly-illustriouf Rama the son

Dasharatha, acquired the eternal regions by
making gifts of riches at sacnhces.

’ 15. Ihe illustrious Royal Sage Kaksha*
aeiu weiu tu the celestial region by duly
making over to the great. Valistshilia the
wealth whicii he had deposited with him,

16 Firthwilh MariiUa tlie son of Abi
kshita and the grandson of Karandhama. by
givTng his daughter in marriage to Angiras,
went to (he celestial region.

'^17,., I he higlily devout king of Panchala, 1
Bralimadatta, attained the blessed w«y by
giving away a valuable coichshell* .

^ 18 I King Miirasaha ascended to Heaven j
by giving liis favoiitue wife Madajanii to '
the great Vashishiha.

ip Sudyumna, the son of Maini, attained I
to tlie most blessed regions by duly punishing '
the higinsoulcd Likhita.

30 . Ihe celehraied Royal Sage Saha*
stiachitta went to Ihe blessed regions by
sacnhciiig his dear life fur a 6fahn>ai>a«

' 3t. rile king Satadyumna went to
heaven by giving to Maudgala a Kolden
palace filled wuh all the objects o( desire

23 Formerly, King SuinaiiyU by giving
lo .tthandily^ lieaps ol food reseinbhug a
hill, went to the celestial region.

’ 33.* 'Ihe ' bhatwa • prince Dyulunat «l
great nefTuleence 'attained to the hig)>e*l
regions by giving his kingdom la Riciuka

* 34 Royal Sage JIfad/rashira went

to the region ol the ctlestuls by giving bis
ileiidcr>watsied daughter to Hirauyahasta.

‘ 35.s/lhe lordly Lomapada aiiamed all
the objects of his i desire by giving hit
daughter Sbanta in uiarciage to Uishya*


The Royal Sage Bhagiratha Went Id
the eternal regions by giving Ins famous
daughter Haiisi m inarnage to Kauisa.

37 King Bliagiratha acquired the most
blessed regions by ^giving hundreds and
thousands of kine with their young one
to tCul ala.

3S Ihese and many other men, O
Vudhishttnra, have attained to the celestial
region, by the niem of their chanlies and
peiiaiicef and they have also returned from
there again and dgain. ,

39 Iheir fame will last as long as the
world will Ust. I have related to you. O
Yudhislithira, this stuiy of those good*
huusekiilders who have attsined 10 eternal
regions by virtue of their chanties and
penances

30 Itiese people have acquired the
Celestial region bv their chariiies and by
peiformiiig sacrihLCS and by procreating
children. I

31. O foremost semn of Kuru's race,
these men devoted their virtuous intellects
to the celebration ut sacrifices and cbaritisi
by always petfornung acts ol charily
33 O powerful prince, as night lias let
in t shall explain to you in the mornmS
, whattwr duublv may Spring up til jWf
I mind.


CHARIER CXXXVlir.

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVAj —
CortltnueJ.

TndUishthira said 5—

»♦ I have heard from you. O sire, iho
names of those kings who have ascended **
the Celestial regiun O you whose pnwe’’ •'*
great ti) the obsei Vance of tlie Vow of irut"»
by following the religion ol gift.

3 How many kinds of gift arc there T
What are the fruits of the several kinds ol
gilts re!>pectively.

3 For what reasons what kinds of B'h»
made to whal persons yield merits T Indeed*
to what persons should wliat gifts be mao'* •
Fur what reasons ace how many kinds o<
KiUs to be made T 1 wish to hear all this i<t
full. > ,

Bhishma said:—

4* Listen, O son of Kunii.in fulllun'^t

O sinless one. as I describe il e subject ol

gdts. Indeed. I tliall Idl you. O UiaraW.
how gifi( should be made to all the orders
of men.


At^U^ttASAtlA'PAnvA.


281


5 Gifts are made from desire of merit,
from desire of profit, from fear, from free
^ choice, and from pity, O Bharata^ Gifts,
i therefore should be known (0 be of five
I sorts Listen now to the reasons for wliKh
I gifts are thus divided into five classes,
r 6 With mind shorn of malice, one should
make gifts to Brahmanas, for by making
gifts to them one wins fame in this world
and great happiness m llie next

7, He IS in the habit of making gifts,
or he wilt make gifts, or lie has already
made gifts to me Hearing such words
from solicitors, one gives away all kinds of
riches to a particular solicitor.

V 8. I am not his, nor is he mine If d«*
^ Vegarded, he may injure me From such
I motives of fear even a learned and wise
I man may make gilts to an ignorant wretch,

9 This one Is dear to me I also nm

dear to him Actuated by considerations
titetl*se an inirlligcnt person, fieely and
With olnC'ity, m^kes ** friend.

10 The person who sohcics me 1$ poor.
He IS, again, satisfied sviih a little. From
considerations sucli «s these, one should
always make gifts (e (lie poor, moved by
pity.

It. These are the five sorts of {iifu They
increase the giver's merits and fame Ihe
Lord of ail creatures has said that one should
always make gifts according to his power.


CHAPIER CXXXIX.

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Coiitintitd

YudhUtthira said:—

I. U grandfather, you are endued with
great wisdom Indeed, you are fully con-
yrrsant with every branch of learning. In
our gra^t family you are the only individual
who l/ve mastered sciences

2 l.^h to hear from you discourses of
Reti^nn Juil Profit, which bring on happi-
ness in ihe world and that are fraught
rvnli wonder t/fScreatures.

3 I he limeithst has come Is full of dis-
tress. Hie liic if ft does not f,eoer»Jly
Come to kinsmen and friends. Indeed,
except you, O foremost of men, we have
now none else svlio can take the place of an
msifuctor.

4 If, O sinless one, 1 with my brothers

deserve Jour Hvour, you should answer the

questions I wish to ask you.

35


5 This one Is Ntrayana who is gifted
svith every prospenty and is honored by all
the kings Even he waits upon you, show-
ing y<Mi every indulgence and honoring you

greatly.

6 Vou should describe it to me, through
. affection, for my benefit as also For that of

my brothers, in the presence of Vasudeva
himself and of all these kings.

Vaishampayana said

7. Hearing these words of king Yu-
dhishtliira. Bhishma, the son of the river
Ganges, filled wich joy on account of his
affection for the monarch and Ins brothers,
said what fallows,

Bhishma said •—

S I shall certainly recite to you dis-
courses that are charming on the subject, O
king, of the pnwer of this Vishnu as display-
ed in days of yore and as I have heard
(from my preceplorsl.

9 Listen to me also as I describe (he

f lower of that great god wtio lias a bull for
11$ emblem Listen to me as I describe also
the doubt that filled the mmd of the wife of
Rudra and that of Rudra himself.

10 Once on a lime the virtuous Krishna
observed a vow extending lor two and ten
years For seeing him who had performed
the rite of initiation for the observance
of his great vow, there came to that
^aceNaryda and Parvata, and Krishna-
Owaipayana and Uhaumya, that foremost
of silent reciters, Oevals, Xaihyapa, and
Hastlkashyapa.

iz Other Rishis also, gifted With initia-
tion and self-restraint, followed by their
disciples and accompanied by many Sid-
dhas and many ascetics of great merit, came
there,

13 The son of Deviki offered them
such laudable honors of hospitahry as are
offered to the gods alone.

14 riiose great Rishts sat (li^msi-lvcs
down upon seats some of whicti were green
and some were gefd^hued and Sami' were
made of the plumes of the peacock and
some were petlecily new and fresh.

tS "nius seated, they began to converse
sweetly with one another on subjects of
Kehgion and Duty as also with msny royal
sages and celestials.

16. At that lime the energy, in the
form of fire, of Narayan-i rising from the
fuel that consisted of the rigid observaiici*
of h«s vow, c»me out of the mouth of
Krishna of wonderful deeds,

17 That fire began to consume tho^
mountains with their trees and creepers an j


282


UAIIABIIAnj^TA


litlle phnts, as also with ttiPir birds and
deer and beasts of prey and reptiles

t8. Soon the summit of that mountain
presented a distressing and pitiful sight
Inhabited by animats of various kinds which
began to utter cries of woe and p'tin, the
summit soon became bereft of every living
creature.

19 That fire of powerful flames having
consumed everything without tivii g a re-
sidue. at last returned to Visl nu and touch-
ed his feet like a docile disciple

SO That crusher of enemies its
Krishna seeing that mountain hiirnt cast
a benignant tooU upon it and thereby
brought a bach to its former condition
21 lhat mountain thereupon nnee more
became bedecked with flowering trees and
creepers, and once more erhoed wiih the
notes and cries of birds md deer and
animals of prey and reptiles

33 Seeing that wonderful and incon
ceivible -pectacle, all tlie ascetics became
filled with wonder. Their hair stood erect
and their vision was disturbed with tears

33. Seeing those Rishis thus stricken
with wonder, that foremost of speakers
Nsraiana addressed them in these sweet
and refreshing words —

34. Why, indeed, has wonder filled the
hearts of this eolirction of Ktshrs, ilese
ascetics who are always free from attach-
ment of every kind, who are divested of the
idea of mine ness, and who are fully con-
versant With every sacred science

15 These Risi is having penances for
wealth and freed from every «tain, should
explain to me truly this doubt winch lias
ort},mated in my mind.

The Rishis said

36 You are the creator of all the worlds,
and the destroyer nf them again Yon are
Winter, you arc Summer, ami you are the
Season of Kaiiis,

37 Of all the creatures, mobile aud im-
mi bile that exist on Earth you are ll e
lather, you are the mother, you are the
mister, and you are tl e origin.

aS Tvcnthis O destroyer of Madhu is
a inAiier of w mder and douhl with us O
source of all auspiciousness you should ex-
plain to IIS that doubt, v«s . the issue of fire
Irom your mouth.

29 Oiir fears Iwing removed, we shall
thru, O Man. recite lo you what we have
lieard a id veeii.

VastitleTa said —

31 the lire that came out from my


mmtlh and that reSembfes the all destroy-
tng Yuga-Fire m splendour, and by wl ich
this mountain has been crushed and scor-
ched IS nothing else tlian the power of
Vishnu

31 Ye Rishis ye are persons whohive
governed anger, who have broiuht your
senses under complete control who are
gifted with wealth of penances, and who
are very gods 111 power. Yet you have
allowed yourselves to be agitated and dis-
tressed

33 I am now engaged wholly with the
observances about a rigid vow Indeed
on accoiil t of my observing the vov\s of an
ascetic a fire came out from my moullu

You should not allow yourselves to be agi-
tated therefor


33 It »s for observing u ri|.id vmv
that 1 came to this cl arming and
mountain 1 he object that has broiglt
me I er«^ rs to acquire, by the help ®
penances, a son that would be my equal m
power.

34 On account of nry penances tha
Soul existing m my body became

into fire and came out of my mouth I'*
fire had gone to see the boon givtiin Gtano*
father all the universe.


35. The Grandfather, ye foremost oj
ascetics, told my soul that half the
of the great god having the bull
embletnr would take birth « my son


36 That fire returning from its rnisjio »
has come back to me and appronclied iny
feet like a disciple desirous ol aliending
me dutifolly Indeed, renouncing *
fury It has come back to Us own proper


37 I have thus told you m brief, a
tery belonging to Him who has the lot

for his origin and who is gifted with gre

intelligence Ye Rishis having penances
for weahli, you should not yield to fear


38 You are gifted with far rcachu^
vrsiun You can proceed to every pisc
witlKint any obstacle Radiint with
observed by ascetics, you are adorned "U
knowledge and science


39 I now ask yoi to tell me somel'iinp
that IS highly wonderful winch you
hesnl of or seen on Earth or in the ceies*
tial region

40 1 sm anxious to taste the honey 0
words whKh wWI drop Irom your hps
which, I am sure, will be as sweet***
yet of nectar itself.


41. II I see anything on Perth
celestial rcy.ion, which is h ghiy


or in the
dSli^hllul


anushasana parva


2a3


anti Aontlerlui but wlncli is unlenown tc> all
of )OLi, O god-like lUsliis, tliat is ok «ic<
count of my own supretne Ndture illicit is
incapable of being obstructed by anytliing
Anything wonderful winch I ftiiiw >by na-
ture or by my own inspirationj ceases to ap-
pear wonderful to me.

43 Anything, however, tfiat is recited
by pious persons and tIiMt is heard from
those who are good, deserves to be accept
ed witli respect and faiih. Such discourses
exist on Eiith for a loiii* time and will last
like characters engraved on rocks.

44 !* wish, iherefore, to hear at this
meeting of ourselves, samelhmg dropping
from the hps of persons wlioare good and
who cannot fad to be productive of good to
men.

45 Hearing these words of Krishna,
all those ascetics became filled with wonder.
'Ihey began to look at J-inarddana with
those eyes of theirs that were as beautiful
and Urge as the petals of the lotus

46 Some of them began to glorify him
and lome began to adore him with respect.
Indeed, alt of them then sang the praises
of the destroyer of Madhu with words
whose meanings were adorned with the
eternal Riclia

47 All those ascetics then appointed
Narada, that foremost of all persons con-
versant with words, to satisfy the request of
Vasudeva.

The Ascetics said : —

48—49 You should, O Narada, describe
m fuff, from the beginning, to Hnshikesha, '
that wonderful and inconceivable incident
which took place, O powerful one, on the '
raountamsof flimavat and which, O ascetic,
was seen by those of us who had gone there I
•n course of our sojourn io tlie sacred waters .
Indeed, (or (lie behoof of all the Rishis here '
colfecced, you should recKe d at incident , 1

So Thus addressed by those ascetics, j
the celestul Rishi, vis , the divme Narada, I
then recited 4l»o .follOHi'U.' whose I

mcidenis had taken place somedme before |


CHAPTER CXL

(ANUSMASANfKA PARVA.— »
Contt»ut4.

Bbishma said

I Then Narada, that holy Riihi, that
fripnd of Narayana,) recited the Mtowing
discourse tiiat took place between Shankara
and III, wile Unia


I Narada said

2 Once on a time the pious lord of all
the celestials, vie , Mahadeva liaving buff
for his emblem, practised severe penances
on the sacred mountains of ilimavat the
resort of Stddhas and Cfiaranas.

3 That eharming mauntam is over-
grown with various kinds of herbs and
ad rned with various (Towers. At tiiat time
(hey were intiabiled by the different tribes
of Aps^ras and crowds of ghosts.

4 Ihere (he great god sat, Jrlled with
joy, and encircled by hundreds of ghostly
beings who presented various aspects to the
eye of the beholder. Some of them were
ugly and ankward, some were very beauit-
fut. and some presented the most wonder-
ful appearances

5 Some had faces tike the lion's, some
like the tiger’s, and some like the elephant's,
in fact, (he faces of those gobhns presented
every variety of animal (aces— borne had
faces resembling that of the jackal, some
those Of the pard's, some like the ape's >
sorne like the bull’s.

6 Some of them had faces like the
owls, some like the hawk’s, some had
faces like those of the deer.

j The great god was also encirefed by
ICinnaras and Yakshas and Gandliarvas
and Rakshasas and various other created
beings i/>e retreat of Mahadeva also
abounded with celestial flowers and shone
with celestial rays of light.

9 . 1 It was perfumed with cefestial sandaf,
and celestial incense was burnt on all sides .
And It eclioed with the sounds of celestial
instruments.

9 Indeed, it resounded with the beat
of Mndangas and Panavas, the blare of
conchs, and the sound of drums It was
full «t goblins of diverse tribes that danced
III jjy and with peacocks also that danced
with plumes outspread.

tv A* wnr Ah? resmv tffv <x!vttazf
Rishis, (he Apsaras danced there in (oy.
Ihe place was exceedingly beautiful to look
at It was exceedingly beautiful, resem-
bling Heaven iisclf. Its view was wonder-
ful and, indeed, its beauty arid sweetness
was beyond description.

II With the penances of that great god
whn sleeps on mouniam breasts that king
of mountains shone with great beauty.

It resounded with tlie eliiuilc of Vedas
uttered by learned Urahrnanas igiven to
Vedis recftatmi I Pcnoi.ig Wit/i the hum
of bees, O Madhava tlie mounUm be-
came peerfess in beauty


284


Itt.MlABlIARATA


12. Seeing Oie grcil god, who has a j
Tierce form and who looks like a great fesli*
val, the ascetics became filled, O Jaoaid*
dana, with l^y*

13—14 All the highly blessed ascetics I
the ijiddhas who have drawit in their vital
seed, the Macuts, the Vasus, the Saddhjas,
the Vishwedevas, Vasava hmisell, the
Yakshas, the Nigas, the Pishaclias, the
Kegents ol the world, the se\eral sacred
Hres, the Winds, and all the great crea-
tures lived on that mountain with minds
concentrated m Yoga

13 All the Seasons xvere present there
and Tilled those regions with all sorts of
wonderful flowers Various kinds ol burn-
ing herbs illuminated the woods and forests
on liiai mountain.

16 Various <pecies of birds, filled with
jo), danced about and sang merrily on
the charming breast ol that mountain
‘ihose birds were exceedingly loveable on
account of the notes they uttered.


17 The great Mahadeva sat, beauti-
fully on one of the pe^ks that was adorned
with excellent minerals, as if it served lh<,
purposes ol a fine bedstead

j 8 Round Ins louts was a liger-skin
and a lion-skm was fits upper garment
His sacred thread consisted of a snake
His arms were decked with a pair of red
armleii^.

ig. ' His beard was green. He had mat-
led locks on his head Of dreadful features
he fills with fear the hearts of dll the enemies
of the gods He removes the fear of all
creatures He is adored by his worsinp-
pers as the deny having the bull tor Ins
emblem

20. 1 he great Rishis, seeing Mahadeva,

bowed to him by touching the ground wnili
their heads Gifted wiih forgiving souls,
they all became freed from every sm and
thoroughly purified.


21. He retreat of that lord of all crea-
tures, Tilled wuh many terrible forms, stone
with a peculiar beauty Abounding wiih
many large snakes, it was uiiapproacliable


and unbearable.

32 Within the twinkliiig of the eye O
desiroter if Madhu, everything there be
__me higl 1y wonderful Indeed, the house
nf thal^hf®^^ 1 the bull for

his emblem began to blaie with a terrible
beauty, ;

/ To Mahadeva seated there, came
»,.= d«le the daughter of HimavM, sor-
ded by the wives of the ghostly betn^
^ « ihc^ companions of the great god

w-hoarel . ^ ^ jj,at of her husbai d


Her dicss


and the vows she observed, were like those
of ills.

24 She held a jar on her loins tint was
filled with the waters of every lirtha, and
was accompanied by the presi ling goddess
of ait the m nmtam rivers, iiiose auspici-
ous ladies followed her.

25 1 he goddess came, raining flowers
on dll sides and various kinds of sweet per-
fumes Slie who I ive 1 to live on the breast
of Hiinavat, advanced in this guise towirds
her great husband

26 With smiling lips and desirous of i
playing a jest, the beautiful Uma covered
from behind witli her two beautiful hands,
the eyes of Mahadeva.

27. As soon as Maliadeva’s eyes were
thus covered, all the regions became dark,
and life seemed to be extinct everywhere in
the universe Ihe Homa rites ceased
I he universe became suddenly deprived of
the sacred Vashat also

28 All living creatures became dispi*
cued and filled witli fear. Indeed, when
the eyes of the lord of all creatures were
thus closed, the universe appeared sunless

7 % Soon, however, that besetting dark-
ness disappeared A powerful and burni tg
flame ol fire Came out from Mahadeva »
foreliead

30. A third eye, resembling another sun»
appeared (on it) That eye began to shine
like the Yoga Fire and began to consume
that mountain.

31. Seeing what took place, the
eyed daughter ol Himavat bowed her head
to Mahadeva gifted with that third eye
which resembled a biasing fire. She Stood
there with looks fixed on her husband.

3* — 33 When the mountani forests burn-
ed on all sides with ilieir Salas and other
trees of straight stems, and llieir delightful
sandals and various excellent medicinal
Iterbs, herds of rleer and other, animals fill*
ed wuh lear, came quiclrly (0 the place
where Hara sal and sought I is protection.
With those creatures al nost filling it, *''8
I ermitage of the -greai-Tleity shone with »
sort ol peculiar beauty.

34 Meanwhile that fire, swelling wildly,
soared up to ilic very sky and endued with
the splendour and unsteadiness of lightning
and looking like a doeen suns m power and
effulgence, covered every side like the ah*
destroying Yuga Fire ^

33 In a moment the Himavaismoun- .
tains were consumed, with tlieir minerals «
and suiniiiils and blaaing herbs


ANUSUASANA I’ABVA


2S5


36 Seems* Himavat crushed and coa«
sumed, the dau^bier of lhatkmg of moun-
tains sought the protection of the great
deity and stood before fnm with her hands
joined m respect

37 Seeing Uma overcome by tvomanly
mddness and finding that she was reluctant
to see her father Htmavat reduced to that
piliable condition, then Shar\a cast ktad
looks upon the mountain.

l3 In a moment the whole of Himavat
regained his former condition and became
as beautiful to look at as ever Indeed, ti e
mountain displajed a cheerful aspect Ail
Its trees became ‘bedecked with flowers.

39 Seeing Himavat restored to his
natural condition the goddess Uma, dives-
ted of every fault addressed her husband,
that master of all creatures sua , the divine
Maheshwara, in these words

TTma said —

40 O Holy One O Lord of alt creatures,
O God holding trident, O you of lugh vows,
e. great doubt has (ifled my mind * You
should remove that doubt of mine

41. Why has this third eye appeared
in your lorelead? Why also was the
mouniam consumed with (lie forests and
all that belonged to ut
43. Why also, O illustrious god, have
)0u restored tie mountain to us former
condition ? Indeed, having burnt it once,
why have you again filled it with trees T

Maheshwara said — -

43 O goddess without any fault, for
your having covered my eyes through an
act of indiscretion, the universe became in
a moment devoid of light

44 W^eiJ the Universe became sunless
and therelore, all became dark, O daughter
of the prince of mountains, 1 created a thud
eye for protecting all creatures

45 The great energy of that eye crushed
and consumed this mountain For pleasing
you. however, O goddess, I once more res-
tored Himavat to his pristine condition lor
making good the injuty.

Uma said'—

46 O Holy One, why are those Faces of
yours which are on the east, the north, and
the west, so beautiful and so agreeable to
look at like the very moon.

47* And why is that face of yours which
IS on the south so dieadful? Why are
your matted locks tawny in colour and so
erect I Why » your tliroat blue like the
peacock s plumes ?


I 4S Why, O ill islrmns god is the PmaVt
always tn your hand? Wliy arc you always
a Brahniachdrin with matted locks?

49 O lord, you should explain all thesn
to me I am your wife who seeks to follow
the same ditties iviih you Further, i am
your devoted worshipper, O deity having
highly the bull for your emblem

Narada continued —

50 ‘thus addressed by the daughter of
the king of mountains, tie illustrious holder
of (hnaiCA, (I e powerful iMahadeva becamd
highly pleased with her,

51 Ihe great god then addressed her,
saying, — O blessed lady, hear as 1 exptiin
with (he reasons (hereof, why jmy forms
are so


CHAPTER CXLI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ) —

Contfnue3,‘ *'

The Blessed and E0I7 One said

t. Formerly 3 blesseij and foremost of
women, was created Brahman, called
lilottama, by collecting beauty hom ever/
beautdul object in the universe^ ^

3 One day, that lady of beautiful face,
peerless in the universe for beauty of form,
came to me, O goddess, lor circumambu-
lating me but, m sooth, moved by the desire
of tempting me. ^ ^ •

3 In whatever direction that lady of
beautiful teeth turtied a new face of mine
instantly appeared. All (hes^ faces of mine
became handsome to look at

4 Thus," on account of the desire of {
seeing her, I became lofir faced, through ^
Yoga power Thus 1 showed my high
Yoga power in becoming four faced.

5 With that face of mine which is turn-
ed towards the east. I exercise the sove-
reignty of the universe With (hat face of
mine wln^ is turned towards the north, t
sport with you, O you of faultless features.

6 That lace of mine which is- turned
towards (he west is handsome and auspi-
cious With It I ordain the happiness ef
all creatures I hat face of mine Which 19-
turned towards the south iS dreadful VVith
It 1 destroy all creatures.

7 1 live as a Brahmachann with matted
locks on my head for doing gohd tn sl)
creatures. Ihc bow Pjualta is always m


286


B*AHW1IM<AT^


my hand (or accomplishing the woik o( the
celestials.

^ 8. Fiirmerly, Indra, desirous of acquir-

I in^ my prosperity, had liiirled Ins tliuiiiler>
V bolt at me With that weapon my ihrott
/ was scorched. 1 here(ore I have become
\ blue-throated.

Uma said •—

9 When, O foremost of all creatures,
there are so many excellent beautiful cars,
why have you selected a bull (or your
vehicle? ,

Mabesbwara said

10. Formerly, the Grandfather Orahman
created the celestial cow burahht giving
profuse milk. After her creation there
sprang from her a large number of kine
all of which gave sufhwient quantities of
milk sweet as nectar,

11. Once on a time a quantity of froth
fell from the mouth of one of lier calves on
my body. I was enraged at (his and my
anger scorched all the kine which there*
upon became diversified in colour.

la. I was then pacified by the Lord of
all the worlds, etr.. Brahman, conversant
with all subjects, (t was he who jrave me
this bull both as a car for bearing me and
as device on my banner.

TTma said*—

13 You have many houses, fn the celes*
tUl region, of various forms and possessed
of every comfort and (usury.* Wliy, O Holy
One, do you live in tlie crematorium, aban*
doing all those delightful palaces.

14. t}) e crematorium 1$ full of the hair
and bones (of the dead), abounds with vnl
lures and jackals, and is covered with
hundreds of funeral pyres.

IS Full of carrion and muddy with fat
and blood, with entrails and bones scattered
all over it, and always echoing with the
howls of jackals. It is certainly an impure
place. I ^ j

Mabesliwara said

> 16 1 always travel over the whole Earlh

* in search after a sacred spot | do not,
I however, see any spot that is more sacred
than the (Crematorium

17, Therefore, of all houses, (he crema-
torium appears to me to be the best,
shaded as it generally is by branches of the
banian and adorned with torn garlands of

J 18 O you of sweet smiles the mulliludes
/oI goblins that aie my companions love to


live tn such spots I do not like, O goddesSi
to live Hiywhere, without those goblins by,
my side

19 riierefore, the crematorium is a
sacred house to me Indeed, O auspicious
lady. It appears to me to be very Heaven
Highly sacred and endued with great
merit, the crematorium is much praised
by persons desirous of having holy abodes.

Uma said

20 O Holy One, O lord of all creatures,
O foremost of at) observers of duties and
religious rites, I have a great doubt, O hold-
er of Pitiakaj'O giver of boons

21. Hiese ascetics, O powerful lord, have
practised various kinds of austerities. In
tl c world are seen asceitcs wandering every-
where under various forms and clad in
various kinds of dress

22 For beneRtling this large number
of Kishis. as also myself, do you
temove, O chaisier of ail enemies, this doubt
of mine.

23 What are the characteristics of
Religion or Duty ? flow, indeed, do nen
unacquainted with the details of Retigioh ot
Duty succeed m observing them O power-
ful ford, O you who are,^conversant with
Religion, do you tell me tins.

Narada said » i

24. When the daughter of Himavat, put
this question, the assemblage of Risliis there
present, adored the goddess with words
adorned wall Richs and with hymns fraught
with deep meaning.

Idahe sbwara said : ,

*5 Abstention from injury, truthfulness
of speech, mercy towiirds all beings tran-
quillity of soul and (lie making of gifts*®
Uie best of one's power form the foremost
duties of the householder.

26 — 07. Abstention from sexual unto®
with the wife of Other men protection of the
nches and the woman commuted to hii care,
relucrance to appropriate what is not given
to one, and avoidance of honey and meat
these are the five chief duties Indeed,

Religion or D ity has many branches alf O'

which yield happy results Fhese are the
duties which those embodied creatures wh®
consider duly as superior, should observe
and practise. lliese arc the sources of
merit. j

Uma said

28 O Holy One I wish to ask you
another question about winch I eoterwm


^NUS^ASit^A PARVc.


2^7


prfsl dniibls. You should answer it ind
r;mo»e»ii|' doubts. Wbat are Uie men*
torious duties of the four castes.

29 What are the duties of the Drah>
manaT Wliat of the Kshatri>a ? \Vliat
are the duties of the Vaishyat And what
bre the dunes of tfie Shudra.

The Holy One said

30 O higl ly blessed lady, the tluealwn
you have put, IS -i very proper one ItiOse
persons who belong to the twice born order,
are considered as highly blessed, and are,
indeed, gads on earth

31. Forsooth, the observance of fasts, is
always the duty of i1 e Urahinsna When
tlie Orahmana succeeds in properly ob-
serving alt Ins duties, he becomes at one
with Bralitna.

31. The proper observance of the duties
of Drahmacharyya, O goddess, are l>is
ritual Ihe observance of vows and the 1
Investiture with the sacred thread form Ins '
other duties ft is by these that he becomes 1
ttuly twiee-born.

33 He becornes a Qralimana for ador*
Ing his preceptors and other elders as also
the celestials Indeed, that religion which
has for its soul tlte study of the Vedas,
Is the source of all virtue Even that is the
religion tvhieh those embodied crealures
who are given to virtue and duty, should
observe and practise,

Uma saidj—

34 O Holy One, my doubts have not
been removed You stionM explain m de-
tail what the dunes are of the four respec-
tive castes of men,

Maheshwara said*—

3^. Listening to Che mysteries of religion
and duty, observance of Itie vows laid down
in the Vedas attention to the sacred life,
and accomphshrnent of the business of ihe
preceptor, leading a tnendicani hie, always
bearinjr {he sacred thread, constant reriia-
tion of 4 he V/'-rfAS- .and.rg'id-nliSM.vaiutejsf ,
the duties of a cehbraie life, COiisdCuce the}
duties of the Brahmana. I

37 * After the student life is over, the
Brahmana, at the behest of his preceptor, I
should leave Ins preceptor's abode fir I
returning to liis father’s house. Upon '
his return he should duly marry a properl
wife.

38 Another duty of the Brahmana con-
sists of avoiding t> e food prepared by the
Shudra. Walking along the path of virtue, j
always rbserving lasts and the practices of'
ifrahmacharyya, form his other duties.


39 'Ihe householder should keep up his
domeslic fire lor daily adomxion. i}e
stmuld study the Vedas. He should pmir
libations in bailor of the departed Alanes
and the celestials. He should keep his
sensee (tiider proper restraint He should
eat wliat temams after serving gods and
gtiesrs and all bis dependarits. He should
be abstemious in food, inilliful m wDids,
and pure both in body and mind.

40 Attending to guests IS another doty
of the householder, as also the keeping up
of tlie three sncriffcial fires. Ihe house-
holder should also attend to ihe or< mary
sacrifices called Isbti and sfiould also dedi-
cate animals to the deities according to the
ordinance*.

4 <> Indeed, [he Celebration of sacrifices
Is his greatest duty as also a complete abs^
tention from injury to all cteatbies Nevef
to eat before serving the celestials and
I guests and dependants is another duty of
the householder. The food that remaind
j after serving gods and guests and the de-
pendants 1$ called Vigliass, Ihe house*
holder should rat Vigliasa, *•-’ *’ *

42. Indeed, to eat after [he members of
his family ineJodlnp servants and other de*
pendants, is considered as one of the espe*
cmI duties of (he twice-born huusehoioeA
who should, besides, be conversant wiili the
Vedas.

43. Tl e conduct of husband and wife, in
the case of the householder, should be equal.
He should every day make offerings of
flowers and ottier srncles to those celestials
who preside over domesticity.

44 1 he householder should see that h!s
tiouse IS every day properly rubbrd with
(cowdung ancf water). He should also ob-
serve fasts every day. Well cleaned and
well-rn* bed, his house should also be every
day fu>*galed with the smoke of clarified
butler poured on his sacred fire m honor
of the celestials and tlie depaiied Manes,

45 Even these are the duties of a twice-

born householder, f hose dudes really up-
■Ivild.shn .wnrld- Xluun xfitties jriuii

eternady emanate from those pious persons
among the Brahmanas who live like house-
holders.

46 Do you listen to me with rapt atten-
tion, O goddess, for I shall now (ell you
what the duties are of the Kshatriya and

! about which you have asked me.

I 47, From the beginning It has been said
I that the duty cf the Kshatriya is to protect
1 all creatures 1 he king gets a fixed share
I o( the merits acquired by his subjects. By
j that means the king becomes gifted with
' iigiiteousncss.


43. The kidR w*io rules and protects Ins
subjects piously, acquires by virtue of the
protection he Offers to Olliers, many regions
of happiness in It e next world
49 The other duties of a Kshatriya con-
sist of self coiUfril and Vedic study, the
pniinng of hbaUons dn the sacred 6re, the
making of ehts study, the bearing of the
sacred tfiread, sacnfkes, the performance of
religious rites tl>e support of servants and
dependants, and pr^severance in acts that
have been undertaken.

51 — 5S Another duly of his Is to give
punishments proportionate to the offences
committed It <s also Ins tloty to cetebraie
sacrifices and other religious rites accord-
ing to the ordinances laid down in the Vedas
Properl} judging the disputes of hiigants
before linn, and tnnhfulnes of speech, and
interference for helping the distressed, are
the Oilier duties by doing which the king
acquires great glory both in tins w >rld and
hi the iieSt He should also sacriftve Ilis
fife on the Retd of battle, having shown
great prowess on behalf of kiiie and Brafi-
manat, ^

. 53 Such a king acq ures In the celestial
region such regions of, happniest as are
capable of being acq nred by Uie perfor-
mance of Horse SacriRces ^

„ 54 The duties of the Vaishya always are
the keep of cattle and agriculture, the pour-
ing of libations on the sacred Rre, the
making of gifts, and study,

53 Irade, walking in the path of virtue,
hbspitahty peacefuliiesi|ielf>control welcom-
ing of Brahinanas, and renouncing things
are tl e other eternal dunes of tlio Vaishya.

' 56 the Vaishya, engaged 10 trade and
walking in the path of virtue, should
never sell sesame and perfumery and
uices or liquid substances He Should per-
orm tli& duties of 1 ospitality towards all

57. He IS at liberty to pursue virtue and
profic and pleasure according to his means
and asmuUi as is judicious for him Ihe
service of (he three twice born classes
forms the high duty of llv Shudra.

58 "I hat Sliudra who is truti ful m
speech and who has controlled tils senses, fS
considered as having acquired meritorioils
penances Indeed the Stiudra, wild havi ig
got a guest performs the duties of^hospi-
tality towards him is considered as acquir-
ing tlie me it of great periaiices
1 59. lliat intelligent Sliudra whose con-
duct IS virtuous and who adores ll>e denies
a id Brahmanas, gets desirable rewards of
viitue

Co. O beautiful lady, f have tlms recited
to you what ate the duties of the four castes


Indeed, O blessed iacjy, I have told vdil
what are ihcir respective duties. What
else do you wish to hear 1

T^ma said

61. Vou have recited (0 me what are
the respective dutie* of the four castes, aus-
picious and beneficial for them Do you
now left me O Holy One, what are ihfi
common duties of the all castes

JffabeshTirarA daid *— '

62. Ihe foremost nf all beings tithe
universe, vt» , the Creator Bralimana

I always seeking righteous accomphshments,
created the Orahmanas for rescuing all the
; worlds Among all created beings, they
I are gods on Earth.

dj I shall at the beginiilg tell you what
are the religious acts which (liey slioUld do
and what are the rewards which they
acq lire through them The religion of the
B aliinauas is tlie foremost of all religions

64 Par the sake of the virtue thfei*
religions were created by the Sell-Create
Whenever the world is created those Beti-
gions are created by the Oraiidfather, Oo
>e listen.

(5 These are the three eternal Reli>
K'o IS The Religion prescribed m the Vedas
IS the greatest, ihai of the Smntis is the
next in the order oi importance | the third
in importance Is that which 1^ based upoi
the practices of the virtuous

<56 The Brahm na, endued with learn-
ing should have the three Vedas He
should never make the study of the Vedas.
He should devote himself to the three well-
known deeds (of making gifts, studying the
Vedas, and performi g sacriRces) He
should be above ilie-tlirbe (vie , lust an^er
and cupidity) He should be the friend of
all creatures A person wlio possesses these
qualities is called a Drahniaiia

67 The lord of all tlie universe de-
clared tfiese SIX deeds for the observance of
Brahmanas Listen to those eternal duties.

GS *l he celebration of sacrifices officiat-
ing at the sacrifices of others, the making
of gifts the acceptance of gifts ceachu/.
and study, are the six deeds by doing winch
a Bralimana acq ures religious merit

69 Indeed (he daily study of the Vedas

is a duty Sacrifice la (another) eleriul
duty. Ihe making of gifts according to
his power and the ordiujnce, is, in Ins case,
much praised, 1

70 franquillity of mind IS a great duty
that IS III vogue among the righteous
llousehofders of pure mind are capable 0‘
acq uiing very great merit.


ANUSMSAWA PAAVfi. sgg


tl— 72 tndepd, he wfvJ p'ir\(ie5 50ol
by the pcrlormunce of (he five a^oiRce^
v/ho truthful m speech, who ts shore* of
tnslice, ^ho makes (tifts, who treats with
hospitality and honor all regerierate gtiesis,
who Jives In well cleaned houses, wlio b
shorn of pride, who b always sincere In Ms
dealings, who uses sweet and assuring words
towards others, who takes a pleasure in
serving guests and others arrived at his
house, and who eats the food that remains
after the requirements have been satisfied
of all the members of his family and depen»
dants, acquires great merit,

73 I hat man who offers water to his
guests fir washing ihetr feet and hands,
who presenis (he Arghya for honoring him.
who duly gives seats, and beds, and lamps
for lightning the darkness, and shelter to
those who come to his house, Is ponsidered.
as highly righteous

74 That householder who rises at dawn
Olid wastes his mouth and face and gives
food to hts guesfs and tiavmg honored
fhem riitJy dismisses them from his house
and fullowf them for a little distance, wins
eternal merit,

75 Hospitality towards all, and the pur*
lu t of the three (otd obfects, are (he duties
of the ho iseliolder I he dudes of (he
Shudra consist tn the pursuit of the three*
fold obfects

76 The Religion laid down for the
householder has action for its chief charac*
tenstic Auspicious, and benefleul (0 all
preatures, i shall explain it to you

77 The householder should always
msfce gifts according to Ins power He
siiould also perform saciiflces frequently.
Indeed he who wishes to secure hn own
good, should always achieve metuotious
bets

78 The householder should acquire
riches by fair means, Thericies thus ac*
quired slioutd be carefully divided Into three
pari* keeping (he req iirements of virtue Jn
View

79 With one of those portions he should
accomplish all acts o{ klitue With another
he should seek to satisfy bn carvings tor
pteatuie Hie third portion he should lay
Out (or increasing

87 The Religion of Renunciation is dif*
;lerent ft exisis for Liberalion I sbafi
tell you the conduct that constitutes it.
Listen to me m full O goddess
81 One of ''the dunes incutcated >by
that Religion is Mercy towards all creatures.
The man who follows it should not live iri
one place for more than a day For ac-
quiring Liberation, the followers of this

37


Ref gfon free ihemsefves fram the fetters of

hope (or desire),

83 They have no attachment to habi*
Ution, ta the Kamandalu they bear far (he
the keep of waier, to the clothes that cover
their foins, or the seat whereupon (hey ?est,
or the triple stick they bear In their hands,
or the bed they steep on, or the ff^e they
want, or the chamber m which it hes.

83. \ fotlower of this Religion fixes hi3
heart upon (he workings of his soul. H'e
mind is devoted to Supreme Brahma, He
IS 6)ied with the idea of attaining fo
Bfahma. He is always devoted to
and (be Sankbya philosophy.

84 He seeks for ns other sheller than
the foot of a tree. He lives in vacant
homes of men. He sleeps on the banks of
rivers f^e takes a pleasure in living by
such banks.

85 He IS freed from every attachment,
and fr im every bond of affection He
merges (he existence of his own soul into the
bupreme Sou)

86. Standing like a slake of wood, and
abstaining from all food he does only such {
deeds as point to Liberation Or, fie may 1
wander about, devoted to Vega Thefs '
are the eternal d Hies of a follower of Ihe
Religion of Renunciation.

87 He lives aloof from men He fe
freed from all attaefiments. He never lives
■n the same place for more than a day.
Freed from all letters, he roves over me
world Freed from all ties, he never sleeps
on even the same river*baiilt for more than
a day.

83 This IS the Religion of persons con-
versant with Liberation, as declared in (he
Vedas 1 his IS the righteous path that i3
trodden by this virtuous. He who folipws in
this path, leaves no vestige behind

89 Vikshus (mendicants) are of four ’
kinds They are Hutichakat, Vabudakas,
llansas, and Paramliansas, Die second if
superior to the first, the third to the Second,
and (he fourth to the third

90, There Is nothing superior 10 (he
Paramhansa { nor is there anything
lerior to it or equal to it or superior (0 it,
t{ is a condition shorn of sorrow and happi*
ness , ausp ctous and freed frorn decrepitude
and death, and without any change. ‘

Uma said

gi You have described the Religion of
the householders^ ihat 6 f Liberktioi, arid
that whtch is based upon the Obsiiryadifes
of the pious These paths are noble and
highly be eficiai to the world of living
creatores


l^fAflArtirARATA


290

92 O jflii wlio ^re con\ersti>i with
ivcry icli^ion 1 wisli to hear whit (he high
Heligioii IS of the Histiis. ( nhvays have a
hkiiig {or those ssfio five in hermitage

93 the peifinne that comes out of (he

lliesmOheof the lilialions of cUnRed butler'
jwnired on the sacred fire, seerrfs to {>eivade
»h llie hermitages and make l)iem delight-
ful Seeing il is O great god, iny heart
becomes always filled wiili }oy <

94 — 9 S O powerful god, 1 have doubts
ibout ihe Heligioii of tl e Ascetres You aie
conversant with tie details of alf religious^
Do jmi eiilrjjliien me 0 god ol gods, tn
ileiail about this subject truly about which
1 have asked 30a, O gteat god

The Blessed and Hely One said •—

96 Ves, I shall reate to >ou the high
ind excellent Ueligiou ol the Ascetic By
following ihe dictates of lhat' Religion, O
riuspicious lady the Ascetics acquire suc-
cess through the severe penances they
practise,

97 O higl ly blessed one, do you hear,
from tie begii nin<, what are (he duties of
(hose pious Uisliis who know every duty
a id who are known by the name of
I't enapas

93 Ihe Grandfather Drahman drank
some nectar that water had flowed m
(he celestial region from a gieat saciifice
Q9 lie froth of (fiat water is higfify
sacred aid it partook of His own nature
'ihuse Risliis wlo live upon (lie measure
of iruth tl at Ih IS came out are called
Ihenapas (Frotli eateis) I his >s (he con-
duct ol ihusE pure Rishis, U lady having
penal CCS for weallh' Listen now to me
as 1 explain to you who (he V«)ikhiliyas

too Ihe Vahkiiillyas are ascetics who

I ive acquired success by their psiiances
they live 111 tie solar disc Living like
buds (lose Uisl is conversant with every
rlniy of iigliieousness, live according 10 the
Unchd mode

101 "mieir dress consists of deer skins
&r barks of trees Freed from pairs of oppo-
sites the V liikl iflyav I aving penances for
w(;alili, walk in tl is track of virtue.

102 *1 hey are. as big as a digit of tlie

II limb Divided mo classes each class
] vev III (he practice ol its duties 1 hey
wish only to practise penances, the merits
they acquire by their righteous couduct are
very great.

103 'they are considered as having ac-
qnued an eqimliiy with the gods and exist
>01 tl e (ulfilineiit of the purposes of tile
guds liaving dissipated ull their aiiis by


severe penances, ihey shrne 111 effiilgeficr,
Irgliting lip all the points of the compass

fO| Others, called CiMkracharas, arc
gifted vfitli cleansed souls itid devoted to the
practice of mercy, Rigl irons 1 > ilieir con-
duct and possessed of great purity, they
live in the region of Soma

105 llios IrvtiTg near cnetigh to the
region of ilie departed Manes, they duly
live by dnnkiirg the rays of Soma Ihere
are Others callr-d SamprakshaUs and Ash-

I makuttas and Daritolukhalas.

106 Ihesehve near the Soma drinking
celestials and others that drink flnnesof
fire. With their wedded wives and with
passfOftt under complete restraint, Ihey too
live upon thk rays of So'^ia

107 They po ir libations of clarified
butter on the sacred fire and worsi ip ®
departed Alanes under proper forms • I ey
also celebrate tlie well known sacrifices
I bis IS said to form their rehj,ion

ivS Ills religion of the Rishts, D
goddess IS afaays observed by (hose wl 0
are houseless and who are free (0 go
tlirouvh every le^ion including that of tf ^
celestials Ihere are again, other classes
about whom 1 shall sp^ek now Do yot*
listen

109 It IS necessary that theywioob*
serve the different religions of tlie KisInSt/
should control Iheir passions and know the
Soul Indeed, in my opinion, lu»t and anger
should be completely conir> lied

111 With corn (wealth) acquired
by the Uncha mode, tl ey should perform
the following duties, vis , tlie pouring
Utx tions on the sacred fire, occupying a fixed
Seat employing oneself during the time hi tl e
sacrifice called Dtiarmaralri performance
ol tlie Sorna Sacrifice, acq nsicion of especi*'
knowledge the giving ol sacrificial present'll
which forms the fifth, the daily perlorm»n«®
of sacrifices, devotion to the worship of the
ancestors and the demos, hospitality l^*
wards all

112— JI3 Abstention from alfluxiirwos

disi es prepared from cow s milk taking ^
pleasure in trai quiliiiy of heart, lying on
naked rocks or the earth devotion to
eating potherbs and leaves of trees, and
living upon fruits and roots and wind and
water and moss, are some of pratices of the
Risliis by winch they acquire Ihe end that
belongs to peisons unsubjugated

114— >115 When the smoke has ceased
to curl upwards from a house, J

busking (nacfime has ceased lo ply» *"6
the heartl>-fiie has been put out, when
the nunaies have taken their f<od, *'h«
dishes are no longer earned from room (v


AHU«*ASaTlA fAnVA


mm, whfn mendicants I'^ve ceased W w*Jk
(lie sifeets, it IS <>i«n (hut «f'e msfr wt" H
dfvo'ed to Jlie Reli(jio»i ef I r»itl« and Iran-
qniUityof sold wisliinff to liave a
«l ould eat wImI remnant o{ food may still
remain in t>>e liouse Bv acH'ie' tlnis, one
tecomes a practiscr of the Keugion of tlie
Mums.

m <5 One shoald nnl be arrogant, nor
proud ; nor clieedns and disrontented t
nor wonder at aiiytlnne Indeed one ationid
treat his friends and enemies alike Indeed
one who ts the foiemnsi <tl at) persons con*
srrsant wiih dunes should treat all creatures
like friends


CllAPIFR CXUI
(XNUallAbANUsA PAItVA) —

Cenfi 11 iird

TJmaB&ids—

I Mertniis live in charminff rcj^ions,
among the spnmjs and famtains of rivers,
til bowers by the sides of rivers and rills, on
lulls and me mtnms m woods and forests,
«nd in sacred places fiiU of fruns and roots.

a With rapt attention and observing
vo«i and rules, they live m even such
places. *'

3 t wish, O Shankars to hear the
•acred ordinances which tfiey fofloiv ITiese
hermitt. O pod of all gods, are perr ms who
depend for llie prnieciion of their bodies,
upon themselves atone.

JIaheibwara said

4. Do you hear with rapt attention what
are the dimes of Ifermits. Having (istened
lo them wtih One mind, O goddess, do you
hi your heart upon vtrlue.

5 I.{i(en fhen to what the acts are ihht :
should be practised by righiroiii hermits
crowned with success, observant of figid
Vows and rules, and living in woods and
forests

h—y. Performing ablutions thrice. a day,
wdoring tfve departed Manes and (he Cefes-
iiali, pouring tibatmnt on the aaered Are,
performing of those sactiUces arid rites
mlted liiiti.lloma, picking up the grams of
Nivars p4<ti|y, eating (runs and roots, and
•King eil that is pressed oat from {nguda
and easier seeds, form their duties.

S Having performed (he practnes of
Yoga and become crowned willi (av»l«r)
autcess and freed from luvt and ange», they
atuHild seat themselves in the atiitude
vallsd Vi^asaiia. I'ld'ed, they stmutllive


in itioso pl,ices ivfirch arc »fi3cces‘iWe to
cowards.

9— (0. Observant of the eicclfent ordi-
nances about Yoga, siitiog »> summer
itt the midst of four Ares on four tides wiili
the sun overhead, duly practiihig what i4
called Mandiika.Yoga, and always seated
in the altitude cilt'd Vtrasana. and fymg
on naked rocks or the earth, th'^e men,
with hearts Axed tipon vutur, must expose
iherttsefvcs to cold artd water and fire.

It 'They five upon water or nir or moss.
Tlieyrisetwojpiccesof stone only fOr hurkuii^
their corn Some [of (hem use their feelH
Only for such a purpose 1 hey do not keep
lUeiisils of any sort.

it Some of them clothe themsclyes with
rags and barks of trees or deer skins Thus
do they pass their fives for tl<e time allotted
to them according to the ordiui <ces

13 llcin-itiiiiig 111 woods and forests,
(hey wander wiiliin woods and forests five
within (hem, and are afways 10 be founi^
widiin them Indeed, there hermits enter,
ing into woods 8»d forests live within them
as disoples. obtaining a preceptor, live
wiih him

14— tfi Tlie performance of fhe ntes of
lloma and the observance of the five tacri«
fices are their duties A d le observance
of the rnJes about distribulton of the fivefold
saenfees as 'ordamed in the Yedas, devo-
tion to saerifiees. lormitt^ the eighth, obrer-
vance of the Chaturmashya, performance
of the raurnamashya and other saenfieCT,
and performance of the daily svcrifiees are
the duties of these celibate men, freed
from every attachment, and cleansed from
every sin Indeed, they sliould five thus
in the forest

ry Tlie sacriftcMl ^dle and (he water,
vessel are their chief properlies 1 hey are
afways devoted to the three fires Virtuois
m ttieir esnd ict nnd adhering to the path
of virtue, they acquire ifie Inchest end

18 Tl ese Munis, crowned with success
and ever given to the Keli,;inn of Iruih,
acquirothe highly tac/ed reg»m of Dfth-
' man. orViie iriinnah region PVSoma

tq O auspicious goddess, f have thus
recited to you la brtti, th« ouifmes 0/ the
rctigisn Ihit is fallowed by herroiis and
that has many practices m detail.

Uoia said ^

10 O Ifoty Orie, O lord of a'f cresfures,

O you adored of all bmi^s, f wish (o
bear will! IS the re! gion el |h»*e conclavrs
•( avseiics wi«] arc laliowo uf (iw s(.r,ptum

dcvcnbtng okcciK »ui.ces>. Ua youiccittlt

10 me


292


MAtlAOlIARATA


al. Living ill woods bni! {orests and well* '
accomplished in the scriptures of success,
some amongst them live and act as they
like, without being controlled by particular
practices; others have wives Mow, indeed,
have their practices been ordained.

Mahadeva said:—

23. O goddess, the shaving of the head
and the wearing ol the brown robes are the
characteristics of thoie recluses who rove
about freely; while the characteristics of
those who sport with wives consist m pass*
tng their nights at home.

33 Performing ablutions three times a
day IS the duty of both the classes, while
the Homa, with water and wild fruits,
belongs to the married recluses as performed
by the Kishis in general. Absorpnoit in
Yoga-Meditation, and performance of those
duties which form righteousness and winch
have been laid down as such, are some of
the other duties prescribed for them.

34. .*.11 those duties also of whicli I have
spoken to you before ^3 belonging to re*
closes living m forests, are the duties of
these alio Indeed, if tiiose duties are
ebserved, they who observe them acquire
the rewards of severe penances.

as Those forest recluses who lead mar*
rted lives should indulge in the gratifica*
tion of Iheif senses with these married wives
of theirs By indulging m sexual union
with their wives at only tliose times when
their seasons come, they perform Che duties
which have been laid down for them. I

The religion whidi these virtuous I
suen are to follow is the Religion that lias
been laid down and followed by the Rishis
With their eyes sec upon llie acquisition of
virtue, they should never pursue any other
object of desire from a sense of uncontrolled
caprice.

37. Ihat man w1<o gives promises of
safety to all creatures, (reed as his soul
becomes from the stain of malice or harm-
fulncss, becomes gifted with virtue.

23. Indeed, that person who elwws
mercy to all creatures, who adopts as a vow
of sincere conduct towards all creatures,
and wlio forms himself (he soul of dll crea^
tures, becomes gifted with virtue.

39 A bath m all the shrines, and sincere
conduct towards all creatures, are regarded
as equal m point of merit , or, perhaps, the
latter is a little distinguished above the
other in point of merit.

30. Sincerity, It has been said, is Virtue! .
iwhile insincerity or crookedness is am
*l1iat man who acts amccrely becotnea
Indued with Virtue.


3t I he man who is always devoted (0
Sincerity of conduct, succeeds in acquiring
a residence among the celestials. Hence,
lie who wishes to achieve the merit of virtue,
should be sincere.

33. Gifted with a forgiving nalure and
Se'lf.cimtrol, and witli anger under complete
subjection, one should transform himself
into an embodiment of Virtue and become
freed from malice. Such a man, who be-
comes devoted, besides to the discharge of
all the duties of Religion, becjines indued
with (he merit of Virtue.

33 Freed from drowsiness and procras
hiiHtion, the righteous person, who follows
(he path of Virtue to the be-it of l»s power,
astd becomes possessed of pure conduct,
and who is venerable in >ear», comes to
be considered us equal to Brahma itself.

Uma said '

34 By what course «f duties, O god, do
those ascetics wlio are attached to their res-
pective retreats and have penances for
wealth, succeed in becoming indued with
great splendour?

35 tvhat acts, again, do kings and
piinces who are immensely rich, and others
who are poor, ‘sui.ceed m getting high re*
wards 7

36 By what acts, O god, do dwellers ol
(he forest succeed in acquiring that place
whicli IS, eternal and in rtdurning tlieir per*
sons With celestial sandal paste.

37 O illustrious god of three eves, O
destroyer of the triple city, do you remove
tins doubt of mine about the auspicious sub*
ject of the observance of penances by tellmg
everything in full.

The illustrious Deity 8aid>—

38 those who observe the vows of fasts
and coiUrol their senses who abstain from
lajnryof any kind to any creature, and who
practise truthfulness ol speech, acquire sue*
cess and ascending to the c*Ieseiai ^region
sport in happiness with the Gandharvas a*
tlieir companions, freed from every kmd-m
evil.

39 Tliat pious man who ties down lu
the attitude of Manduka-Yoga, and-who
properly and according to the ordinance
performs memorious deeds after having
been duly miuated, sports in happiness ui
theiiext world tn the company of (he Nagas.

40 That man who lives in the company
of deer and lives upon such grass and vege-
tables as drop from their mouths, And who

has undergone the initiation and attends <0

lb« duties atlaclied to it, succeeds got"?
to Uie capital of India.


ANUStlAMNA TAKV^


m


41. That man who hves upon the moss
he baliiers and the fallen leaves of trees
tliai he ptcks up, and puts up with all the
aevcriues uf cold, acquires a ver^ hi^h
place.

42, llial man uho lives upon either atr
or Water or fruits and roots, acquires to the
next life the aiHuence that betongs to the
Yakshas and sports in happiness m tlie
company of llie various tribes uf Apsaras.

43 Having practised for twelve years,
a^ording to the rites laid down m the ordi*
nances, the vow relating to the endurance
of U>c five fires m the summer season, one
becomes in his next life a king,

44 lliat man who, having observed
vows ,*ibout food, practises penances for
twelve years, carefully abstatnrng from alt
interdicted food, and forbidden hours as
welt, during the period, becomes in his nest
life a king.

45 That man who sits and lies on the
bare ground with (he eaiicpy of heaven
over Ins head, observes the course of duties
of inltUtion, and (hen renounces his body
by abstsiinng Irons all food, acquires great
liappnicss fn the cetesiial region,

4d— 5f, ihe rewards of one wlwssKsand
lies duwH upon the naked ground are sard to
be escethiil cars and hed<, and rich palaces
e{Tul),eiU like the innoii, O Ud) . t list man
wl 0 I asint, lived upon abstemious diet and
observed various excellei t vows, lives de«
pending upon his own sell and (hen renouii.
ces I IS body by abstaining from all food,
succeeds in ascending to Heaven and «n>
joying all its happiness 1 1 at man who
liavnig lived in enure dependence upon his
uwii Self, observes for twelve years tl e dunes
of uiutauon, and at Usl renounces hts body
on the great ocean, succeeds in aitaunng to
tli« regions of Varuiia after death. Hat
loan who living in entire dependence upon
hts own tell observe the duiies of innution
Jor twelve jears, and pierces bij own feet .
Willt a slarp Slone, acquires the happiness
«1 (he region (hat belongs to the Cuhyakas.
Me who cultivates self with (he help of self,
wbo frees himself from (be {nfluence of all
pairsoflopposites, who is freed from every
sort of attschment, and wbomentaWyeb-
serves lor twelve years such a course of «*"•
duct after initiation attains to Heaven and
tnyoyt every happiness with the cclcsuals as
bis companions.

s». Ilewhofrvee J» entire drpefldmce
Upon I IS own sell and observes for twelve
years (I e dudes pi h'liulion and finally
rrnounces his body on the fire as an ohia*
»»n (atheceleitu'r, arqowts il,errr»9n«f
Uiahrai janJ m »n£h caUcm tticre.


53“*55 Mist lw»cc*faorn msn, O god-
dess, who having properly performed ini«
nation keeps his senses under control, and
placing his Self on Self frees hitnseU from
the sense of mine ness, desirous of achievmg
virtue, and sets out, without a covering for
fits body, after the due observance of the
dunes of initiaiion foe twelve years and
after having placed his sacred tire on a tree,
and walks along the path of heroes and Ires
down in tlie attitude of heroes, and always
acts like fiernes, certainly acquires (he end
that u reserved for heroes.

$6 Such a man goes to the eternal
Tegion of Sfiakra where lie becomes crowned
with the fruition of all his desires and wtiere
he sports in joy, his body decked with gar-
lands of celestial flowers and cele>tial
perfumes.

57—58 Indeed that pious person lives
happily ,n Heaven, with the celestials as
his companions Jlie hero. /sDowing (lie
practices of heroes and devoted to tliat Yoga
winch belongs to heroes, livmg in the
practice of Goodness, having renounced
everything, pertermed tie iniii*(lon, enn*
trolled his senses, and observing purity of
both body and mind, t% sura to acqtPra
that path wl leh is reserved for heroes
Eternal regions of happiness are lus.

59 ilidiiig on acsr lhal movas^l the
will of tl e rider, Iw passes tliniiigh »ll
happy regions as ha fiket, Indeed, living
fn the regions pi Shikra, that blesseu
person alw«yi iporta m ioy, freed
every calamity.

CHAPTER CXUUr
(ANUSHASASIKA PARVA;,—
Confinurd.

Uma faM t—

I O Holy One, O you whp had tom efi
(he eyes of lllisga and the teeth of Pushan,
O destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksha, O
three «y^ deity, I have « great doubt.

9 Pormerfy, (he illusirtoot Self.Create
created the (our castes. Ihroueh the eeii
retail of what deeds does a Vawhya be-
come a Shndra T

3 Through «hat ects does a Kshalrfya
become a Vanhya and a Orahmana be-
comes a Kshalrfya f fly what means may
auch degradation ol castes be warded o^ I

4 *n>reu|'h what deeds does a OrahrmieB
take birth U Ih nest life. lr,thc£hudta
casieT Through what acts, O poyctlul
deny, does a Kshttnya al«4 come dorrais
to tl.e su us oi a bhudf a T


^94


^ O sinless one O lord of *11 created
betntrs da you O ilIusIrKJUs one, remove
this doubt of mine. How, again, can the
three castes naturally succeed iii acq iiring
the status Brahmanlioodt

,The lllnstrions One eaid

6. The status nf a Ural rntna, O ROd*
dess, is highly diRt&ult to attain O auspi*
Clous lady, one becomes a Qrahinana through
creation or birth Similarly tl'e Kshalriya,
the Vaishya, and the Shudia, all becomes
so through original creation /Ins is my
opinion,

7. He, however, that is horn a Urah-
mana goes down from his status ihrough
las own evil deeds Hence, the Brahmans
after having acquired tlie status of the first
Older, should always protect it,

8 U one who is a Kshatriya or Vatshja
performs those duties winch are assigned
to (lie Brahmana, after the manner of a
Brahmaiia, he becomes a Oiahman.

9 lhat nrahmaiia who renounces the
iduiies «( hts order for following iho<e of the

Kshatriya, is considered as one who has
fallen away from tlie status of a llrahmana
and who has become a Kshatnya,

to— II, That Iiltle*w1tied Brahmana,
who, moved by cupidity aad folly, follows
tlie practices assigned to Vaisliyas, forget*
ful of hts posuKin as a Brahmana that is
Miigfily difficult to attain, cjints to he const*
dered as one who has become a Vaishja
Likewise, one who is a Vaistiia by birth
may, by following the practices of a bi udra
become a Shudra Indeed, a Qiahmana
falling away from the duties of lus own
order, may go down to the status of even a
Shudra.

tS. Such a Brahmana, degraded from
the order of lus birth and ouicasted, with*
out allBifling to ihe region of Brahman,
Sinks jnio Hell, and in his next birth be*
( comes born as a SbuJra,

13—14 A highly blessed Kshatrlya or
a Vaishya, wivo renounces iba duties of h>s
order, and follon-s (he practices of# Shudra,
' (alls away from Ills own order and becomes
a person of mixed caste. It is in this way
itial a I Uraiimana, or a Kshalriya, or a
Vaishya, comes by the position of a
Sbudra. ,

15 That man who las acquired clear*
Tirss of vision.through practice of the duties
of Its own caste, who IS gified with know
ledge and sdence. who is pure fin body and
< titind) who knows every duly and h devo*
ted to live practice of all fus duties, is sure 10
(T'jey the tcirards of virtue.


16 I shill now recile tn you O Rnddste,
a saying niiered b) Brahman on Ibis sub*
|ect Ihe virtuous and those who are
desirous df acquiring merit alwavs pursue
with firmness itie culture of the soiif. '

17 Ihe food that comes from cruel and

fierce persons is censurable So also is the
food that has been conked for serving a
Urge number of persons I he same is said
of the food that is cooked for the first
Shraddha of a dead person So also is the
food that o sullied for (fie usual faults and
the food tfiat is supplied by a Shudra.
1 hese should never be taken by a Brah*
inanaat any time ,

iS Ifie food of ft Shttdra, O goddess it
always disapproved of by the great deiriet.
this 1 tliinU IS the autliority enunciated by
the Grandfather with lus own mouth.

19 if a Brahmana, who has set up t’ c
sacred fireaiid who performs sacrifices, were
to die with any portion of a bhudra's food
remainmi' muligested in Ins stomach, he 1*
sure to he born a Shudrn,

20 On nccount cl these remains of ft
Shudra's food in lus stomach, he falls sway
from the posinon of a Bralimaua, Such
a Brahmana becomes surely ft Sliudra,

31 ‘the Brahmana m lus next life comes
by tl>e position ol that order upon whose
food he lives through life or with the un»
digested portion of whose food in hts
stomach he diet.

33 fhat man who having acquired (he
saried position ol a Brahmana which it so
tliffivuli to acquire, disregards 11 and eats
forhidd*,! food, falls away from his high
status

33— *4 riiat Brahmana wlio dnnSrs
alcoi'ol, who becomes guilty of Brahmani*
tide or mean in hii conduct, or a thief, or
wlio breaks his vows, or brcomes impure,
or unmindful cl lus VeJic studies, or sinful,
or characterised by cupidity, or gutlly of
cniinmg, or a theat, or who does not ob*
serve vuwi, orwho marries a Shudra woman,
or who derives fill livehliooii by pandering
to the lusts of oilier people, or who sells the
Soma plant, or who serves a person of •
low caste, falls away from lus status O'
Drahmanhood

33, ’fhat Oralimsna who violates th*
of Ins preceptor, or who cherishes mairco
towards him, or who takes a pleasure m
•peaVing ill of him, falls away from |f>e
status ol Brahmanho^ even if he knows
Brahma.

26 By these good deeds sgxin, O C*'^*
dess, ssivrn performed, • bhiidra bi^’oine* o
llralimana, and a Vaishya bt^umcs ft
Ksliatiiya.


ANUSMA&KifA PAWVA


995


27 ri»e Shudra sliould perforin all |1ie
diilies sanctioned far him, properly and ac*
cording (u (he ordinance He sliould al-
fvays serve, with obedience and humility,
peisoiis of the three other castes and serve
iheni wiili care,

28 Always following the path of virtue,
the Shudra should cheerfiilly do a1) this
He should honor the celestials arid twice-
born persons He shauld observe the vow
of liospiiality to airpersans.

29 Wiili senses kept under controt and
becoming abstemious in loot!, he sIroulJ
never approach his wife except m her
season Vie si Quid ever search after persons
who are holy and pure As regards food,
he should eat tliai winch remains after the
needs of all persons have been fulfilled.

‘to. II, indeed, the Shudra wishes to be
a Vaishja (in Ins lexi life) lie should also
abstacii from meat of animals nat killed
in s/icrifices If a Vaish^a wishes to be a
Brahmana (in Ins next life] he should per-
teim these dimes He should he truthful
in speeci). and shorn of pride or arrogance
He should be above rtlt pairs of opposites
He should obierve the duties of peace and
tranquillity.

31—34 He should worship the celestials
in sacrificet, attend wiili devotion to the
study and recitation of the Vedas, and
become pure in body and inmd. Heshould
keep Ins senses under control, honor the
Srahinanas, and seek the behoof of all the
O'ders Living like a householder and
eating only twice a day at llie appointed
hours, he shauld satisfy his hunger wiib only
such food as remains after all the members
ol his family with dependants and guests
hive been led He shantd be abstemio is
III food, and act without being actuated by
the desire of reward He should be free
from egotism He should worst ip the
deities < 1 tf<e Agmiiotra and pour hbations
‘according to the ordinance. Performing the
duties o< hospitality lowiids all persons
he should, as already S/iid, eat the IihhI
that remains after servn'g all otfiert lor
w)>om It has been cooked He should, ac-
cording to tl e ordinances laid down, adore
the three fires Such a Vaishya of pure
conduct IS born m his next life in 3 high
Ksltatriya fsmity.

3S If a Vaishya, after liarmg taVeri
birih at a KsliatiV^, performs the usual
punhcaiory rues, becomes inrested with ft c
sacred thread, and betakes himself (o the
ebservarce of vows, he becomes, in tirs neat
life, an honored Drahmana.

35 Indeed, after his birth as a Kshatnya,
be shraild make presents, worsfup l»«e
denies in great sacfifi^s wlh profuse pre*


.senis, study the Vedas, and desnoirs r>f
' attaining to Heaven, should adore the tfiree
fires ' < 1

37 He should interfere for removing the
sorrows of the distressed and slrml I al-
ways (ighirously cherish and protect his
subjects He should be truthful, aid do
ail true works, and seek happiness in
cuiidnct like this,

33 He should administer proper pumah-
meiits, wilfioiic Hying aside''ttie roif of
: punishmenC for g lod He should rndtice
1 mm 10 do righteous deeds. - Guided by
considerations ol policy, i he should take a
sixth of the produce of the fields

39 He sliould never indulge in sexual
pleasure, but live ciieerfuliy and Independ-
ently, well conversant will) the science of
Wealth or Profit Of rigfiieous soul, he
shouM seek Ins married wife only iii her

40 ^ He should always observe fasts, keep
hts soul under restraint, devote himself to
the study ol the Vedas, and be pure in
body and mind He should sleep on blades
of Ktisha grass spread out m fits fire-
chamber.

4( He should pursue (he (hree*foM ob-
jects of hie, and always cheerful. He
should always say “it is ready” to Shudras
desirous of food. >

42 He si ouU never with for anything
from rr Hives of gain or pleasure He
should adore the ancestors and gods and
guests.

43 fn his own house he shoul i Irve (he
hfe t>f v mendicant He should duly wor-
ship the dritirs m his Agiiihoira, morning,
noon, and evening every day, by pouring
libations according to the Oidinance.

44 With his face turned towards the
enemy, he should renounce his life breaths
an baitfe foucht for the behoof of kmc
and Orahtnanas Or he may enter the
three fires sanctified with Manirss and re-
nounce his body By doing all this be is
born in bis next life as a Orafimana.

45 Oitted with knowledge and saence,
pnnraed from all dross and fully conversant
with the Vedas, a pious Kthatrtya, by tus
own deeds, becomes a Drahmana.

4S It is wi h Uie help of these deeds, O
goddess that • person who (las originated
from a degraded caste, vie s Shud/a, may
become a Brahmans purged oR of all sms
and possessed of Vedic learning.

47 One who it a Drahmana, sthen he
becomes wickeit in conduct and etiterves no
distinctisn abaut food, falls away from the


MAHABlIAftAtA


zgo

statui ol Brahmaqliood ai)d becomes ;t
Shudra,

43 Even a Sbudra, O goddess wbo has
piirtRed soul by pi|re deeds and who has
coiilrp||e4 all h>s senses, deserves to be
wailed upon a^id servisd wilti respect as a
BraitrR4(t-4 ) hts has by Ok

Self Create Srah/nan tumself.

49 When a pious nature and pious
deeds arc ^een 19 ?yen a Stiudra, he should,
according to my opiniOi), be held superior
to a per^j pj Ilic Uiree jvFjce born classes.

50 Neither birth, nor the puriGcatory
rues, nar learning, nor offspring can be !
considered as grounds for conferring upon
pue d'Knily gf a twice born person
Ipde^j pgnditct 15 fhe only grou id.

51 All Brahmanas in this world are
Brahman-ia an account pf conduct. A
Shiidra, if he IS of xogd conduct, is const
dered as edual to a Brahmana

53 Ihe position of Brahma, 0 aus
pictous Udy, IS equal wherever it exists ,
If his IS my opinion He, indeed, 1; a Brah*
fflana to whom the dignity of Brahma
exists,— that condition whicJi is bereft of
qualities and which has no stain attached
JP ;

53 The boon«glying Brahmen, wh la he I
created all creatures, himself said that the I
division of human beings into the four orders !
BS dep^ndf nt op buth is only for purposes
^ cUssifleatign

54 The Brahmana is a great ffefd in |
this world —a field having feet, for i( :
apoves frgpi pl*ce to pUce He who plants
seeds m^liai field. |(J beautiful lady, reaps
the corps m th? nexji wgr|d.

55 That Brahra-ina who wishes to
secure Ins own good, should always live
gpon the remains of the food that may
remain in Its house after satisfying the
needs ol all ethers He should always
follow the paih of virtue Indeed, he should
tre^d along ihe path ol Brahma.

56 He should live, engaged m the study
of tl e Sapihit^si and remaining ai home I e
should perform all (he duties of a house*
holder He should always be giyyn to the
study of the Vedas, but he should never
derive the means of livelihood frorn aoclr
study.

SJ. That Brahmana who plwiys acts
thus following (he path of virtue, adoring
;1iis sacred fire, and engaged in the study of
the VedasJ comes to be considered as
Brahma.

58 Having acquired the poiitiort of a
Crabmana, it should always be protected
snihcare, U )Ou of sweet tm>les. by avoid*


■ng the stain o( contact with persons bo/ff
in inferior castes, by abstaining from |hc
acceptance of gifts, and by otlfer acts laid
down m the senpturfs

59 I have thus told you a mystery, vi* 1
the manner in which a Shudra may become
a Brahmana, or that by winch ^ Br^hmina
falls away from Iits own pure position and
becomes p Shudra.


CHAPTER CXLIV.
(ANUSH/\SANIKA PARVA) —
Cffnfintttd.

ITiiia tfaitJ

1 O Holy One, O lord of all beings, O
you adored of deities and Asiiras equally,
^el| me what are the duties and derilections
of men Indeed O powerful one, remove
my doubts

2 It Is by these three, vte , thought,
word and deed, that men become fettered
with bonds It IS by the same three that
they become freed from the^e fetters

3 By following what conduct, O god
indeed, by what kind of pets— by what
behaviour and q lahties a <d words, do men
succeed in ascending to Heaven 1

The God of gods said*-*

4 O goddess you are veil eonversani
with the true meaning of dimes You aril
ever devoted to Virtue and Self*ConlreI
Ihe q lestion you pave asked me 11 fraught
with the benefit of all creatures ft m*
creases the inielligepce of all persons. Dd
you, therefore, listen to the aersiver,

5 rtiose persons who are deVoteJ (a the
Religion of I ruth who are righteous and
destitute of the indications of the several
modes ol life and who enjoy tlie weatih ac*
quired by fair means, succeeds in ascending
to Heaven

6 Those men who are freed from all
doubts, who are gifted with omniscience,
and who 1 ave eyes for seeing all tt mgs are
never fettered by either virtue orsin fhose
men who are shorn of all altachmenls cah
never be fettered by the chains of action

7 They who never inj ire others m
Oiought, word, or deed and who never
attach i> emselves to anything, can never
be fettered by deeds

8 They who absta n from kiflmg any
creature who are gifted with righteous
duct who have mercy who treat friends an®
foes equally, and who are self •controlled,
can never be fettered by acts. *


A'JU'JHASVNA PARVA


?57


9 Thnnf men whr> are gifieij wjib mtrcy

towards xlHieings succeed m creating

Hie cniifi lei'Cc I J all livnus creaiitres and
who have sliaketi cff inatrce in (Itetr conduct,
succeed in aseeminii; to Heaven.

10 Those men who have nn desire to
appropriate othei^’ properties, who never
as’Ociate wall the spouies of others and who
ei)} IV only such weelth as liai been acquired
by (air means, succeed tn ascending to
Heaven.

It. (hose men who treat (lie wives of
other people as llieir own inollicrs and sis*
lers and iiau|{hters, succeed in attAiuing to

12 riiose rnen who sbs(ain from tnis*
appropriating others' tilings whn are per*
fecily coniented with ivliat they (heunscive*
possess, and who live dtpendnig upon ilieir
own destiny, succeed ii) ascending to
Ifeavait.

tj 1 hose men who never know other
peupUs' wives, who are masters u( their
senses and who are given to righteous coo*
duct, succeed in ascendiiii'lo (ieaven

14 Itiis (S the path, created by (lie

sods, lliat the pious should (olluw. I Jus is
the path fieed liom passion and «version.
sanctioned fur the piuus to follow. i

1 5 t hose men who are devoted to lh«ir
own wives uDiJ who ate* them in only ibeir
seasons and whu do not indulge i > sexual
pleasure! succeed in usceiidmg to Heaven.

t 6 For the salts of muliiplyiitg their
merit or fur acqinrinit their meMns ui liveli*
hood, the wise ahmild tvl)»w chuttiy, peri'
ances and puiuy uf both bod) and ntind


with sincerity welcome all w 1 iom Ibey meet
with, succeed ni ascending to Heaven.

H Ihey whn never utter words whi-h
are hsrsh bitter and cruel and who are free
from dcceilfu’nws diuJ evd of every kind,
succeed in ascending to Heaven.

23 Those men who never utter deceitful
words which create disunion between friends
and who always speak what is inis and
what pro/nofes good feelings, succeed in as*
cendiiig^o.Heaven.

24 Uiose men who avoid harsh words
aiid abstains from q larreli with others, who
are cquat ru their conduct lo all creaturesi
and wlio liave governed llieir souls, succeed
III ascending to Heaven.

25 1 liey who abstain from evd speech
or aiiifuf.conveisaticn. who avoid disagree*

I able speeches ^i^d who utter only au'pici*

I out and at.(eeable words, succeed lu ascend*
mg to Heaven.

ad ffiey wlio never utter, under anger,
such words as cut others to Ihe quick, and
wlio, even wlieu under the influence of
anger, spesit words that are peaceful
and ak.feeable. succeed ii> asceiidmg CO
Heaven.

ay This rtbgion, O goddess of ipeedh
should always be folUwed by inen. U il
ouspicivut and characterised by fiulhi
Ihe wjjc should always avoid unitulh*

tTma said 5—

28 . led me, O god of gods, O holder of
Pinaha, U you who are Inghly hitssed,
wliai those tiiouglits ate by which a person
may be IcUelcd.


I?. Ihove who wish to ascrnd In Heaven,
should follow 111 Lius tract and not any
other.


TJma said

>8 1 ell me, O illnilrious god, O sinless

lord of all creatures, what are itiose woids
hy wlndi.oiie becomes fettered and wImI ar*
tViose words by apealiiiig^wliikh one may be ]
freed from (eiteis. * I


Haheshwara said —

>9 I hose men who never tell
fvr or for others,

vr (or exciting Uuglittr, succeed ir
'"t Heaven.


falsehood


, 20 . They who neser tell Hes for acquir*
'"K (heir livelihood or for acquiring merit
or thiou,,h lucre Caprirs, succeed in ascend*
■ '>g to Heaven.

2 (. 'they who Utter words which ora
Sniuoth and sweet ami faultless, and wIm


Haltosbwara said:—

29 Gnied with merit that oripinaiea
Itom nienlai .sets, O guddess, one rserndf
to Heaven Lisien to me, O an^picioua
snie, as I lecne to )ou what those acts aro.

30. Listen to me. U you of sweet fac*,
how also a mind uf ill. regulated features,
j becomes fciiercd by ill irgulaird or evil
cnoughls*

3t. Those rnen win do nit seek, C/en
nsenUlly, to lake other peoples' things even .
wbeii ilwy lie in a Joiie iurest, spcceed jh
asceiuling to Heaven.

3s. Those men who care not others*
beiingines, even when (hey see It l)tng in
a house «r a village ttiat has been deserted,
ascend to Heaven.

^ Those men who do not seek, cveis
menialiy. to associate with (he married
writes of otiiert, even when Ihey see lliem >/i
deverled places and under |l.e influence oS
wssMC, succeed in ascciiiling to Htavtn*


MAilADliARATA


29 ?'

34 Those men who, meeting Wiih
liieiids or enemies. *lbeh«ve in', tlie same
friendt) way hmards atl| Succeed hi cacend
ing (0 Heaven

35 Ihose men who are posiened of
learning and metcy, who are pure in bod)
and mind, who are film in truth, and whu
are contented wrth wit it belongs to lliciii,
succeed In ascrnding to Heaven.

36 'itiose men wlio do not bear li) wd)
t I an) ciealurr, who do not stand in need of
labour fur their hvehtiooil, wlio bear fiie >dl)
hearts towards all beings, and who enitnaiM
mercy towards all, succeed in ascending
to Heaven.

37 1 hoiie ini-n who have faith, who have
liibrcy. who are hoi) , who st ck lt>e cnmpaii)
ill bolj men, and who Itiiuw ihe dnlmcIroiH
between light and wtun^, succeed in as*
cvndiiig to licavi.n.

3S Ihose niciii O goddess who know
the conseq leiices of good and bad deeds.
SUbCeed III ascehdiiihfto Heaven.

30 Ihoae men who aie pisl in all their
dealingc, who have desneabk acc imphsh*
iiienis. who are devoted to the deities and
tl>« Uiahniaiias, and wlio arc perseveiing
• I diimg dll ^ood acts, succeed m ascending
tu llbdven.

4). Ail liiesc men O goddess succeed
in ajCvndiiig to Heaven t 1 i<oni,h lie ineti
loitoiis lesulls of tlieii deeds. Wiui cUe
do )ou wish to licai 7

Uma said —

41 I have a great d iiibt. O Mahesh* I
waia, uii a subject abiui I umuii ben
V uu should expUin it tu me cotefully '

43 Uy what deeds does a iiihii succeed
U poweilul deny, III acquin ig a loiii; lifcT
Ky tvliHt penaiices aUo dues uiic acquire a
lulls, ^

43 By what acts dues one become
shuri-lived on C-iilli? O you who are
pecf^clly Slaiiilets. you should tell me what
ale the consequences of acts.

44 ft me tiave great good fortune and
sibne suffer Irtmi nnsEortuue Some are
( assessed oi iiubic, and some are «/ rgrroble,
Luili.

45 Sime have such repulsive features
as It II ey are made of wood while others
iuvk vtwy haudsunie at even (he ficsi sight

46 Some appear to hive no wisdom
wnile Olliers are possessed of it Some,
a&ai I, are seen gifted wilb lii|!h iiilelligenco
aUd wisduin eidighteiied by knowlcogc and


while Olliers there are (hal are loaded witH
heavy calamines Such diverse sights are
seen of men O illusirtous one, you should
tell me the reason of all this I

The god of gods said *—

4S fridred O goddess, I shalf describe
10)0(1 the Iriitif ol acts li is by thein
that all human beings in (Ins world enjoy
or suffer the conseq leiices of their acts

49—51. 1 tiai man who assumes a dread*
ful aspect (01 the purpose ol taking the
lives of other creatines who arms hiintelf
wall strong slicks for injiting other ciea*
tures, who is seen with tiphiled weapons,
who kills living creatures, who is shorn' of
inescy, who always causes inbuladun lo*
UvuiiC beings, who refuses to grant prolec*
liou to even worms and ants, who is ciuel>
one who IS sncli, O goddess, siiiKS III HrII
One who has an oppiisile dispnsition aiuh
who i> itghieous III deeds, becomes but 11 At
a handsome man.

53 Ihe man who is cruel, goes 10 Hell,
while he who Is merciful, ascen Is to Heaven
, the man wlio goes to Hell, has tu sutler
great niiseiy

S 3 O >e who having sunk In Hell, rises
thetcboin. takes biilh as a shuii lived man.

54—57. lhat man who is given to
slauKiner and iuj 11), b> goddess, becomesi
thioUkli his sinlul deeds, liable to desliuc*
lion buch a person becomes disagreeable
(o all creatures Hiid sliort*hved 1 hat man
who belongs to what is called the \Vl lie
bUs\, who abstains iruiii the destruction of
hvn g creatures, who has liirovvn away all
weapons ami nevtr infl cts any punish-
ment uii ai)> body, who never injures any
Cieature who never causes anybody to
kill caealuies for him, who never kills or
stiikes even when siiuck or attempted
to be kiHed, who never sanctions or ap-
proves an act of destruction wl o is
with mercy towards all creatures who treats
uiheis as hi» own sell, — sucli a supeiior
man, L> goddess succeeds in acquiring I**
the dignity of a celestial 1 llleU wl'h joy.
such a man enjoys vaiious kinds ol luxuri-
ous articles

58 If such a person is ever born in the
world ol men, he becomes long lived ana
eii{ciyS great happiness

59 Ihis IS llie way of those who

of righteous conduct and rigJileous deeds,
and who are blessed with loi gevit' . 'he
way tbal was marked out by the
Brahman himself and wincli is niarUed by
abstention liuin the desitucliuii ul hviii|> j
creatures.


have to suffer little Pain


ANiMl\S\NA pauVA /g5


CH\PrER CXLY.

< ANUSllASANIKv PAUVA) —
Continue4,

TJma said

1. Uy wlut (taturtf. ivliat conAttct, wliat
deeds, and ivImI does z inan succeed

III aiutiiiug ta Heaven.

Mahesliwara said

3 — 6 Hewloliasa liberal ditFOsiltoii.
■wlio honors 0 ralm.in 49 and lieats lUecn
«iUi ho'ptiality, who in-<kes gnts of food
and drink and clolhes and uiner iiiicles of
ienjoyment to the destitute, tt e blind and
Uhe distressed, wt o makes t;i{ls of liotises
’’erects halls di,>s wells, constructs siieliers
whence pure and coul water ts d'SMiuuted,
excavates tanks inakesarcaiigem'nis/or (he
free distrihuiiuiis of yifts every da), f.i'fcs (O
all corners what evch prays fur, who rn-tkes
gifts of seats and beds and vehitles, wealth,
jewels and yems houses, all kinds of corn
ki«e, fields, and wnnen— he who alwa>t
'tnakes these vifts wiili a cheerful heart, be«
><oincs a deinieih O guddess, <jf the celestial
region.

'' 6 He lives there fur a loiii; tune, eii>
laying various kinds of superior articles
Passing his time happily in the coinpsny of
the Apsaras, he spurts in the garden of
Nniiddiia and other delightful regions.

7 . After the exliautiion of his rnetiis be
falls down from the celestial region and '
takes birth in the order of hunanit), in a
TiCli family, O goddess, whiefi (las a large
command of every article of enjuyinent

8 In that life he gets all ariKles for
gratifying his wishes and appetites In.
deed, blessed with tlie possessiun of eucit
articles, he gets, itches and a weti filled
treasury.

9 riieiSell Create Bralnnan himself de-

clared jt formerly that « rs even such per-
sons, O goddess who become highly bless- |
ed and possessed ot liberal difposjuou* znd
iiandsoine features. |

( 0 . fhere are otfiers, O goddess, who |
Are incapable of making gifts Giltedwith 1
Small udderstandings, they cannot make I
gifts even when sohciied by Brabwaiias ami '
possessed of iiiiinense riches.

It. Seeing the destitute, the blind, the
disiressed, and inendicarits, and everi guests
arrived at their houses, those persons always
filled With the desire of pleasing the organ
of taste, tum away, even when expiessly
solicitedjsy them.

12. rtrey never make gifts of wealth or


dresses, or vunds, or gold, Or kine, or any
kind of food

)j those men who are disinclined to
relieve the distress of others, who are full uf
cupidity, who have no faith in, the sciipiuieS,
and who do not iit.ke gifts —vetily, these
men of little understanding, O goddess,
have to sink 111 Hell

t4 In course of lime, when their Suff'C-
tngs in HlH, tericiiiiate they uke birth lit die
order of hu II iiiity, in poor fanuhes.

15 Always sufJenng from hunger and
thirst, excIuieJ frum all decent society,
liopeless of ever enj tying all goodly ihuigs,
they lead wretched lives

t 6 Dim 111 families which are (lestiiule
of all iriiclss of e»]oyine»l, these men never
succeed III enjoying tlie goodly things of
Eaich, Indeed U goddess, it is thrm'h
deeds Uiat persons become wreictied and
poor,

ty There are olhers who are arrogant
and proud for the psssesston ul {tichet.
those senseless wi etches never offer seals.lo
worthy persons.

18 Gifted with luile uilderstandinge,
they do not give w-.y to them who deseivu
such an honor. N»r do they give water for
washing the feet to peisuna to wliotii |(
•hotild begiven.

19 Indeed, they do not honor, accord*
t»g to the ordinance, with gifts of the
,A<ghya, such persons as deserve to be
InuioreiTii herewith 1 hey d > nut offer water
for washing the muuifi to sucft as deserve
to have that tionur.

I 30—31. They do not treit llieir very
preceptors, when tile fatter arrive at their
liuiises in the insnner in ivhich preeepturs
should be ire ted Living in cupidiry and
pride, they refuseto tre*i (heir elJ-rs and
aged men Willi love and affeciioii. even j»-
suiting those who. deserve to be honored
aud asserting their superiority over them
without showing reverence and hunuhiy.
Such men, O goddess, inik in tlelt.

33 When their sufferings terminate
after many years, they rise from Hell.f and
take birth as men, in low, and wtclched
families.

33 indeed, they who humihste‘'{their
preceptors and seniors, hsve 10 take^birth
III such castes as those of Swap,<k»s and
Pukkaias wliu are greatly vile and ietelt
«f meUigeiice.

34—38 He who IS nof arroganfor filled
with pride, who is a worshipp-r of the
deities and Brahmanas, who enjoys (he
esieerrr of Ihe.worlJ, who bows to every evre^
who dcseiyco. lus leyeience, who ulffs


300


MMIahIIARa ta


smoolli and tweet words, wlio benefits
person* of all c-isles, vvlio it always devoted
to l)>e belioof of all beings, wlio does not
feet hatred Cor anybody, wlio is sweet*
tongued who is an uilerer of fweei and
cooling words, who gives way to one who
deserves to have way, who worships his
preceptors in the manner in winch precep-
tors deserve to be adored, who welcomes
all cieatures with prnpey courtesy, vvho does
not bear ill will towards any creature, who
lives, adoring elders and guests wiih such
honors as tliey deserve, who H ever bent
upon having as many guests as possible,
and vvtio adores all who lionar his house
with their presence succeeds, O goddess,
in ascending to Heaven Upon the esiiaus*
lion of his merit, he is born as a man in a
high and respectable family.

39 In that life he gels all articles of
enjiyment in prolusinii and jewels and gems
and every hind of tidies in abundance. He
gives to worthy persons what lliey deserve
He perforins «very duty and every act of
virtue

30 Honored of all creatures and re-
ceiving tlieir respec, he obtains ilie fruits
el his own deeds

3t. Even such a person acquires a
high birth III tins world 1 his that I have
recited to you was said by the Ordainer
(Brahman) himself formerly

32-*-34< I hat man who 11 fierce in con*
dual, who creates terror in all creatures,
who injures other beings witli hands or feet
or cerds or sticks, or brick-bat* or clods of
hard clay, or other means of wounding and
paining, O beautiful lady, who practises
various kinds of deceit for killing living
creatures or vexing lliem, wl o chafes 1
wniinals and cause* them to tremble in 1
fear. — indeed that mat}, who acts thus, is I
certain to sink in Hell I

35 If in course of lime he is born as
man in a tow and wreiclied family which
meets with obstacles of every kind on every
side.

36 He IS hated by all A wrelch among
men, he becomes so for lus own deeds

87 — 33 Another, who is possessed of
mercy, casts I is (benigi ) ey e on all creatures.
Gifted with a friendly vision, treating ail
«. eaiures a* if he were their father,
rhornof every hostile feeling, with all ins
p lasioits under' complete restraint, he never
vexes any creature and never (ills them
with fear by means of tiis fiands or feet
w 11 I are always under hi* control He
inspires the cuiilidence «f all beings

39 He never afflicts any creature with
chiisr cirds or elubi or brick bats or duds


of hard eartli or weapniis of my sort IIis
deeds are never fierce ur CtU’-I, and he is
full of mercy,

40 One who is given to such praciices
and conduct, certainly ascends to Heaven
I here lie lives like a god in a celesiia
palace full of comfort.

41 If, upon the exhaustion of Ins merit,
he tias to take birtli as a man, he bccmnes
bnrn as a man who has not to fight widi
diRi..uhies of any kind or to roeet with any
fear. Indeed, he eiij >ys great happiness

41 Happy and not compelled to work
for Ills hvehtiood, he lives freed from every
kind of anxiety. Fven this O goddess,
IS the patli of the vinnoiis In it tlicie are
110 obstacles ur .ifll ctioiis

Uma said —

43 111 the world some men are master*

of inferences and the premises leading to
them Indeed, tliey are ina»iers uf science
and knowledge, have large progeny, and
are giited wiili leariong and wisdom

44. Others, O god are shorn of wisdom,
teieticr, and knowledge, and are intrked
out by folly By wliat particular acts dors
a person become endued with wisduin 7

45 By what acts, again, does one be*
comeof little wisdom and distorted vision?

I Do you remove this doubt of mine Uyoi
who are the loieinosl of all beings kiiowmif
dunes.

46 Others there are, O god, who are
blind from the moment of their birtfi
Other* tliere are who are diseased and
■mpitent Du you, U god, tell me Hi*
reason uf Hus.

Maheshwara said

47~43 those men who always enq nre

abuiit wliat is for their belioof and what i*
to their deiiiinent, of Brahinana* faarnel
in the Vedas, crowned wiili success aid
knowing all dunes who avoid all kinds of

evil deeds, who achieve only such deed* as

are good succeed in ascending to Heaveh
after leaving tlii* world, ind eiijjy gr**'
happiness a-, long as they live there

49 Indeed upon the exhasutio 1 of therr
merit, when they take their birth m the
order of huinsiuty, they becmie bom a*
men endued with great intelligence. Ihey
enjoy every kind of happiimss and au*
picitusnesf on account of thit iiilelh^eiice
with wlii(.li they are born.

50 Those men of foolish nnJerstand- |
slaiidinits wlio cast wicked eyes upon 'the I
married wives of other men, beco^te cursed |
with congenital bhndiiass on acvuunt u' J
that sinfulness of tlieirs.


ANuMMSANA parva


301


I 51 Tl'osf men moved by desire

in ilieir hearts, cast Clieir ejes on iMfced
; women, tbose men oi wicked acts lake
I birih in tins woitd to pass their wliolc lives
III one cmuiouons di$e<>se,

52. lliose men oi foolish and wtciced
>' acts wlio indiilKe in sexual union witU
I womei! of castes different from tbeir own,'—

[ those men of tiitle wisdom,— tiave 10 lake ^
< birth III tlieir next lives as persons shorn of 1
the virihly.

53 1 hose men who cause animals to be

> killed and tbaie who violate the hed^ol^
t>>eir precepiois, and those wt>o indulge in
proiniscu ms iMiei course fiave to lake biiili '

> III tlieif next lives as persons sham uf man* ,
^ hood

Uma said

54 What deeds, O foremost of the

CelesuaU are and what deeds are

fauhleis? \Vl ai, indeed are those deeds
by doifi^ which a man succeeds rn acrimr'
mg what IS for >our highest good 7

Iilalie8li7ara said

• 55 1 "laii who IS desirous of deter

mtiig what IS rrirl (eousness, and who wishes
lo acquKit pmiiiinent viuues and qu^hiies,
find who always puis questions to (lie
Brithmaius wiili a view to find out the path
' leading to his Inghest good, succeeds in
ascending to Heaven.

56 If he IS born as a man, he becomes
aitied wiili luleihgeiice and memory and
gre,<t wisdom.

b7 fills. O goddess, IS the line of
conduct that (he pious aie to follow
and liial is fraught wiib great good | have
told you of It for tlie beliooi of liuman

Uma said

58 riiere are men who hate virtue and
who are gifted with hille uiidrrstanJings
'Ihey never wish to approach Brahinaries
knowing me Vedss.

59 Ihere are otlieis who obseive vows I

and who are given to the duly of peilorin- I
nig bhraddhas Others, aaain, are dcsti* |
tote of bI} vows ihey do not cafe for :
(ibiervAiices and are like Uakshasas tn j
conduct. * I

£0 Some there are who are given 10 ,
the pprlorinante of saccihees and Some who
do nut cAie for ii nna For what deeds do
men become possessed of these different

Mabeikwara said t—

Cl. Ihfough the Vedas, the bmils Isave ,


been laid nut of all ilie acts of hiimsn beings.
I hose rneti who acts thus according to the
autliority of the Vedas, are seen to become
devoted to the obfervance of vows ‘

dl—Cj. Those men, however, who beioi;
ttifliieiiced by folly accept unrigliieotistiess
for Its reverse, became destitute of vows,
transgress all resiraints, and come to be
considered as Brahmarakshasas tndeed,
<t IS these men who do not care for Hums,
who never uiier the Vashat and utlier
sacred Mantras, and who come to* be
considered as the lowest and vibest of
men.

64. Thus, O goddess, have I expUined
to you the entire ocean of duties of liuinan
beings lor the sake of removing yniir
doubts, not omittiiTg the tint al wliiclt tlie^
become guilty.


CHAPTER CXLVI. ,

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

CoufiMwrd. • '

Narada said ^ ,

I. Having said these words, the power*
fill Mahadeva himself became desirous «/
hearing, and wuli iltai'vi^w he questioned
Uh dear wife wlio was seated by hit side
and was bent upon doing kis will.

, llahadeva said ^ '

3. You, O goddess, know whalisSu*

' preine and what IS not so You know all
I duties, O you wlio love to live in the retreats
. oi ascetics You are gifted with ever^y
I virtue, possessed of beautiful eyebrows, and
hair ending in tlie fairest curls, O daughter
of HifflavaC, (he king of tnountanrt, __ ^

3 You are skilled in every work You
•re gifted with, self-cociirol and look |impa^*
lially towards all creatures. Divested of
the senses of itiine.riess, you are devoted to
ihr practice of' all' tlie duties O' you of
beautiful features. I wish tu ask you (about
something). I wish (hat. asiied by me, you
will describe to me tliat subject.

4 ' Savilri IS the chaste wife of Brah* j
nian. 1 be chaste bhachi is t).e wife of j
Indra. Uhiimorna is thf wife of Maikart* j
deya, and KiJdhi of (king) Vaishravana ■

5 Varuna has Goury fur his consort, and ^

the Sun>God has buvarcliala. Uohini is ipe
eftasie wife of Sliashin, and bwaha t>l Va^
bbavasu. , 1

6 Kashyapa has Aditi Alf tfese ton*
aider Uieir husbands as ihcir'-gods, 'You


302


MAIIABIIARATA.


iiave, O ^oddeu, conversed and associaleil
wutiall uf clism every day.

7. it IS, ilierefore, O you knowiii(; every
diit), tliat I vvisli to question you about tlie
duties uf women, O you wliose words are
always consistent wiili iij>ltteuusHess (
wish to hear you desLribe that subject from
the beginning.

8. You practice all the duties of virtue
with me. Your conduct is exactly like iiiine,
and the vow« you observe are ttie same that
ate observed by lue. Your power and
euergy are equal to mine, and you have
piactised the austerest penances

9 1 he ,subject, when described by you

will become highly mentoiiuus. Indeed,
that subject will llteii become autbotiiutive
til the world.

lu. Women, in especul, are]the higl est
refuge of iiAnnen U you of beautiful hips,
among human beings the course of coi duct
laid uown by you will be fulUweu Irviu
geneialiuii to geiieraliun.

II. Half of my body IS made up of half
your body. You are always engaged in
doing the work uf tne celesuats, and it is you
ate the oause uf have peopling tne Earth |
13 , O auspicious lady, you know all the
eternal duties of women. Uo yon, therefore,
tell me in lull what the duties are uf your
■eX.

Uma said

13. Ulralyone, O lord of alt created
things, O source of afl that is past present,
and future, It IS ihrougli your favour that

tlie words 1 am uttering are arigiMaling m

lAy mind.

14 Alt these Rivers (that are of my sei),
O god of gods, tiavliig tlie w-aters ot all the
lirtiias, are approdciniig your presence lor
enabling yuu to perform your abiuiiuns in
them.

15 After consulting them 1 shall describe
the Subject in doe order I hat peison who,
though capable. Is still free from egotism, is
rightly called a Puiuslia

16 As lor woineit, O lord of all beings,

shj follows persons uf her sei By consult*
ing these foremost of Kivers. they will be
huuoured by me. ^

‘17. 1 he sacred Saraswati is the foremost

river of all rivers^ isl>e goes iOA.ards the
ocean aod is tiuly'ihe fi>st uf all rivers.

.*18—20 Vipasha, also, is here, ‘and
VitSsta, Cliamlrabhsga, Iravsti, bhatadru,
the river Devika, Kaushiki, and Gomati,
and llni celestial Kiver who has in
her all the sacred lirthas, vi» , the
goddess Ganga. who having oiigiualed


from the celestial region has descendel
on the Earth and is considered as the
foremost of all rivers !—l laving said this,
the wife of tliat god of gods, that foremost
of all pious persons, smilingly addressed
dll those Rivers of her seX.

2f Indeed, tlie wife of the great god,
devoted to the performance of alt duties,
questioned those individuils uf her sex
dbout the duties of women Indeed, those
foremost of rivers Inving Ganga (or their
first all know tlie duties of women.

Uma said

22 1 he illustrious god has asked a ques*
lion about the duties of women 1 wish to
answer Shankara after having consulted
with you

23 1 do not find any branch of know*
led>.« on Earth or Heaven that is capable
of being mastered by individual without
your help Ye rivers that run towards the
ocean it is, therefore, that f seek your
opinions

24 it was in tins way that those (ore*
most of Rivers, all of whom wer& aUspiCionS
and highly sacred, were accosted by bluva s
wife Iheu tlie celestial River Ganga, who
adored the daughter of the king of inouii*
tains in return, was selected for answering
the quesiion.

25 indeed, the of sweet smiles is held
as swelling with various kinds of under*
standing and well conversant with the duties
of women The sacred goddess capable of
removing nil fear of sin, gifted with humility
in c inseqiieoce uf her mtellixence, well
acquaniied ivith all duties, and endued with
an exceedingly comprehensive intelligence
sweetly snuliiig, uttered these words —

37 O goddess, you are always given to
the due performance of all duties You
have favored me highly by thus questioning
me O sinless one, you are (lonoured by
the entire universe, yet you ask me that atii
but a River.

a8 That person who, though fnmse'f
competent yet asks another, or who pays a
graceful tribute to another, certainly de«
serves, t tiniik tube considered as right*'
wius.souled Indeed such a person deserves
to be called learned and wise.

29 That person never falls into disgrace
who asks such speakers as ate gifted with
knowledge and science and as are well con*
versaiit with premises and inferences.

3 ** A proud man, even when gifted with
intelligence, by speaking in the mn^st of •'*
assembly otherwise, finds iiimsclf uilsrnig
only words of weak meaning.


3^4


MAHABHARATA


iiiishand, and no god that can compare with
him

54 A woman Considers husband’s grace
and He-iven as equ-d , or, if iineqilsl the
nfequalKv is very trivial O Mahesitwarat
1 do not wish Heaven itself if you are not
satisfied with me.

55 If the husband that IS poor, or dif«
eased or distressed, or fallen among eiiemiesi
or aHl cted by a Brahmaiia’s curse, were to
command the wife to accumplisli anything
that IS improper ur unrighteous or that may
bring onlliedestruciion of life iiself, the wife
should, without anj liesiiatton, accomplish It,
guided by the code wliose propriety is sane*
tioued by tlie Law of Distress,

57, t have thus O god, explained at
your comm iiid, what the dunes uf women
are. Indeed that woman who acts thus,
becomes entitled to a sliarc of the merits ac>
quired by tier tiushaiid.

Narada said

. 5S 1 hue addressed, the great god highly
spo«e of the daughter of tlie king of inouii*
tains and then •dismissed all persons who
had assembled tliete, logetiier with all Ins
own attendants.

5^ 1 he various tribes of ghostly beings,

as also all the embodied Rivers, and the
Caiidiiarvas and Apsarar, all bowed their
heads to Mahadeva and departed (or re*
turning tu the places whence they lied
come.'—


CHARIER CXLVII.
(ANUSHASANJKA l•ARVA)--

CentiiiUiJ,

The Uishis said

I. O holder of Pinaka, O tearer of the
eyesol Bhaga, O you adored of Uie cnliic
smvveise, we wish to liear (lie glory of
V'asiidava.

Mabeshwara said —

3 Hen IS superior to (he Grandfather
' liimstH. He IS the Hiern^l Piiruslia. Other*

Wise called Krishna, He is endued willi
’ the splendour of ^otd and gifted with solar
effulgence.

3. Having ten arms, He is giftederitb
gieat energy, and is the Destroyer of the
enemies ot the celestials Ife has a wUui
on Ills breast, and curly lochs ol hair on
His head. He is adored of all the celetiuls.

4 Brahman has sprung from Ins abda*
I men 1 iiave oii^inaied from his head.


All ihr liimlnsrtes m the sty lute nrigi*
naied from Ins hair. From the bristles on
Ins bsdy hive originated all the gods and
demons.

5 From his body have ongmstel the
Rishis AS also all the eternal woilds He
IS the aboie of the Grandfather and of
all the gods

6 . He IS the Creator of this Earth and
lie IS the Lord nf the three wnri is He ts
also the Destroyer of all creatures mobile
and immobile

7 lie IS indeed, the Foremost of aff the
celestials He ts their Master. He is llie
Chastiser of all enemies Heisgiflet with
Omniscience He exists in everylhine He
IS capable of ening everywhere 11 ? per*
ineates everything.

8 He IS the Supreme Soul He is ilie
Wo.ker of nil the senses He covers ihe
innverse He js the Supreme Lord Ihere
IS nothing in the three worlds wliicli is
superior to Hun.

9 — It. He IS Fternal He is the des*
troyer of ^!adhll, and is otherwise calirti
Gnvi xla Ihe Giver nf I onors He wit]
cau^e all the kniw’^ of Earth to be killed
in haitle for securing Ihe piirpises of the
celestials (akiiig birth In *t liiimau form.
Ihe relestufs abandoned hi firm are
unable to do their work on Farlh With*
out Hun as tl eir leader they eaiiiini do
Anything He IS tlie leader of all cieaiures
and It worsliipped by all tlTe gods.

13 — 15 Within the ahdomen of this
Master ..f the gods Win always does celes-
tial work, of (his U le Wh > ts at one willi
BraUma, and Wlio IS aiwiys ll e rohige of
(li« twice hnrn {Kisliis, fives Rrahinan.
Indeed, the latter lives happily in Mail*
body which is hii abode I lutself. ih.t
am called Shatva, itso live happily in diet
happy abode of (nine.

14 All the celesdils, inn live happily
in His body Gifie i with great rguli’encr,
He has eyes which reienible Ijins peial»

1 lie «od less of prosperity lives w ilun Hi »
And lie lives atwiys m f>er comp my.

15 — «7 The biw called S'laranga •" I
tlie discus (called Sudarshuna) are h'*
weapons, as Well as a sword lie lias lK<>
nrtblein of tl e e ir.ny of all ti>e snakes o •
Ins standard He is disiingnishej hy es*
ceJIent conduct, by purity, by $vH. control,
by prowess, by energy, by the most beauti*
(uliotin by tallness and well proportianed
hub* by patience, by sincerny, by riche*,
by mercy by the beauty of form, {i*d b'T
power He shines, iiavt'ig all lelerbl
weapetts of wonderful form and make.


ANtSHAbANA t»ARVA.


305


)8 tie 1)4S Yogt lor Ids He

IiHi •« 1)1 iiisHod ejes lie is f ee Ifooi
every si^in or II^ 11 (iii»!« minded

tie IS ^died null > eruisiii lie is an oli)<'Ct
of piide wiili all Ills Iitends Hi, is dear
(0 afi Ins kmsnieit ami leldlwes and lliey
are dear to linn

19 lie IS gifted witli forgiveness He
}s nee from pride or egotism He »» de-
vuied to t> e Bra)»naiias and is llieir leader
lie reiiiuves itie fears of all persons sirii.kcii
wiili fear, lie iiK-reases ifie loya of all his
Inends

2 >, He IS the reloge et all creatures
He 1$ ever engaged in prutecitiig and clie*
fishing the distressed Having iiiasiery
over all the scriptures and ev'tyltuidoi
afUueiiCe, ife is adored by all beings.

21 tCiioiviifg all dutieSi He ts a great
benefactor oi even eneiHies when they seek
fils protection. Conversant wiili policy and
endued Mnin policy, He is an uiterer of
Braiiina and lias all Ills senses under per-
fect restraint,

22^25 Fur doing goad to (he cefeslials.
Goviiida will take bnih in die (amity of the
great Manu Indeed gifted with great in*
triligence. He will take b<il)i in Die airspici-
oils and nghtrous faintly of that Fraiapati
Manu will have a son named Anga, Alter
Aiiga will come Aiitarilhainaii

34 From Antardliaman will come Ha*
vtrilliaiiian, that lo^ of all creatures, free
from evecy stam. Hayirdlui»a» will beget
an lUusuious son named Pracliuia Varhi

35 lie will have ten sons having ^ra*
cheias fur ilrctr first Hracliecss will have a
son tianiej Oakslia who will be regarded as
a Prajrtp^ti Uaksha will beget a daugliter
iiauieu Uaksliayani,

26 Prom Dakshayani will spring Aditya
and from Adiiya will spring Manu Manu
Will beget a d >U(,liter iiained IJa and a sun
named budyuinna.

27 lla will have Vudfia for her husband,
and from Vudha will spring Puturavas
From Pururavas will spring Ayu Froin
Ayu will spring Nahusfia aiidNatiusha will
beget a son tiained Vsyad

23 From Vayaii wilt spring a powerful
Son named Yadu Yadu will beget Krosh-
tri Kroshtri will beget a powedul son
•lamed Vrijniivat.

29 Vfijmivat will beget the invincible
CshaJgu Usliadgu will beget a son named
Cfmrarailia.

SO— 31. ’Clutraratfia will have a younger
oi Die name of Shura. Indeed, m tire
family o( these powedul niea of energy known


all over the world, gjfted ivith excellsiu con*
duct and various accomplisliments given in
the p*rfuriiiaii(,e of sacrifices and pure in
behaviour.— Ill the pure lamly honored liy
(he Brahmaiias Shuru will take hiS birth
He wiK be a foremost Kshair lya, giftcsl wtch
great energy, and possessed of great lame.

32 Shura, that giver of honors, will
beget a soii, the perpetuator ©f his familv, of
the name of VdsuJeva, ©Dierivtse called
Anakadiiiidhuvi

33 Vasudeva will have a son of name
Vasudeva He Kill have four hands He
will be greatly liberal and will ho tor the
Brahmanas greatly Ideniicil with Brahma,
he ivdl love and like the Brahmanas, and
(he B>alimaitas will love and like hut

3t lhat scion of Vadu's race will libe-
rate many kings confined III (he prison o(
(he king of the Magadlias (Jarasandha)
after defeating Imn in his capital buried
among mountains.

35 Gifted with great energy, he wilt be
rich with the lewels and gems oi all rulers of
(he Earth Indeed, in energy he will be
peerless on Eaiili.

36—39 Petseised of great prowets, he
Will be (lie king of all kings of (he Earth.
Foremost among all (he Surateiias, the
puweifitl one living at Dwaraks, will rule
and pio(«c( (he entire EirDi after dHeaiing
•II her kings, conversant as lie wilt be wilh
(he science of policy Assembling together
do ye ail worship linu, as ye adore the
Eternal Brahman, with speech, flowers, and
excellent incense and perfumes He who
wishes to see me or (he Grandfather Brah-
man should first see the illustnoui Vasu-
deva of great power if He is seen I am
seen, as also the Grandlaiher Brahtnon,
(liat foremost of all (he celestials.

40 I do not find any difference in

(his Know this, O Kishis having asceti-
cism for wealth lhat person with whom
the lulus eyed Vasudeva becomes pleased,

IS liK«d by all the deities wiih Brahman
amongst (hem lhat man who will seek (he
protection of Keshava will succeed 111 ac-
I q iiring great act levemenis and victory and
I Heu/eii He will be an instructor in reli*
j gion and duties, and will acquire great fell*
gious merit.

43 All persons knowing religion and
duties sliould, with great readiness, bow
down to that Lord of all tlie gods By
adoring (hat powerful one, one will acquire
great merit.

44 Gifted with great energy, that god
with the desire of benefiinig all creatures,
ncMed mtllions u( Uislus (or the of

viiiue. •


30 &


UMiABiiAnATA


45 Those millions of Rishis, ihos created
by that great Ordainer are now living on
tl e mountains of Gandhamadana, headed
bySnatkumara and engaged in the pcr-
iortnance of penances.

46 Hence, ye foremost of Iwi-e born
ones, lliat foremost of all eloquent persons
vie, the righteous Vasndeva, should be
worshipped by all The illustrious Han the
powerful Narayana, is, indeed, liie foremost
of all beings in Heaven.

47 Adored I e adores and henored, he
honors , to them ivlio make offerings to lum,
he makes offerings m return Worshipped,
he worships in return

48 If seen always,' he sees the seers
always If one seeks Mis refuge and pro*
leciion, He seeks the seeker as His refuge iii
return O foremost of all righteous ones, if
adored and worshipped, He adores and
wnrsli ps III return

49 This IS the practice of the faultless
Vtsl nu this IS the vow that ts practised
by “ill righteous people of that first of all
deities, that poweiful Lord of all creatures

50 He IS always adored m the world
II at Eternal Being is adored by even the
celeatials Those persons who are devoted

.td film with the steadiness of a vow become
freed from calamity and fear proportionate
to his devotion

51 T he regenerate ones should always
adore Him in thought word, and deed
Itie son of I>eval(i should be seen by them
with respect ai (I in order to see Him with
respect they should undertake the perform-
ance of penances.

5* O foremost of ascetics this is the
path that f show to you By seeing Him,
you will have seen all the foremost {of celes-
tials.

53 I, too, bow my head m respect to that
I.ota of the universe, that Grandfather oi
all the woilds, Bia; powerful and huge
boar.

54 By seeing Him one sees the Trimly
Ourselves, vis, all the ceteshdfs, live m
Him,

• S5 He will have an elder brother who
will be known over all the woifd by the
name of Vala Having a plouiih for his
weipon, in form he will look like a while
1 ill In fact he will be gilied with strength
capable of uplifting the entire Perth.

56 Upon the car of that divine person a
tall palnyra, three*hc«decl and made of
goH will be his standard

57 The brad cf that migl ty>arrred hero,
tl at Liird of all the worlds, will be covered
w d» many I ugc snakes. All weapons cl


attack and defence will also come to IiirT ad
soon as he will think of them.

58— 59 He IS called Ananta (TnfinifeJ.
That illustrious One is at one with the im-
mutable Han Once nn a lime, the celestials
thus spoke to the nrighty Gaiuda, the son
of Kashyapa — Do you, O powerful one,
see if this One has any end — I hough gifted
with great energy and p6wer, Garudi, how*
ever, could not find out ihe end of this 11*
ustrious One who is at one with the Supreme
Soul.

tfo, Supporfiiig ihfi entire Earth on His
head, He lives in the netlier regions He
roves through the universe as Shesha, filled
with great ]oy

61 He is Vishnu, He is ihe illu'tnous
Ananta, He is (lie supporter of tlepurifr
He who IS Rama is Hrishikesha He who
IS Achyuta is Ananta the bearer of the

Earth

I 6i Both of those foremost of all crea*
lures are ccfestial and gifted with divi le
prowess One of ihein is armed with the
discus and ihe other with the plough Ihey
deserve every I onor and should be seen
I 63 I have through my kindness for you,
have thus described to you the nature of
Vasudeva Ibis, O ye ascetics havii g pen*
aiices for wealth, 1$ Virtue

64 1 have described all this to yon W

that ye may, with respect and care adore
Kfishna, that Foremost One of Vadu's
race. *


CHAPTER CXLVirr.

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CoirftHKrd.

Norada said

1 . At the conclusion of Mahsdeva'e
speech, loud roars were heard in the sky.
thunders bellowed, with flashes of I11.I ming.
the sky was covered with blue and thick
clouds

a The god of the clouds then poured
pure vraler like to what he does tn the sea*
son of rams A thick darkness appeared
The cardinal points could no longer be
made out.

3 Tlien on that chsfming stcred ami
eternal breast of that cetesi lat, mountsi '<
ihe assembled Risins no longer saw fhe
ghostly beings who associate with .Mahs*
deva

4 Soon, however, (he sky, cleared

I Some of (he Rislns siarled for the sacred
I waters Others returned whence they ca


ANUSHAS\NA PARVA


S^?


S Seeing Itiat wondvrul and inc<>it«
C^ivabte spectacle, tbey became fitled tn(h
surprise. Ibey bad beard tbc discourse, too,
betneen Sbankara and Uma with the same
feelings.

6. Ihat Foremost o( all Beings, ot whom
(he great Sbankara spoke to us on that
tnoiiDtain, are You You are at fine with
Eternal Drabma

7 Sometime before, Mahadeva burnt
Hitna\at wilb tus energy, Vuu have showu
us a simitar wonderful spectacle (ndeed,
we remember that by what we have seen
to day.

8 O Mighly*Armed Janarddaoa, 1 have
thus, O Powerful One, recited to You tl»e
glory of that God of gods, via , Him that is
called Kaparddin or Girisha.

BhisUma said !—

9 Ihus addressed by those hermiis’
Krist na, (he debgl (er of Oevaki, paid due
honors to all those flislin.

to. Filled wiih joy, those R»his Once
more addressed Krishna, saying,— >0 Des>
irojer of Madhu, do you repeatedly show
5ourseff (o.us at aff times

ft O Powerful One, Heaven rtself can*
nottejoico us so mucli as a sight of Your*
sell Fvct^lhing that was said by the illus
triuus Bhava is true.

la— -13 O Crusher of enemies, we have
told )0u all about that mystery, You are
jourtelf acq tainted With the truth of every
subject Since, however, asked by us. You
were kind enough to ask us in return, we
I ave, il erefore, recited everything to You
Ur only pleasing Vou. /here is notftrng in ;
the Ihreciwotlds that You do not know.

14 You are fully acquainted with the
birlh and origin of all things, indeed, with
everything that works as a cause. On ac
count of the Iif>hlness of our character, we
tarnoi keep cloje any mystery.

*5 fndeed, in Your presence, O Power*
ful Une, weiiidulgeiiiincoherencies from the
h^hlness of our hratls. Tlerets no ssonr
deiful thing which You do not know.

16 You know whatever is on Earth,
and whatever is in the celestiaf region
We lake our leave of You. O Krishna, for
irturning to our respectUe qutrieis May
A ou increase in Intelligence and prosperity.

17. O Sire, You will soon get a son after
You or even mote diviinguished than Vour*
sell HewiJIbegihed *>ih great tntr/ry
andeplei'Bour. He wiUacl 'Cve great (eats,
and liecamc possessed cf power as great *sj


Bhifilima said:—

18 After this, the great UishiS batted
to that God of gods, that scion of Yadii's
race, that Foremast of a’l Bemgs. Ihey
(hen went round Him and taking ffis leave,
departed.

*9 As regards Narayana, who fs gifted
with prosperity and blaemg ellufgence, ffo
returned (0 Owarafca after having duly ob-
served that vow of His

ao. His wife Rukminj conceived, and on
the expiration of the tenth month a sou wav
born of her, gifted with heroism and honor-
ed by eft for bis flighty wonderful accom-
plisfiments,

21. lie It at one with (hat Kama (De^
sire) which exists in every creature and
which pervades every conditicn. Indeed,
I e moves witbm the hearts of both gods and
demons.

This Krishna is that foremost of aJ.
persons tie, gifted with the cunplexinn o'
llie clouds IS that foflr.haudrd Vasudsva
Ihrough afTeciion He has taken up the
cause of the Pandavas, and j-ou also, je
sons dI Pandu, have attached yourselves to
Him.

*3 Achievemenls, Prosp*fit), Intelli*

I gence. and the Path that leads to the celes-
' tial region, are all (here where fhis One, c // ,

I the Illustrious Vivlmu of three steps, is

34 He IS the thirty-three gods headed
I by Indra Hiere is no doubt in this He
IS (he one Ancient G><t He is (I e Fore-
mostofalJ gods He n the refuge of all ’

I creatures

ay- He« «ifJioi.t beginiungand mtluat
desiruction. He is uninanifest He is the
great Oesirojer of Madhu Gilied with
inigliiy energy. He has taken birth (among
men) for doing the purposes of the gods.

Jy. This Madhavs rs the eep'rander
of (h« must dilhcuU truths about Proht or
Wealth, and He IS also tlieir achiever. □
son of Pritha, the victory sou hivegot ovee^
|0«r enemies, your peerless act levemenn,
the dooimion you have aeq iired overt'e
whole Earth, are all owing to iMVtng.
Narayana espoused your cause
aS, The fact of jour having got the in-
conceivable Narayaoa for jour prmector
and refuge, enabled jou to become an
Adharjyu (cl lel sienticer) for pjurmg muU
tirades ot iiagr ae /I'rtdsnf o« rbe f/ rromif
fircofbsiite llis Krishna wis >our great
sacnfioal Udie resembling (he all destroy*
tng (ire wtiicli appears ac (lie end of the
cjcfe

ay DjrysJ ijtl, with hit ssni, brs’hifs ^


3o8


MAilABIIARATA.


and Urntmcn, w^s mticli to be piiied m«s-
miicb as, nio\ed b) anger, be made war
willi Han and tbe vvielder of G^ndiva.

30 Manj «ons of Diti, many foremost of
Danavas, of btige bodres and vast strength,
fiave died in ilie 6re of Krishna’s discus like
insects in a forest Rre.

31. How incapable llien must human
bemLS be of figluing against iliat Krishna,
— human beings wlio, O foremost 0} men,
are sliorn of strength and power.

33 As regards Jaya, I e is a powerful
Vogtn resembling the all destroying cycle
Tire in energ> Capable of drawing the
bow equally with both hands he is always
III the van of fight tVuli Ins energy, O
king, he has killed all the soldiers of Suyo*
dhana.

33 Listen to me as T tell you what
Mahadeva liaving the bovine bull for the
emblem on his standard had recited to ihe
ascetics OR the brea<4 of Hiaiavat His
iiiierances fom a Furana.

34 1 he sdvancemeiH or greatness
energy, strength, prowess power, humihis,
audfanuh (I at are in Arjuna can form only
a thud part of the attributes Krishna.

35 \VI o ts there wl>o can transrvnd
Kiisina II these attributes 7 Whether
that IS possible nr not, listen Peerless
Fxcellence prevails wliere the itIuMrious
Kiishnn is

36 As for ourselves we are persons of
little understanding Dependent upon the
will of otfiers we are I iglily unfortunate
Knowingly we betook ourselves to the etcr>
nal path of death

37 You however, are devoted to since
ril) of coudiici Having formerly promised
not to lake your kingd iin, yon did not lake
It. desirous of keeping your promise

3$ O king, you make too much of the
destruction of your kinsmen and friends tii
battle You should irmeinber, however, O
chastiser of enemies, that it is not fair to

'U'fA'UJHSA..

39 AH those who have fallen on the
held of battle have leally been killed by
'time Indeed, all of us have been killed
by lime 'lime IS indeed, all poweiliil

40. You are fully acquainted with the
power of lime AfTlicied by rune you
sfiould not grieve Know ihat Krishna
IlimselF otherwise called Man rs that
lime with bIaod>red eyes and with club III
hand

41 Tor these reasons. O son of Ktinli,
you should not grieve (or your (slauiy kins*
lolU lie always (lee, O dchghter of the
Kurus, Irom grief.


43 You have heard nte sing tlie gf'’’’?'
and greatness (if M^idliava lhat is suAi*
cient for making a good mart bndesiand
Him

43 Having lieard the words of Vyasa as
also of the highly inielligrnt Narada, I Have
described to you the adorableness of Kfislma,
I have myself added, from my own know-
ledge snnetlifng to that account

44 Indeed I have described also on tl e
SiirpassiiTg Power of Krishna as recited bv
Mafiadeva, to that assembly nf Rishis I
have also described tciyuii the discourse too
between Mahesluvara and the daughter of
Himavsi, O’bliarata

45 He who will remember that drs-
course when coming out fro^ii a foremost
person, he who will hslen to it, and he who
will tecne II, IS sure 10 acquire what >s
highly benelscul

46 1 fiat roan will find all hiv wishes
fulfilled Dep irting Irom this woi/ld lie
ascend to ihe celestial region l^ereisno

donbi Mt il to I

47’ n 31 man who wishes to opiam whal
IS beneficMl fur I iinself, should de vote Iimh*
sell to Jxiiardiidint •

4S O king of the Kurus, yjea should
also remember iliose msidenls oil diiiy*'<^
virtue which were declared by MkheshwarH,

49 If you act accordmg to /those prc'
cepis if you carry the rod of |iunishinent
righify, if you protect your sirl|ijeeii pr*>*
perl) yon may be sure of at^>iimi>g t*
Hie celestial.

50 You should, O king, protect jout
subyects always accordmg to the dictates
of virtue Hie strong r(>d of punishment
winch the kings bear has been sdid to be
the embodiment of his virtue or merit.

51. Hearing tins discourse frai^ht
wiih righteousness, between Shanknra fl"d
LTma. rfiai I have recited before this pioo*
assemblage one should adore with lesprct
Hist god having the bull for the lievKe ©•>
‘iiis'uanner,

52 One who becomes even desirous of
hsiemiig to tliat discourse, should adore
Mah-ideva with respect Indeed the person
who wishes to obtain wliat is beneficial for
him, should woislnp Mahadeva with a pure
heart.

53 1 his IS the behest of the sinless and
liigli sonled Harada lie t>as commanded

such adoration of the great god O son
of Pandu, do you obey Ibat Command of
Narada.

54 O powerful king, these are the w*^'
deifut incidents which took place on (he


ANLSrfASARA FARVA


309


ACred breast cf Himatat abeut Vasudeva
and Stbaiui O son of Kimti Ihose events
emanaied from itie very riatmt of those
great deities

55 Accompanied by l)e holder of
Gai diva, Vasudeva practised eternal
penances m tie hermitage of Vadaii for
ten iliousand years

56 Indeed, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya.
having ejes like lotus petals, practised
severe austerities for three entire cycles, I
have learnt this from Narada and Vyasa, O
king

57 Tie lotus eyed and nightyarmed
VrfsuJeva tvt te yet * chid performed (he
gieal feat of killing Kansa for (he fclietof
his kinsmen

58 I dare not O son of Kunli, enume*
rate tiie feats of this Ancient and Eternal
Oeing, O Yiidliishihira

59 O son forsooth, I igh and great
benefits vnK he reaped Jby yotx wihoiave
(hat foiemnsi uf all peisons, via , Vasudeva,
for your fiiend

' do I grieve for the wicked Ouryo,
dhaita about even the next world to which
he has gone It was lor him (hat the entire
Earth has been depopulated with her horses
and elephants

6l« ]i deed, through the fault of Durte,
'dhana, of Kama, of Suakuni and of Dussia,
f Sana as the fourth, tliat the Kurus have dnd

Vaishampayaita said —

6>, lie that foremost of men, «i* ,
the son of Cange, spoke <0 him (Hjs, the
Kuru king (YudhishtUira) lemamed entirely
silent in the midst of those great persons.

dj Aft the kings with Dhntarashtra
amongst them became stricken wnh wonder
I pun I earing the words of the Kuiu grand,
fad er. In their minds (hey adored Krishna
and then turned towards him with hands
clasped m reipect.

64 1 he flishn also headed by Narada,

accrpied and I >s,hl) spo»e of (i e words of
AVi,ii(yi« and approved Ol’ if em joyfulfy.

f>S llirse were the wonderful sab|ects
rrciied by 01 rsl m* nbich Ytidhxl (hira
wnh all 1 IS bii llieis heard wuh joy

66 Son eiime after, when king Yudhish.
(lira saw that ilhiii ina w( o had gno
away pirluse (icles as ptesenis to ibe
Ural manas in the sacrifees celebrated by
I >m had retted and breeme refreshed
U e h tel] gent king once more asked him
*1 follows.


CHAPTER CXLJX

fANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Conlintied

Vaishampayana said —

1 Having heard alt H e duties in full
and all (hose sacred deeds and nb|ec(s
winch purify human beings of ■) rii sms,
Vodhisi ihlra once more addiessed llie son
of 6hantattu in (he fotloamg words

yodhishthira said

2 Who may be said to be the One Ood
inihewirJd? Who may be said lo be the
One Object which is otir only refuse ? Wl o
IS He by adoring whom or singing whose
praises human beings would get what is
beneficul T

3 What religion is that which, accord,
in^ lo your pidgmei t tsde foremost of alf
teligions? What are ilioie Mantras by
feexing which B living creature becomes
freed from (he fetters of birth and life f

Bhislima Bkid —

4 One should always, diligently and
throwing away all idleness, sing (he praises
of that 1 ord ol the universe, that God u(
gods, (ois , Vasudeva) wlio is Infinite and
(he foremost of all Beings, by uttering His
ttiOusand names.

$—6 Dy always adoring with respect
and devotion that immntabte Being, by
meditating on Him, by singing His praises,
and bowing tie head to Him, and by cele.
bratmg saciifices (o Kim, indeed, by always
praising Visl nu, who IS will out beginning
and without end or destruction, who is the
Supreme l.ord of all the worlds, and wb<7
IS the biikster and Conlrnllei of the universe,
one can succeed in getting over all sorrow

7 Indeed, He is devoted to tl>e Itrah*
manas, km wing all duDrs and practices,
ihc enhancer of the farne and achievements
of all persons the Lard of all the worlds,
li^hty wonderful, and lire prime cause of
the oiigin of all creatures.

8. Hus, in my judy.ment, is the fore,
most religion of all religions ns orie
should alway* »dcre and sing the praiiet of
t>e lotus. eyed Vasudeva with devotion

9 He is the h gl est Energy He is the
t lehest i cnance He is the t ighesi Brat ma.
He IS the > ighest Kelu),e.

ro He IS (l>e most Holy of all holret (he
most sacred el all sacred objects He tsihe
God of at! tf e gods, and He tt tlieimmuable
Father of all creatures.


310


MAitABlIARATA


II On (lie advent o( ttie primitive cycle,
all creatures originate from Him On tlie
expiration, again of tlie cycle, all tilings dis-
appear in Him.

12. Hear, O king, the thousand names,
highly efficacious in dissipating sins, o( that
Foremost One in alt the worlds, that Master
of tlie universe, vts , Vishnu.

13 All those names, derived from His
attributes, secret and welt-known, of the
great Vasudeva, winch were sung by the
Rislits, 1 sIiiiU recite to you for the good of
all

14 They are, Om * He who ertters all
things besides Himself, He who covets all
things. He to whom sacrificial libations are
poured, tlie Lord of the Past, the Present,
and the Future, the Creator (or Destroyer)
of all existent things, the preserver of all
existent things the bxistent, the Soul of all
things, the Originator of all things (I — ix) ;

15 Of purified Soul, the Supreme Soul*
the Highest Refuge of ail liberated persons,
the Immutable, He who ties enclosed m a
case, the Witness, He who knows the
material case in which He lives, the hides-
ttuctible (X— xvti',

t6. He upon whom the mind tests during
Yoga meditation, the Guide or leader of
all persons conversant with Yoga, the
Lord of both Pradhana or Ptakrm and
Purusha, He who assumed a human form
with a leonine head, He of beautiful features
and equipments, He of beautiful hair, the
_ foremost of Purushas (xvili— xx^l) , ft/

17. Tlie embodiment of all things, the
Destroyer of all things He who transcends
the three qualities of Goodness, Darkness,
and Ignorance, the Motionless, the Beginning
of alt things, the source into which all things
go at the universal Dissolution, the Immut-
able, He who takes birth at his own will, He
wl o causes the acts of all living creatures (0
fiuctily, the Upholder of «11 things, the
Source frpm which the primal elements have
oritiiiaied, the Powerful One, He in whom
exists the unbounded Lordship Over all
things (xxv— xxxMi) ,

„ _ 18. The Self-Creafe, He who gives

happiness to His worstnppers, the pre-
siding Genius in the midst of the botar
disc, the Lolus-Cyed the Loud-Voiced.
He who IS without beginning and without
end, He who upholds the universe, He wlio
ordains all deeds and their fruits, He who is
superior to the Grandfather Brahman
(XXXyiJI— XLM) ,

19 The Immeasurable, the Lord 'of
the senses, He from whose navel the
pcirtitval lotus originated, the Lord of all
ihe celtslub, the. Divint Arsbiicjf, (be


Mantra. He who weakens or emaciates fll
things, He who is vast, the Ancient One,
He who IS enduring (xu 11 — L\ i) ,

20 He who IS incapable of being appre-
hended (by either the senses or the mind),
the Eternal One, Krishna, the Red-Eyed, He
who kills all creatures at the time of the uni-
versal dissolution, He who is vast for know-
ledge and power diid other attributes of tl e
kind. He who resides in three parts of every
creature, 1 hat which cleanses, is auspicious,
and high tLVj: — Lxtr) ,

21 He who urges all creatures m
their acts. He who makes the vital airs
work. He who causes all living creatures
to live, the Eldest, the Foremost of ai|
those who are considered as the Lords of
all creatures ‘ He who lias gold m his
abdomen, He who has the Earth for ffis
abdomen, the Lord of SI ree or Lakshmi, tns
Destroyer of Madhu (LXV— UXIIi) ,

22 1 he Omnipoteut, He who is endued
with great prowess, He wl o is armed with
the bow. He wfio ts possessed of a mmd cap-
able of understanding all treatises. He wjio
roves through the universe, nd mg on Garuda,
He who IS well-suited to the offerings made
to him and who has the power to enjoy
them properly, the Peerless, He who is
incapable of being discomfited, He wlo
knows all acts that are done, He who is at
one with all deeds. He who rests on His
own true self (lxxiv— Lxxxn) ,

23 The Lord of all the celestials. He
wl»« IS the Refuge of all, the einbodinient
of ihe I iVhesi happiness, He wl ose seed
IS Ihe universe He who is the source of all
things, the Day, the Year, the Snake the
embodiment of CcfiMctun, He who sees
all.lhings (lxxxt— xciT, ) ,

24 Tlie Unborn, the I nrd of all crea-
tures He who h.,5 ..iqinrLd success, He

who is bu'tess Itself, He wl o is the begin-
ning of all tl nigs, He who is above deiem-

ration, He who ‘is >iriiie in the form of d'C

bull and II e great boar tliat raised the sub-
merged Earth, He who is of immeasurable
soul. He who stands aluof fiom all kinds of
union (xcv— cm),

25 He who IS Pavaka among ihs deiu**
called Vasus, He that is of liber.^ soul,
being shorn of anger, haired, pnde
and other evil passions, 1 ruth fie >s
whose soul IS equable on account of Hi*
perfect rmpartiahiy, He who has been
measured by His adorers. He wl»o is
equal, being above all change or modifica-
tion, He who never refuses to grant l* ®
wishes of His adorers, He whose eyes are
like lotus petals. He whose deeds are always
matktd by Virtue (ciwcxnt) ,


Ar3Us7IASANA PARVA


26 He nlio dc^lrojs all creatnrM, ihe
tllany-headed, He wlio apholds Ihe universe^
He hIio t< Jl e source of the aniverse. He who
in of pure or spoiless reputaiiou, the ]mmor>
tal One, He who is Eternal and Fixed He who
has beaotilii) limbs, He t/ho has such know*
letlfcie having penance for US mark that He
>s able 10 agitate Nature for evolving ihe
oiMverse out 0/ her (cxir — CZXii);

27 He who goes everywhere, the Omni*
scient One He wlio shines forth in immodified
effcilgencr, He wiiose troops are everywhere.
He who ii coveted by alt He wVn is the Veda,
He who IS conversant with (he Veda, He tvho
rs conversant with all the branches of the ■
Veda, He who represents the branches of the
Veda, He who settles the interpretations of
the VcJhs He who has nostrpenor in trisdom
(extm— CTXXJil) ,

28. He who IS the Master of alt Ihe
worlds tfe who is (he Lord of (he celes-
tial^ He who M ihe Sn^iervisor of both
Virtue and Srn He who is both Effect and
Cause, He whn is four>sauled. He wlio is
known hy four forms (as above), He who
has fiur horns. He who has four arms
(Cxxxir— e'en) r

29 He who shines forth m effulgence.
He who IS the giver of food and chetishes
(tie good, He who does not pu( up with
those that are wicked, (or He who puts up
with the occasional transgresaions of his de*
voteet), He wl o existed before Ihe universe
came into life, He who rs stainless, He
who IS ever victorioos. He wfio defeats (he
very celrstials, He who is the matesial
cause ef the (universe, He who repeatedly
Lives in material causes (cxtu—Ct) ;

30 He who IS the younger brotfier of
Indra, He wlio took birth as a dwarf. He
who IS tall He whose acts are never fotile,
He wtia cleanses, He who is gifted with
pie*emiiirnt Cl ergy and strength. He who
transceids lidra in all aitnbates. He who
accepts nil His tvorsliippers, fJe who is the
Creaiinn Itself on account of His being the
Causes thereof, He wfio upholds His self m
the same form wfibool being ever sub/ect
to birlli, growth, or death. He who sustains
all creatures in their respective fonctrons »i»
lh« universe, He who conirolls the hearts of
alt creatures (CLi— CLXu) ,

31. He who IS worth) of being known by
those who ivish to acquire what >s (or their
highest good, Hewloistle celestial physi*
eian in tiie form ef Dlianwanfn, He who is
always engaged in Yoga, He who kills great
Asuras for establishing virtue. He who h (he '
lord of that Lakshmi who originated from
the ocear^when il was d urned by the celes-
tials and the Asuras, Hewfois honey. He
who IS above the senses. He who is gifted


with great powers of illusion. He who dis*
plays great energy, He who transcends all
in energy (ctxtti—CLXxii ) ;

3* He who transcends fall m jnlelJi*
^nce, He who transcends all in power,
He who transcendens all m abifiiy, He
who discovers the universe by the efluU
geoce Coming out from His body*He whose
body IS incapable of being seen by the eye,
He who li gifted with every beauty, He
whose %oul IS incapable of being compre-
hended by either (he celestials or (lie mortals,
He who held on His back, in the form of the
vast tortoise, the huge mountain, vMandara,
which ivas made the chornirif' rad by
the celestials and the Asuras when they
began xo churn the great ocean for getting
therefrom all the valuables h?d tn his bosom
(CtIXH,_CLXXX) ;

33 He who can shoot His arrows to
A great distance, piercing through obstruc-
tions cif every sari. He who raised the
sobmerped Earth, having assumed the
form of the powerful Boar, He on whose
bosom lives the goddess of Prosperity, He
who rs the Refuge- of the pious. He wlio
fs incapable of being won without ihorougb
devotiob, He who is the deirght of tne
eefestials. He who rescued (he submerged
Earth, He who is the Master of all elo<
quent persons, (cutxxt— CLxxxvni) >

34' He who is lull of blazing efTutgence,
He who removed the afniclions of His edorerr,
He who assumed Ihe form of a Swan for
commuiiicatihg the Vedas to the Grand-
father iBiahman, He who has Garuda, the
prince of birds for his vehicle, tie wlio is the
foremost of snakes on acCourK ol Hi* identi.

(y with Shesha or Ananta who upl>oId$ orr
his head the vast Earth, He whose nav-I 13
as beai}{,fu| as gold , He whu practised
the severest austerities in the form of Nara.
yana at Vadari on the breast of Himavat,
He wlit)$e navet resembles a lotus. He who
IS the Lord ol all creatures (CLXxxix-.^
cxcvrr) I

33 He who transcends death. He nlnr
always easts a kind eye on Kis worshippers,

He whti destroys aft thini,s, fie who is
Ihe O'dainer of all ordainers He who
Himself enpys and suffers the fruits of aff
deeds. He who assumed the form of, Rama
the son (|( Dasharaiha and going into exile
at (he Command of hrs father made a treaty
with Sugriva the king of the Vanaras for
helping Him in ihe recovery of his kingdonr
from the graep of Ins elder brotlier Vali m
return (cir the help whicli Sogriva promised
Him’ for rocorenng from Havana His wife
Sita Wlig had been earned away by that
Kakthasa to his island home in Lanka, Hq
who IS always ol ihr same form. He who 10
always moving. He who is incapable of


3


. MAHABIIARatA.


tiiiliired by Dmavas ami Asuras,
Hr vvli) punishes tl>e wicked. He
s(i»l lins true knowledge i r I's m.trk He
wtiii dest'U)s ttie enemies uf ilie celestials
(cxcviii — cevm) ,

36. He wlio Is t!ie institicior mall
sciences anti tiie fnilier of ell. He who is
Itie instriiLtur of even tlie GranOlalber
llicibm'in. He wbo is tlie abode or lesiini;
place of all creatures, He wlio is the bene>
iMctor of ibe ^ood and is free from falseiiuod.
He whose prowess is incapable ol bclot;
lliwavvtcd,«fte wfio never casts bis e>e on
such acts as are not sanctioned or approved
by tlie sciiptures, He wbo casts Ins c«c
on such acts as are sanctioned or approvrd
by tlie scriptures, He wbo wears the un>
fading |>arland of victory called by lUe
name of Vaijajanti, He who is itie Loid
of speed! and lliat is possessed ol gte^t
liberality insomucb that He rescued tl>e
lowest of tbe low and the vilest of tie vile
by Rranimi* them His favour (ccix—
eexvm) 1

37. r He wbo leads persons desirous of
Liberation to tbe foremost of all condiiiims,
via I Lmancipalion itself (or. He wboos«
aumes tbe form of a powerful Fisb and pass*
ing through tbe vast exp,tnse of waters that
cover tlie Earth when tl>e universe! disso*
lutioii sets in and dragging the bo<i tied
to His bornsi leads Menu and otl<«r« to
safeij), He who is tbe leader of aticrea*
Hires (or, He who sports in the vast expanse
of waters which cover .itl things at the
universal dissoluiian), fU wituse w rds.<re
Veda and who rescued (lie Vrd„s when
they were submerged in 11 e w^ieis at ili
univecidl dissolution , He who is lt>e «c
complisher of all lui>cli»ns in Uie univeise
He who assumes the form of (he wind for
making all living cre-itures act or exert, (or.
He wliose movements are alaa^s le*ui>Jul,
or, who wislies His creatures to glorify Him),
He who has a thousand heads. He who is
the Soul of the universe and as such per*
vades all things. He who has a ll>ousand
ejes and a ihousund legs (CCXIX—
ccxxv i),

38 He who causes the wheel of the
■'universe revolve at His will. He wirose
soul IS fieed from desiie and whois above I
those condiMons which invest the individual '
5 ul, He wl o IS concealed (lom the view of
all persons who are aitached to the word
(or, He who has covered lie e)es of all
persons with the bandage of Nescience), He
who grinds tl Ose who turn away (com Hun,
He who sets lhe*days agoing, on account of
His being at one with tlie Sun, He wlio is
the desiiyiyer of an*desiro>ing lime itself,'
He who conve)S the libations poured on I
the sacred hre lo those tor whom they are j


tnleiirli'rl (or. He who be»rs |Iie ijniveMB
pliong It on only a minute pvrt of Ins body),
llewto his no beginning, (or, HowIoImS
n • fixed habitiiinn) He tliat upholds tlie
E-rrth (in «p<ce in the form ol bheshn or
rescues tier in tlie form cl the powerful boar,
or supports her as a suliiile pervaJer)
(CCXXVII— CCXXXV) ,

39 He who IS exceedingly inclined to
grace, iiimmiicli that He grants happiness
til even enemies like Shislnip ila , He who'
lias been fieed fiom tlie qualities of goOd*-*

I oc<S, del (mess and ignorance so tfiai ffe is
pure or stainless Satlwalry it<°eH, (or, tie
who has obtained the fruiiion of all His
desi(es). He who supports the univeise, He
whofeeds (or enjoys) tl>e universe. He who is
displayed m infiinte power, He who honors
(he Cclcsiidls, tlie departed manes, and His
own worshippers. He who is honored or
adored by those tliat are themselves honored
or adored by others, (or, He whose acts are
all heautilul and enduring), He who aceom*
phshes the purposes of others, He who

J withdraws all Ihings unto Himself at (liB

; umveisal dissolution, (or, He who de»iro}*
ibe foes of the celestials or of His worship*
pers). He who has the waters for his home,
h>r, He who is tlie sole Kifuge of all crea*
luies), or He that destroys the ignorance of
,<11 creatures (ccTXxt/— ccxLvr) }

40 He who IS distinguished above all*
He wIh) cheiishes the virtuous, He w'ho
cle-nises all the worlds, He who crowns will>
fruiiion the desires ol all creatures, He
wli.»e wishes ate always crowned with
(luitum, He who gives success lo *T1. He

I wl*o bestows Success upon those who solicit
Him (or iifccxLVJi— cCLM) j

41* He who presides over all sacred
days, (or. He who overwlielnis Indra himself
wilb His own excellent attributes}. He who
showers all objects of desire upon His wor-
st ippers, He wlio walks over all ll>e imi*
verse. He who offers the excellent flight of
steps formed by Virtue, He who has Virtue
III His abdomen, (or, He who protects Indra
even as a mother piotecis ihechild in I'cr
womb). He who aggrandises (His worship-
pe'S), He who spreads Hinivelf out (or
becoming ll e vast universe, He who is alo t
from all ib ng«, He who is the receptacle
of He oiean ol bhiuiis (ccLVii — ccuciv) ,

43. He wlio IS possessed 0/ exceile"*
arms, He wiio is incapable of being borne
by any creature. He from whom flowed tj'B
sounds called Brahma (or Veda), He who
IS the Lord of all Lords of the universe.

He who IS ihe giver of riches, He who hve*

III Ills own power. He who ,is mliltifurm,

He who IS of vast form, He wlio fives m
tbe foiQ) cf Saciifice in all animals, He who


314


MAllABHARATA


}le wbo bean or forgtves all in]iiries, lie
ulio npliotds the Earlb in tl<e form of her
mountains. He is the foremost of all
objects of adoration, He who is gifted witli
great speed, He wlio swallows vast quanli*
tjes of food {ccCLxv— ccctxxiv) j

54. He who caused the creation Is atari
into be^ing, He who always agitates both
Nature and Soul, He who shines with
resplendence (or, sports in joy), He who
has power m his stamach. He who is the
Supreme Lord of alt, He who is the mate*
rial out of which the universe has been
made. He who is the cause or Agent who
has made the universe, (fe who is fndepen*
dent of all things, He who ordane variety
m the universe, He who is incapable ol
being comprehended. He who renders
Htmself invisible by the screen ol illusion
(CCCLXXV— ccct-xxxv) ,

S3 He who IS understanding divested of
all qualities, He on whom all things rest,
He in whom all things live when the um*
Ncrsal dissolution comes. He who assigns
the foremast place to ttiose who worship
Kim, He who is durable. He who is gifted
,with the highest power. He who has been
glorified in tlie Vedanta, He who is conten*
led. He who is always full, He whose
glance is auspicious (cccc.xxxti— cccxcr),

56 He who fills all Yogini with joy
He who >i the end of all creatures fie who
1$ the faultless Path, He who is, in the
form of ^entiency. lead to Liberation, He
who leads (Jiva to Emancipation), He who
has none to lead Him, He who is endued
with great might, He who is the foremost
of all Beings possessed of might, He who
upholds He who is the foremost of all
Beings knowing duty and religion (cccxcvi
— CDI\) ,

37 He who joins, at the timeof creation,
the disunited elements lor forming all
objects. He who resides in all bodies. He
who causes all creatures to act m the form
ol Kshetrojoa, He who creates all creatures
after destroy ing them at the universal dis*

* solution, He to whom every one bows with 1
respect, He who i« extended over the entire I
, universe He who owns the primeval golden
egg as His abdomen whence everyibmg pro-
ceeds. He who destroys the enemies ol the
^ celestials, He who over>spreads all things.
He who spreads sweet perfumes, He who
disregards the pleasure of the senses (cdt—
CDXV) ,

58 He who IS at once with the seasons.
He at whose sight alone all adorers succeed
in obtaining the great object of their wish.
He who weakens all creatures. He who
lives in the sky of the heart, depending
upon Hts own glory and power, He who is


capable of being known everywhere, He
wliO fills everyone with dread, He in whom
all creatures live. He who ts clever in
doing alt acts He wh« forms the Rest of
all cteatures, He who is more powerful than
other Beings (CDxri— CDxxv) ,

59 He in whom the whole universe is
spread out, He who is himself immobile aad
tn wham all dungs rest for ever, fie who is an
object of proof, He who is the ndestructible
and unchanging seed. He who is sought
by ali. f!e who has no desire, He who is
the great case (winch covers (he universe),
He who has all sorts of things to enjoy, He
who lias great wealth wliereivith to secure
all objects ol desire (CDxxvi — CDtxxlv) ,

60 He who is above despair, He who
exists <n (he form of Renunciation, fie who
IS without birth. He who is tlie stake to
which Virtue is bound, He who is the great
embodiment of sacrifice, fie is the nave
of the starry wheel that revolves in the sky,
He who IS the Moon among the constel-
lations He wlio IS eampatani to perform
every feat, He who slays in His own soul
when all things disappear, He who
cherishes the desire for Creation (CDXXXV^
coxuv) ,

6( He who is (he embodiment of all
sacrifice, He n)>o 1$ adored in all saertficH
and religious rues, He who » the most
adorable ol all (lie deities present in ths
sacrifices that men perform, He who is the
embodiment ol aH such sacrifices 1 1 whidt
animals are offered up accordi >g to the
ordinance, He who is adored by persons
before they take any food fie who is the
Refuge ol those who seek Liberation, He
I who sees the acts and omissions of all crea-
tures, lie whose soul is above atf attri-
butes, He who IS possessed of omniscience.

He who IS identical with knowledge that IS
unacquired, unlimited and capable of doing
everything (coxtv— -cdlit; ,

62 He who IS observant of excellent
vows, He whs has a face always full of joy,
He who IS exceedingly subtile, He who
utters the most agreeable sounds, He who
gives happiness, He who doe* good to
others without expecting any return. He
who fills all creatures with joy. He who
has subdued anger. He who has mighty
arms. He who tears the impious (CDtT-“
CaLXlT) ,

6j. He who causes those persons who
are desiiiule of knowledge ol the soul
be steeped in the deep sleep of HisiHu*
sign. He who relies on himself, He who
overspreads the entire universe, He who
exists m infinite forms, He who engaged
in vocations infinite In number, He wti#
fives in everything He who is Ml aB^*
Uon towards all His worshippers. He wl>o


ASUSIIASANA PARVA


3»5


is the univerial failitr, He wlie holds in
the form of the vait Ocean, all jewels and
Cems in His abodemen He who is the
Lordef all treasures (cDLxT — COLXXiT) ,

64. He who IS the protector of ^tue,
He wlm accomplishes all the duties of
Virtue, He who is the substratum ol Virtue,
He who IS existent for aft lime, He who is
i>on*ex>stent. He who is destructible. He
who IS indestructible as Chit, He who is, in
the form of Jiva, destitute of true know-
pledge, He who IS in the form of the Sun,
gifted with a thousand rays, He who
ordains He who has created all the Scrip-
tures (CDLXXV— CDLXXXV),

65 He who exists, in the form of the
Sun, as the centre of innumerable rays of
light, He who lives in all creatures, He
whe IS endued with great prowess, He
who IS the Master of even Varna aod
others of similar power. He who is the
oldest of the deities He who exists in Hts
own glory, renouncing all conditions. He
who IS the Lord of even all the deities.
He who IS the ru'er of even turn who up-
holds the deities (vitf , Indra) (cDutixw—
CDSCIIl) ,

He who transcends birth and death.
He wtio tended and protected kme, He
who nourishes all creatures, He who is
spproacluble by knowledge alone, He who
IS Ancient, He who uplwids the elements
winch form the body, tie wfio enjoys and
suffers ffe who assumed the form of a
huge Boar, He who gave plentiful presents
to all in a grand sacrifice performed by Him
(CDXCIV— DII) ,

He who drinks Soma in ev'ry sacri-
fice, He who (In lies nectar, He who in the
form of Soma (ChandramasJ nourishes all
lie 1 erbs and plants. He who conquers
enemies in a moment when even they are
inlinite in nu nber, He who u of universal
form and is the foremast of all existeu
bodies He who is (he chastiser, He who
is v ctorious over all. He whose purposes
are never baffled, He who deserves gifts.
He who gives what {Iis creatures hare not
and who protects what they have (diii—
oxn)t

63 Ho who holds the life breaths, He
who sees all His creatures as objects of
direct Vision, He who never sees anything
besides His own Self, He who gives Libera-
tion, He whose footsteps covered Heaven
Carlh, and the Nelher regionf, lie who }s
the receptacle of all the waters, He who
everwhetms all Space, atl Time, and aK
things, He who ties on the vast expanse «[
waters after the unberssi dissolution. He
who causes the desruclion of all things

(DXlIt— DXXI) ,


69 He who IS without birth. He who is
exceedingly adorable He who appears in
His own nature, He who lias conquered
atl enemies, He who delights those who
meditate on Him He wlio is jsy. He who
fills others witli delight. He who swells
with atl causes of delight, ffe who has
rriith and other virtues lor His indications.
He whose footsteps are in the tliree worlds
(oxxti — czxz ) ,

JO He who « the first of Rish s. He
who is identical With the' preceptor Kapila,
He who IS knower of the universe, He who
IS Master of iheEirth, He who has three
feet, He wlio is the guardian of the celes*
Hals. He wlio has Urge liorns, He who
exhausts all acts by causing^ their doers
to enjoy or suSer then fruits (Dtxxi—
DSXXVIft),

71, The great Boar, He who is under-
stood or apprehended by the help of the
Vedanta, He who has beautiful troops. He
who IS adorned with golden armlets, lie
who isconceald, He who is deep He whe
IS diffi.ult ol access, He wlio transcends
both word and thought. He who is armed
with the discus and the mace (oxzix«-
DXLVit) , ’

ji The Ordainer, He who is the cause
(in liie form of helper) of the universe He
who lias never been defeated He who is
(he Istand Born Krishna, He who is endur*
ing, He who mows all things and it Him-
self above decay, the Varuna, the son of
Varuna, lie ivlio it immovable as a tree,
He who IS shown m His own true form in
the lotus of tiie heart He who creates,
i preserves and destroys by His will (dxlvIii
— DLVili) ,

73 He who IS possessed of the sixfold
atinbutes, He who destroys (he sixfofd
attributes. He who is felicity. He who is
adorned with the triumphal garland He
who IS armed with the plough, He wlio
took birih from the womb of Adili, He
who IS endued with solar «ffulgenc<*, He
I who endures alt pairs of opposites, He who
■s the foremost Refuge of all things (oux--* --

I

I 74 He who IS arm'd with the best of ■
{ bows (called Sharnga), He who was di-
' vested of His battfe-axe (by Rama of
Bhngu's race) He whr is fierce, He who
IS the giv'r of all objects ol desire, He who
IS so tall as to touch the very Heavens with
Ins head, He whose vision extends over the
entrre universe He who ts Vyata, He
who IS the Master of speech or all learning,
He who has come into being w ihcut the
intervention ol genital organs (dxztjm-^

XtXXXTI) ,


MAIIAbHARATA


3t6


75 He wlio IS hymned *uh lb« three
(loremosO Samans, He who Is ihe singer of
the Samans, He who U tlieSaman*. He
who 13 ihe Exlinclion of *11 worldly attach*
menls, He who is the Medicine, He who
IS the Pfiysictan, He who has ordained the
fourth or last mode of life called Uemmcia*
tion, He who causes the passions of Itis
worshippers to be controlled, He who is
contented He who is the Kelutreof devo*
lion and tranquillity of Soul (DLTXMt —

DLXXXV) ,

76 He who IS possessed of beautiful
limbs, He who is the giver of tranquillity of
soul He who IS the Creator, He who sports
in ]oy on the bosom on the Earth, He who
sleeps (in Voi;a) lying on the body of (he
prince of snaltes, blieslia, after the universal
dissolution, the Benefactor of kine, the
Master of the universe, the Protector ol
the universe. He who is endued with eyes
like those of t 1 e but] He who chciisbes
Virtue with love (dlxxxvi — Dxcv) ,

77. He who IS the unreturning hero, He
whose soul has been withdrawn from all
attaehmentsf He who reduces to a subtile
form the Mtiiverse at the time of the univer*
O' sal dissolution, He who does good to His
afn eted worshippers, He whose name, as
s6on as heard, purges the of all h'ls

sins, He who has the mystic mark (Shribatsa)
on His breast f!e in wliom lives the god*
dess of Prosperity for ever, He who wAs
chosen by Lalcshmt as her husband. He
who IS the foremost one of all Beings gifted
with prosperity (dxcvi— DCIv) ,

7S He who gives prosperity to Hw
worshippers, the Master ol prosperity. He
svho always lives with tliose who are end leJ
with prosperity He who is the receptacle
of all kinds of prosperity, He who gives
prosperity to all persons of rig< teous deeds
proportionitte to their virtue, He who holds
the goddess of Prosperity on his bosom
He who confers prosperity upon those that
bear of, praise, and meditate on Him He
who IS the embudiment of that condition
* which represents the attainment of uaaltain*
able happiness He who is possessed of
every kind of beauty, He who is the Refuge
( of the three worlds (dcv-— Dcxiv) ,

179 He who has beautiful eyes. He who
has beautiful limbs He who is a hundred
sources of delight He who represents the
highest delight He who IS the Master of
all the luminaries in the sky, He who has
subjugated His soul. He whose soul » not
governed by any superior Being, He who
IS always of beautiful deeds,! He whose
doubts have all been removed for He sees
the whole universe as a myrobalatn in His
palm (dcxv — dcxxiu) ,


So lie who Is above at! creatures,
Ite whose vision extends in all directions.
He who has no Master, He who at all times
IS above all changes, He who (in the form
of Rama) had to lie down on the naked
earth, Ite who adaens the Earth, He who is
power incarnate, He who IS above all grief,
lie who removes 11 e griefs of all his wor*
shippers as soon as they remember Him
(dcxxJV — DCxxxil) ,

8t He who IS possessed of efTulgence,
Me wfio It adored by all, He who is He
WAter*pat, He who is of pure soul, He
wito purifies all as soon as they liear of
Him He who is free and uiuestraincd
He whose car never turns away from bat*
ties. He who has irnmriise riches, He
whose prowess IS incapable of being rmea*
sureii (ccxsxni— dcxli),

,82 He who IS the destroyer of the Asura
named KaUnemi, He who is the Hero,
who has taken l>isth in the family of
Shura, He who is the Lord of all the
celestials the Soul of the H tee worlds , the
Master of the three worlds He who has the
solar and I mar rays fir Hit hair, the del*
troyer of ICeshi, He who Jestroyt all thing
(at (he universal dissoIuHoti (oC'tLtl'^DCL) 1

83 The deity from whom Ihe fruition of
all desire 13 sought, Mb who grants the
wishes of all, He who has desires He who
has a handsome form He who is endued
with perfect knowledge of Shmiiaand Smri*
tis He who IS possessed of a form which
IS indescribable by attributes, He whose
brightest rays • verwhelm Heaven, He who
has no end, He who (in the form of Arjuna
or Nara) acquired immense riches on the
occasion of Jus campaign of conquest (OCti
— DC lx) ,

84 He mho IS the foremost obiect of
silent rec tations of sacrifices of tlie Vedas,
and of all religious deeds He who is tie
creator of penances and ihe like, He who is
ol the form ol Brahman He who is the
augineiitor of penances He who is conver*
sent with Brahma, He who is of the form
ol Brahmana He who has for His limbs
Him who IS called Brahma, He who knows
all the Vedas and everyihmg 10 the uu*
verse. He who is always fond of Brah*
manasand of whom lie Brahmanas also
are fond (dclxi — dclxx) ,

83 He whose footsteps cover vast areas,
He whose feets ara mighty He who •*
gf/ted With great energy. He who i» at
with VasulS the king of the snakes, He
"who is^ the foremost of alt sacrifices He
who IS the foremost ol all sactificers, H*
who IS Yepa, the first of sacrifices«He who
is the foremost of all offerings made in sa*
crifiees (dcixxi— dclxxvjh) ;


maiu)ii)arj(t;i.


318

^Is e>e, He who Is worthy of adoration by
Brahman I imself and other foremost ones
in the bniverse, He w>io is the giver of food.
He who assumed liorns at tf^ time of tlie
universal dissolution, Ho who has always
subjugated His enemies most wonderfuUyt
He who knows all tilings, He who is ever
victonous over those who are of irresistible
prowxss (dccxc— Dccxcix) ,

99 He whose hmbs are I ke cold. He
who IS incapable of being agitated, He
who IS Master of all those who are masters
of all speech, He who is the deepest take.
He who IS the deepest pit, He wlio trans*
tends the itilluence of lime, He in wliom
the primal elements are established (dccc —

PCCC\ I) ,

100. He who gladdens the Earth, He
who grants fruits winch are as agreeable as
the yasmtmm fuhtsceus flowers, fie who
gave away the Earth to ICasiiyapa, He
wiio removes the three kinds of misery like
a rain.charged cloud cooling the heat of the
Earth by Its dawn>pour, tie who purifies
all creatures, He who lias none to urge
Him, He who drank nectar, He who has
an undying body, He who is possessed of
emnucience. He who has face and ejes
turned lowerds every direction (dcccvii—
dcccxvi) >

101. He who IS easily won, He who has
performed excelletit vows. He vrlio is
crowned with suceess by Hnnself, He whe
IS 2 vieiorious over all enemies, He who j
scorches ail enemies, He wlio is the ever* j
growing and tall Banian that overtops all ^
other trees. He wlio 1$ the sacred fig tree, !
He who IS the J^irns re/i^uoM, (or. He who
IS not durable, in conse<} lence of Hts bcii^
alt perishable forms in iiie universe even as
He IS all the imperishable forms which e^isi.
He who IS the slayer of Chanura of the
Andhra country (dcccxvii— dcucxxv) ;

103. He who IS endued with a thousand
rays, He who has seven longues, He who
has seven flames. He who has seven tiorses
for carrying His vehicle, He who is form*
'less, 'He wtio is sinless, 'He wlio is tncon*
ceivable, He who removes alf fears.
He who destroys all fears (ncccxxvi —
iicccxxxiv) t

103. He who IS minute, He who is
gross. He who is emaciated. He who is
adipose. He who is gifted with attributes.
He who IS above all attributes, He who m
unsellable. He who suffers Himself to be
easily seized (by His worshippers), He who
lias an excellent face, He who has lor His
descendants li>e people of tlie accidental
regions. He who extends the creatioii con*
sisling of the TiyJoid primal clemcfils
(DCCCXXXV-^CCCXLX I) ,


104. He who bears heavy weights {irl ,
the form of Ananta), He who has been
: declared by the Vedas, He who is devoted
to Voga, He who is the Lord of all Vogins,
He who IS the giver of all desires, He who
affords an asylum to those that xeek it, fid
who se's Yogins to practise Yoga anew
after ilieir return to life upon the ccnclusion
of their blessed life in Heaven, He who
invests Yogiiis with power even a[ier the
exhaustion of their merits, He who has
goodly leaves, He who causes the winds to
blow (DCCCXLVII — DCCCLTI) ,

105 He who IS armed with the bow, He
who IS conversant witli the science of arms,
He who IS the rod of punishment. He who
IS chastiser, lie wlio executes all sentences
of punishment, lie who has never been
defeated, lie who is competent in all acts,
He who engages all persons in their respec*
live duties. He who has none to set Him to
any work, iie who has no Yaina lo kill
Him (DCCCLVU— DCCCtXTl) ,

106 He who IS gifted with heroism and
prowess, He wIm has the quality of ^altwa
(Goodness), He who is identical with Iruth,
He who IS devoted 10 truth and Virtue, lie
who IS sought by iliose who are determined
upon acquiring Liberation, He who deserves
to have all objects which Hit worshippers
preSen) to Hits, He who is worthy of being
adoted. He who does good to all, He who

I increases the delights of all (dccclxvii— *

I uccclxxy) ,

I toy He whose track L through ihe sky,
j He wlio shines ki His own effulgence, He
I who is gifted with great beauty. He who
I cats the oHerings made on the sacrilkiAl
fire. He who lives everywliere and is gifted
With supreme power. He who socks tl>o
moistive oi the Earth in the form of the
Son, He wlio has various desires. He wlio
. brings forth all things, He who is lho
parent of the universe. He who has if ^
Sun for His eye (ccccLXXvi— DCcruDCXv) .

io9 He who is Infinite, He who accepts
ail sacrificial offerings He who en)’y*
IVifiure arfiie'iorin oi iftinb, iie v/im
happmess He who has t-iken repeated
births. He who is the First Born of all
existent things He who is above despair.
He who forgives the pious when tliey inpr
lie who IS the foundalion of Hie universe,
He who IS roost wonderful (uccctxxxvl-^
DCCCXCV) ,

109. He who IS existent from tlie begin*
Ring of lime. He who is existing from
beiare the birth of ilic Grandfather and
others. He ivlio » of a taivny color. He
who atsurred the form of itie grev
He who exists even when all tilings are
dissolved. He wlio is tlie giver ol all bless*


AKUSIMSANA PAnVA.


lie iirlid creates bleSMnf, llewhals
ii)eniiflable«uhall btestin^t Helv>ioe«>|ay9
bleninci. He wl>a is able to scatter blcM«
IKg (ccccscvi— cuvj j

tie. He utiQ IS wtitieut an(*rrt tfesvfia
bet ensconced in folds. He «tio fs armed
«itb tlie discus. He who is {■■Ited «ith itceat
process, He wl*ose jw»y is (>overned by tlie
crest prrcepts o( the Shruits and the
Smriiit, He atx) is incapable of bemc dcs<
ctibed by sptech. He whom the Vedsntas
fiave tried to c:tpress with tlie help of
speech, fte who ts (lie dew which cools
those who are aRlicted with the three kinds '
of criel. He who lives In all bodies, C'fted
wiOi the power of removing darkness
(CMTl—CUXtT),

III. He who is shorn of ancer. It« sslto
IS etpert in doing all acts by (haught. word,
and deed. He who can do all acts within
the shoiiest time, lie who destroys the
Wicked, He who is the foremost of all for*
giving persons, He who is foremnse of aft
persons gifted With knowledge, He who ts
above all fe^r, lie wtiose names and deeds,
heard and recited, lead to virtue (cuav-*
CtfXXK) ,

Its. He who rescues the Virtuott from
the tempestuous ocean of the svortd, lie
who destroys Hie wicked, He s»tv> Is Virtue.
He who removes all evit dreams, He who
destroys all bad paths for leading llis
worshippers 10 (lie good path of t.4bera|ion,
He who protects the universe by staying
tn the quality of Goodness, He who walks
along tie good path. He who is Life, fie
who exists overspreading the universe
(cstxsnt— csisxxt) ,

113 He who IS of infinite forms He who
IS gifted with infinite prosperity. He who
has subdued anger. He who destroys the
fears of the pious. He who gives lust (runs,
on every side, to sentient beings accor*
ding to their thouehis and deeds, fie who
IS of immstsurable Soul. He who bestows
various kinds of fruits on worthy persons
for their various deeds, He wt o issues
various commands, He who attaches (o every

114 He who has no begining, If« who
U the receptacle of all causes ns well as of
the E«rlh, He who has the goddess of
Prosperity always by f IS side, He who is
the teremost of all heroes. He who is adorn*
ed with beautiful armlets, lie who produces
all creatures He who is the original Cause
of the birth of all cr^aturei, Ut who is the
terror of all the wicked Asuras, Me who is
gifted With terrible prowess (cjwu—

CStSLIX) , e

115 fte who IS the receptacto and abode
cf the five primal (fements, He wbd gulps


315

down Hrs ihrdaf all crealufei at the time el
the universal dissolution. He whose smile
ii at pleasant as the sight of flowers, He
who IS always svafcefui. He who stays at
the head of all creatures. He whose con*
d ict consists of those acts which the Pious
do, He who who revives the dead, lie who
IS ihe mystic syllable Ou, He who has
ordained all pious deeds (cut'-'CsiLVi ti} ;

Itfr He who d splays Clie truth about tlie
Supreme Snub He who Is ihe abode of tbs
five life breaths and the senses He who is
the food which maintains alt living crea«
tores, Hewhocauses atf living creatures (o
live wijli the help of the vital air called
IVana, He who Is the great subject 0! everyt
I ^stem el philosophy. He s/lio 11 the One
' ooul in the universe, He who is above bit ih,

' decrepitude,aiid death (cULia-~cu:.s>},

tif4 He who rescues the universe eis
account el the kacred syllables Ohuh, Bhu*
*ah, Swah, and the others with winch
lIoma.ofTennLS are made. He who is (he
gre>t rescuer, He who {s the father of all.
He who It the faiher of even the Grand*
lather (Brahman), He who is of the form
of Sacrifice, ife who is the Lord of all an*
crifiees, He who is the eeenHeer, He who
has sacrifices fur His limbs. He svhd
upholds all saCTifiees (cuuvi— culxxt) i

ItS. He who preteets sacrifices, He
who has created saenfiees, He who is the
foremost of all performers of sacrifices. He
who enjoys the rewards of all sacrifices. He
wlio causes the celebration of all 'sacrifices.
He who completes ail sacrifices by accepting
llte full hbauon at the end, tlewhoisnt
one with such sacrifices as are performed
wnhout desire of fruit, He who Is the food
which sustains aft living creatures. He who
>s also |lie eater of that food (CtiLuxvi— *
OllXXXiv) ,

tip He who IS Himself the cause of Hla
existence, He who is setf.born ffe who
penetrated through the solid Earth, He
wtio sings the Samans He who is the de*
ligfiter of DevaVi, Me wtio is the Creator
, of all. He wlo is the I ord of Esrth, He
' wrhr .v.UiejtMirryo-.rjif ilmjsinsjif Wflr*
shippers (i.sit.xxxT*-csixcii} ,

120 He who bears the conch (Pancha*
}anya} n H>s baud. He who bears ihe
sword of knowledge and illusion. He who
gets itie wtieel of the cycles to revolve cease*
lessly. He who invests Himself with con*
sciousness and the senses, He who <s gifted
witli the mace of the most solid understand*
ing. He who is armed with a cartwheel.

He who IS incapable of being agitated, He
who IS armed with all kinds of weapons
(CStXCJJJ— m).

OM; SAtUTATJoyts TO HIM*


ANUSHASANA FARVA


32J


CHAPTER CL.

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
CcnhrtNtd,

Tndliislithira said
" i. O Rtandfalher, O yfl'i ot ww-

dom, O yoi wtio kn >w atl brai'ct'Cf knovv
«iiat that subjfct o( sd«nt rfctta*
tinn by ivciiiling winch ev»ry day one
may win the'meiit o( virtue in a large
measure 7

3. What IS that Mantra fnr recitatinn,
which gives success, if reeiteii on (he necasion
of starting on a journey or in entering a
new bmldiiig, or at tlie beginning d( any
iindertakiue, or on the occasion of sacrifices
m liouor of (lie deities or of the manes 7

*{. You should tell rne what, indeed, what
M4ntra it is, which propitiates aft (nalevO'>
lent iiiniiences, or brings on prosperity or
growth or protection from evil, or the des«
iriiciinn u< enemies, or if e dispelling of
fears, and which, at ttie Same (ime, <s can>
sistciii will) the Vedas.

BhUUma said

4 Hear, O king, with rapt attention, '

what that Mantra is which was declared by i
Vyasa, ]t was oidamed by Savitr» and is ,
highly excetlent. It is capable of puidynig
a person forthwith of all his snn. ^ I

5 Hear, O sinless one, as I recite to I

you the ordinances about that Manira. fn. |
deed, O chief of ihe sous of Paudii. by .
listening to those ordinances, one becomes I
purged of all his sins. , j I

6 One who recites this Mantra day and I

night becomes never suKied by sin, ( sftall i
now declare >( to >014 what that ATautra is 1
Do you listen with rapt attention. '

7. Indeed, the man who hears it becomes
pitted with longevity, O piince, and aitam*
lug to ibe fruition ol all bis desires, sports '
bappiiy both in this fife and in the next.

8 This Mantra, O king, was daily re-
cued by the foremost nl royal sages per-
turming Kshatriya dimes and' steadify o6>
serving the vow of truili.

g Indeed O foremost of SiingS, (hose
monarchs who, wiih controlled senses and
tranq id soul recite this Mantra every
day, succeed in winniug unrivalled pr«s>
pemy.

to Salutations (0 Vashisfitlia of liigli
vows, after liaving bowed with respect (o
Farashara, that Ocean of the Vedas Salu
taiions to the great snake AnJiita, and
salcitatioos to all th<j*e who are crouneti
with sucAss, and who are ol undecayutg
glory, i k I t-


if ‘SahilaUnns to (ho Risfiis, and'19
Him who IS (he Highest of the High, th^
god of gods, and the giver of boons 10 ^!f
those thst are foremost. Salutations unto
tlimof a ibniKand heads, Hun that IS most
auspicious, Him who has a thousand names,
f ra , Jariarddaua. ^

li—fj Aje, Ekapada, Ahivradhna, tlm
itfivanqnished Pi'iakin, liiia, Piinnipa, iho
II ree-eyed Mahesliwara, Vrisbakapi, Sham*
bhit, H-tvana, and UhwAra,~lliese are tha
Celebrated eteven Rudras, who are the lords
of all tfie worlds. I

14— 'IS Ihese eleven 'high.souJed ones
have been meulinned as a hundred in the
Shaiarnrlra (of ih^ Vedas), Anesha,
Rhaga, Mura, Vanina the lord nf waters,
Olia'ri, Aryaman, Jayanta, Bhaskara,’
Taslilrf, PiMfian, Iltdra, and Vislimi. are
said in cimprtse a tale of twelve, Thestt
twelve are called Ad tyas and lliey^ are
the sons of Rasliyapa as the Shruti de*'
cfares.

t6 Ohara, Dhruva, Soma, Savifira,
Alula, Anala, Praiyusha, ami prabhava,
are the eight Vatus. named in the scrip*
lures.

17. Hasalya and Dasra are said (nh«
the (wo Ashwins. they are (he toiii of
Mariaoda born of )>it wife Samjua, from
whose nostrils they emanated. •,

(6 Alter Hus I shall recite the names of
those wlio are Ibe witnesses of all deeds in
the worf Is I I bey talce note of all saci ifices,
of oil K'ffs, ol sli good deeds. '

r^^ao. Those lords among the deitieS
see everything although they are tnvisibU,
Indeed, (li*y see all the gnr) 1 and bad deedsl
of aft trrings. (bey are Mnt^U fCtla, (be
Vtsfiwedevas, lire Pitris having forms, (ha
Urvat Risbis having penances for wealth, (he j
Mums, and others crowneil with success and
devoted to penances and Liberation, ^

at. These of sweet smites ennfer vaneSs
hewfits upon (lose men who recite their*
names Indeed, gifted as they are with*
celestial energy, they emfer various regions'
JisiveAwt iyi .(fir

upon such men J*

32 Jhey live in all ihe worlds snd af.
tenimly mark all deeds By /eciting the
names of those lords of all living Creatures, T
one always becomes gifted with rigliteons* c
ness and weelPi and enjoyments in profu*-
sion.

33 Oneacqiires Iwreafter diverse re*
gin s of Biispicioiisness and happiness crea*

(ed by the Lord of Die universe. f

j8 ’’Iliese thirty-three deifies -Who
are the lords of all beings, as alsoNsnd?*
sbwara of huge body, and that pre-emineni^


33i -


MAIIaOiIARATA.


one «ho li;*s ti e bull for llie emblem on his
banner, and tfioie masters of all the worlds,
tnt., the followers and associates of him
called Ganeshwara and those called Sau*
myas, and those called the Raudras, and
those called the Yo^as, and those who are
hnown as the Bhutas, and the Inminartea
in the firmament, the Rivers, the sky, the
kin^ of birds (ri* , Gsruda), all those
persons on Barth who have become crowned
with success on account of llieir penances,
and who are existing in an immobile or
mobile form, Himav«t. all the mountains
the four Oceans, the followers and coinpa*
nions of Bhava who are gifted witli prowess
eqiMl to that of Bliava himself, the illustrt*
ousandever victori lus Vishnu and Skanda,
and Amvika — these are (he great souls by
reciting whose names with controlled senses,
one becomes purged of all his sms.

sg — yi. After, this, 1 shall reciie the
(tames of those foremost Rishis who are
known as M^navas I hey are Vavaknla,
and RaibU^a and Arvavasu and Faravasu,
and AUshija, and Kakslnvat, and VaU
the son of Angiras then is Kanwa the
80n of the Rithi Maiidliaiitlii. and Varl*
ahada.

*3t. All these are gifted with the energy
e! Brahma and have been spoken of as
creators of the universe, Ihey have ongi«
flated from Rudra and AnaU and the
Vasus Bv reciting their names people get
great benents.

'3S. Indeed, by doing good deeds on
Earth, people sport happily in the celestial
region, with the ceiesiials, Ihese Rislns
are the priests ol Indra, They live in tlie
East, I '

’■33 That man who, with rapt attention,
recites the names of these Rishis succeeds
in ascending to the regions oilndraand
getting great honours there.

rS ^ — 35 Unmucbu, Pramuchu, Swas-
twyatreya of great energy, Oridhavya,
Vrdhavahu, Irinssom* Angtrss, and
^gastya of great energy, the son of Mitra*
Varuna — these seven are (he Ritwijas ol
the Yama the king of the dead, and five in
the southerly quarter.

‘ 36“37 Dndlieyu, Riteyii, illustrious
Parivyadha, Ekata, Owita and Irita —
the last three gifted with solar effulgence,
»-and Atri’s son of rigeteous soul sue , the
Rishi Saraswata,— these seven who had
acted as Ritwijas in the great sacrtRce of
Varuna— have taken up their abodes m
the Western quarter.

33—39 Atn, ilie illustrious Vashishtha,
the great Rishi Kashyapa, Gotama, Bha.
rtdwaja, Vishwamitra the son of Kushika,


and Rtchika’s fierce and^ energetic sen
Jamadagni —these seven are the Ritwijas
of (be Lord of treasures and live in the
Northern quarter.

40 There are seven other Rislm who
live in all direclions'wttliout being confined
la any panic ilar one. 1 he) , it is who give
fame and of all that is beneficial to men,
and (hey have been sung as the creators of
the worlds.

41. Dharma, Kama, Kala, Vasu,
Vasukl, Ananta, and Kapila — these seven
are ifie upholders of the world,

4>, Rama, Vyasa, Orona'sson Ashwat«
lhaman, are the other Rishis. Ihese are
the great Rishis as divided into seven
groups, each group consisting of seven

43. They are t> e creators of that peace
and good which men entoy. Tley are
said to be the Regents of the quarters.
One should turn his face tothat direction
in which one of these Risliis live if one
desires to adore him.

44 "“ 4 S Those Rishis are the creators
of alt creatures and have’ been considered
as tlie purifiers of all . Samvarta, Meru*
savarna, the iighteeus Msrkandeya, and
Sankhya and Yoga, and Nsrada and the
great Rishi Oufvasas,— these are gifted
with severe penances and great selhcentrei,
and are celebrated over the three worlds.

4$ There are ethers who are equil lo
Rudra himself, they live in the region of
Brahman, By naming them with respect a
soniess man obtains a son, and a poor man
acquires riches.

47*45. Indeed, by naming them, one
acquires success In religion, and wealth and
pleasure. One should also lake the name
of that celebrated king who was Emperor
of all the Earth and equal to a Prajapati,
vit ( that foremost of monarchs, Prithu, the
son of Vena, The Earth became his
daughter. One should also name Furu*
ravas, of the Solar race and equal unto
Afahendra himself n power.

49. He was the son of Ila and celebrated i
over the three worlds One should indeed, 1
take the name of tliat dear son of Vudha.

5 ®— S* One should also take the name

of Oharata, that hero celebrated over the
three worlds He also who 111 the golden'
age worshipped tl^e gods in a grand
Gomedlia sacrifice vte the illustrious Kanti*
deva, who was equal to Maliadeva himself,
should be named. Gified with penances,
possessed'of every auspicious mark, (he
source of every kind of good to the world,
he was the conqueror of (he universe.

$9, One should also take t|ie 5 name of
the royal sage bhtvru ol illustnout fame.


ANUSHASANA PA^VA.


333


lie had pleased the great Mahadeva and
)( was for his sake that Aiidhaka «vas killed

S3 On- should also take ihenameof
the illustrious royal sape Bliagiraiha, who
Ihroiigh the (avour of hlahadeva succeeded
To bniit'iDg dotvn the sacred river from llie
celestial tigion. ^

54. It was Bhagiratha who caused the
ashes of the sixty thousand sons of Sagara
to be washed with the sacred waters of
Ganga and thereby rescued them from their
sm. fndeed, one should take the names
d! all these who were gihed wtih the b)»ting
effulgence 0! firei great beautyi and high
energy.

55. Some of them were of awe^mspinog
forms and great power. One should lake
the names of these deities and Risliis and
kings, those lords of the universe, •~wfia are
iBullipIiers of fame.

S 6 ~^SJ. Sankhya, and Voga which is
highest if the high, and Havya and f^vya
and that refuge of al] (he Sliruds eir ,
Supreme Brahma, have been declared to be
the sources ol great good to all creatures
These are sacred and sin.punfymg, and
have beet) spoken of very iiighly these
•re the foremost of medicines lor curing all
diseases, and are (he given of success m
•il deeds.

SS Controlling one's senses one should

0 Bharata, lake the names of these mwn
ing and evening It is these who protect.
It Is these who shower ram It is these
who shine and give light and heat It is
lliese who blow. It is these who create a))
things.

59 These are considered as the foremost

01 all, as (he leaders of (he universe, as
highly clever in the performance of all
things, as gilied with forgiveness, as com*
plete masters oi the senses. Indeed. H has
been said that they remove all the evils to
wh ch human beings are subject,

do fhese great ones are the witness
Ol all good and bad deeds Jlisin^ up in
the raofttut^ Hive .alwuUl Hake jilw.u'.ciARvejv
for by this one IS sure to acquire all tliat »
good.

6i< He who takes the names of these,
becomes freed from the (ear of fires and of
thieves. Such « man never finds his way
obstructed by any obstacle nylakiigthe
names of these great ones, cne becuinss free
from baa dreams of every kind. |

Ci— 6 ^, Purged of every s n such tnen 1
take biiiti in auspicious families fltat I
twice.barn person wi>o wiili covtroMed |
tenses rac tes these names on occasion* of {
petloimmg the initiator) rues of Ucrifices !
•nd other rel gious practices, becomes, as j


the outcome thereof, gifted with righteous*
ness, devoted to the study of the soul,
possessed of rorgiveness, and self control,
and free from malice. If a man suffering
from disea$o recites them he becomes treed
from Ills sin in tlie form of disease

64. By reciting them within a house, alt
evils are removed from the inmates Dy
reeling ihem wiihin a fief I, the growth
of all kinds of crops is helped.

65 — 68 Reciting them at the time of
starling on a tourney, or while one is away
from tus home one mteis wiih good jorjoor.
lliese names lead to the protection of hts
owiiself. of his cliildren and wives, of his
we-<l(b, and of his seeds, a id pUnis 1 he
Kshatiiya who recites these names at the
time ol joining a battle sees destruction
overtake his eineintes and gooJ fortune
crown him and his party The man who
recites these names on occasions of per-
forming ihe rues in honor of the deilics or
the manes, helps the manes and the deities
eat to the saciificul Hivya aid Kavya.

J be man who reciies ti<em becomes freed
from fear of disease and beasts ol prey, vf
elephants and thieves.

69—30. His burden of anxiety becomes
tightened, and he becomes freed from every
sm By reciting these excellent Saviiri
Mantras on board a ve»sel, or in a car, or
in the courts ol kn gs, one dcquiies I igh
success Here where these btaniras are
recited, fire does not butn.wood ,

71. There children do not die, nor
snakes live. Indeed at such places, ttliere
can be no fear of the king, nor Fishaclias
and Kakshasas,

■jj. Indeed, the man who recites (hesd
Mantras ceases to have any fear of fire of
water or wind, or beasts ol prey. '

73 These Savitri Mantras, recited duly
bring on the peace and well being of atl the
lour casirs those men who recite them
with respect become fired Irom every sorrow
and at last acquire a tnah end

74 Cren these are the results acquired
by (liem wi o recite U ese Saviirl Mantrai
which are ol tlie form of Brahma, that
man who recites lliese Mai iras in the
midn of km-, sees I is kme btcome fruilfuf*

75-*?® Wlefh'r wJen starling on St
journey, or entering a houv- on returning,
one should recite tiese Mantras on every
orcas <M) 1 es- Maniras form a great

mystery of the Rivlns and ,,re ll« very
hi,. best of those which It ry sifenity racile.
Stich ate these Mantras to U e<n who
pract s« the duty of recUa ion ard pour
bbatroos on the sacrtficlal fire.


MAHADilARATA.


324


77. Tlii> lliat I have said to yeii> !$ llie
exceitvnt upiinoii of l’4r.t)liara U was
reciitd tormi-rfy to Sfuhra lie*

presenlto>', as it does, Iriitli or Uicrnal
bralona, 1 luve declared >l fully to you
78 — 79. (t (arms the heart of all crea»
lures, and is the li'ijliest bhruii* All the
pnnces of the suUr and iu >ar families,
vie , I'lp K i^havas and the Ktiravas, recite
tnese Mantras every day alter having pitil*
hed itieniselves. itiese form Um tii);t>esl
end of liu nan creitures. One becuntrs
(reed fro 11 every trouble and cataiiiily by
alaily reciH'i,' the names o( the celestiaU,
rd the seven Kiltns, and a( Diiiuva.
Indeed, such recituiion speedily frees one
fioin distress.

So, liie aai;es of olden times, fie,:
^^ashyapa, Guama, and Otners, and'
iihrigu, Ani*iras and Aifi and oKiers, and
blnisia, Ai;asiya, and Viihaspali, and
uilicis, allot whom are re|>eneraie Ui>his,
have worshipped these Mantras. Approved
of by tlie soil of Uharedw^js, tliCse M
tras were attained liy the sons of Kiwlnka
llaviii|r acq med them aeatn Irom Veshisli*
tha, bhekre and ll<e Vesiis went (oith to
battle and succeeded in vaxq ns) inj* the
U iiuvas.

81. that man who inshes a present of a
hundred bine with itieir horns covered with
plate of gold to a Uraliinana I'lUed with
much leumKi)' and welUconversant with the
Vedas, and he who causes the excellent
Bliarata story to be recited in Ins house
avtiy day, ate said to acquire equal
Sneiits, ' '

' 8i. Uy rrc ltii)< the name of BUrifju,
one's VII toe becomes enlianced. By bow
liiK to Vashishllia, one's energy becomes
enhanced , By bowing' tOiUavhu, one be<
comes victorious in battle. By rrciling the
praises of ihe Ashwiiis, uiie becomes Irecd
it'om diseases. .• T

83 1 have thus, O king, told you

of liie Saviiri Maiitris which are at
one with eternal Brahma. If you wish to
qiiesuoii me on any other subject, )bu
may du »o. 1 slmll, U Bhaiala, answer

It 1 (


• CHAPrE'l cu.

. (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Confinurrf.

Tndhishthua said*—

I. Who are worthy of being adored?
Wiio are they to whom we should bow 7
How, indeed, should we behave towards


whom T What course of conduct, O ,5rand«
fatl cr, towards what classes of persjiis IS
considered faultless I

Bhishma said

3. 1 he liiimibatum of Orahtnanas would

liuuilliate itie Very celestials. By bowtnt; to
Uiahtnaiias, one dues nut, O Yudhistitlnra^
comiiiu any faults < ■ '

3 lliey, indeed, deserve to be adored,

liiey deserve to have onr vows Vuo
ahunld beliavti towards (liem as if they are
your sons Indeed, It is those Wise men who
upholds all the HoiiJs. ,

4 Ihe Urahmaiias are the great cause*
ways of V'irtue abuut all the worlds. Hicir
liappmess consists in rciiuuncmg ail kinds
ol iiclies. I hey are devoted to the vow of
coiiiioihng speech.

5 they are agreeable to all creatures,

and obsei ve various excellent vows. 1 * ey
are the refuse of all creatures in the uni*
verse they nre itie authors of all ihs
regulations whicli govern itie woilds* Hicy
are endued with great lame. n

6. Fesisnees are alwajs their
tidies llieir power consists in speech'
llieir energy emanates from the duties they
observe Knowing all duties, lliey ar*
gifted with minute vision, so that lliey are
coginr ml of the subtlest coiistderatiuiis

7. Ifiey are of righteous desires. Ihey

live in the observance of well riona dim***
they aro the csnse ways of Virtue Ibe
lour kinds ol hvmg creatum exist, depen*
dmg upon them as their refuge. > ^

8 Ihey are the patli or road afo’ij^
which all should go, they are the guides

of all lliey are the eternal Upholders of
all the sacrifices I tiey always uphold the
heavy loads of lathers and grandfathers,

9 Ihey never droop unHar heavy loads
even wlieii pxssing along difft»uk roads, hk*
strong cattle, lliey are atleniive to llm
rrquirentents of manes and denies a"d
guests. 1 hey are entitled to cat the fi'Sl
poilions of Havya and Kavya.

10. By ll e very food they eat, they
rescue the three wurldSrfroni great fe*'"-
lliey are, as it were the Islaiii for all
worlds Ihey ate the eyes ol all persons
gifted with sight. I

XI, The wealth they possess coislsl*
of all the branches ol knowledge known by
•he name of Shiktha, and all the Slirutis
Gifted wnh great slril', they arc conversant
with the most subtile reUtivtls of ihii’its.
Ihey know the en is of all tilings, ^nd tl><'^
tliouglu are always engaged upon )be
science of the sunt. ^ ,


ANUSHASAMA parva.


s^s


U They ate gUled whh the tcnovktedge
Ot the bcRtnninK. the middle, and the end of
aU tilings, and they are persons irt whom
doubts no longer eXist on account of the
certitude of their knowledge. they are
fulty aware of the distinctions between
^hat 15 superior and what is mfetior. Ihey
U IS who acquire tile highest end.

13, Shorn of attachments, purged of all
getting over all pairs of opposites,

they are unattached to all worldly things
Deserving of every honor> they are always
esteemed by persons g'fled wuh knowledge
and high souls.

14. lliey cast impartial looks on sandal
paste and hlih or dirt, on what is food and
what IS not food. Ihey see with art eqtal
eye their brown dresses of coarse cloth and
fabrics of s Ik and animal skins.

13 They would Jive for days logetlier
Without partaking of any food, and dry up
their limbs by such abstention They de-
vote il emselves earnrsily to the study of the
Vedas, controlling their senses.

tS They would make gods of those who
are not gods, and net gods of those who are
podt. Enraged, they can create other
worlds and ether Tlegents ci the worlds
than those who exist.

ty. Ihroiigh (he curse of those great
ones (he ocean became so salmo as to be
tindnnhable. The fire of ihefr anger yet
burns in the forest ot Oandaka, utiquench-
ed by time.

18. They are the gods of the godw and
the esuse of all causes They ar^ the
nulhonty of all authorities \Vhstmanof
intelligence and wisdom IS there who would
seek to humiliate them.

jg Amongst them the young and the
old all deserve honors I hey lionor one
another on account of distinctions In respeet
of penances and knowledge.

30 I'ven the ttrahmana who Is destitute
of knowledge (s a god and (s a great instru-
ment for purifying others, lie amongst
them then, who is pnrsesred of bnowtedge
Is a much higher god and like the ocean
when lull (to tl e brim).

SI. Learned or milearned. the Prah-
mana IS always a great deity. Purified or
not. Fire is ever a great god.

7i. A blaring frr, even when It bams
on a crrmalofium, is not considered as
suined on afcouiil cl the character of the
spot whereon It bums. Clarified bmter
looks beaut'fnl wlwther kept on the sacri-
ficial altar or «n a chamber.

aj S<s if the nrahrnana be always
engaged in evil deedt, he Is still to be con-

42


sidered as derervmg of IionoM. Indeed,
know that the Orahmina is always a great
god.


CHAPTER cm.
(ANUSHASANllCV PARVA) —
C^/:(inui4,

Yuahislithifa gaid;—

t. * tell us. O king, what (s that re*
ward at the worship of Erahmanas, seeing
wlich you adore them O you of superior
intellid'ence ) Indeed, what is that success,
emanating from their adoratron, guided by
winch you worship them t

BhidbuiA safd

Regarding it Is cited the conversa-
tion between Pavana and Arjuna, O
Bharata.

^ 3 Gifted With a thousand arms and
great beauty the powerful Kartavirya,
I(wmef1y became the lord of all the world.
He had his cipital in the city of Mahtsh-
enatu

Of imbafiled prowess, that king ef
tbeAHaihaya rare of Rshatriyas governed
(I19 whole Barth begin by seas, togeiheC
with all her islands and all her precious
mines of gold and gems.

5 Respeeiing the duties ot the Ksba-
triya order, as also humility and Veditf
learning, the king made Urge ’gifts of
wealth to the Rishi Datlalreya.

6 Indeed, the son of Kritavirya thus

worshipped that great BsCetiC ’ who, be-
coming pleased with bun, asked hint to
solicit tlirre boons. * *

?♦ Thus requested by the Ruhl for
boons, the king addressed him saying,-^
Let me have a thousand arms when t am
in tl»e midst of my elders. tVlule, how-
ever, I remain at home let me have, as
usual, only two arms, r i

8 Indeed, fet enmbatants, when fight-
wg, me possessed of a {hotfsaod arms.
Observant also of high vows tel rrfe succeed
>n subjugating the entire Earth by my
prowess.

9 Having arquired the Earth rlghfe-
outly, lei rne govern I er with vigiupce.
these IS a fourth born sih>«h, O foreraost

of twice.bom persons, I solicit thee ta
grant.

10 O lau’itess me, being d>«prtfd;io
favor me, you sheuM grart it to met
Dependent as I am cn yctt, whenever I


MA^ABIIARAtA.


J26

may liappen to ('O wron^, let ptous men
come forth to instruct and set me iigUl,

It. Thus addressed, that Brahman
replied to the Uing, sayii g — So let tl be (
thus were those boons acquired by tlial
hing of burning effulgence.

la— 14 Riding then on bis car which
was effulgent like fire or the Sun the king,
blinded by I is great prowess, said,— Who,
indeed, is (herd irho can be considered as
iny equal in patience and energy, m fame
and heroism, in prowess and strength 7—
After heliad uttered these words, an invi>
sible voice m the sky, said — U igaorant
wretch, do you not know that the Braiimana
IS superior to iheKshatriya? Ihe Kstia*
Inya, 'helped by the Brahmano, rules all
creatures.

15 When pleased 1 am able to create
many creatures When angry, I am able
to destray a/f In ihatight, and deed,

1 am the foremost ihe Brabmana is
i.erlainly not above me.

' t6 Ihe first preposition here is that the
Bral mans IS superior to Ksliktrijas Ihe
counter>proposiiion is that the Kshatriya
» superior'. You Iiave said tl at ihe (wo
are u nied together A distinction, however,
IS observable m this

17 It 11 seen that Brahman^ts taV*
refuge with Kshatrijas Ihe Kshatriyas
never stek the refuge of Drahmanas In*
deed, throughout (he Earth, the Bra*
hmaitas accepting such lefuge under tlie
pretence of teaching the Vedas, get ilieir
iltaintenance from the Kshatriyas. '

iS The duty of protecting all creatures
bet with the Kshatriyas, It rs from the
Kshattiyas that the Urahmanas derive their
livelihood, How then can the Oralsmana
be superior to the Kshatriyas 7

19 \Yell, 1 slrall, from to day, bring
under my subjection, your drahmanas WIm
are superior to all creatures but wIk> have
mendicancy for their occupation and who
are so self conceited.

30. What the virgin Gayatn has said
from the sky is not true Robed in skins
the Brabmanas move about irt nidepen*
dence. 1 sliall bring those independent
men undtr my subjection,

31. Deity or man, (here is none in (he
three worlds who can tbtow me oil from 4be
sovereij-niy 1 etjoyi Hence, ljim;certaiDly
superior to (he Urahmanas.

23. Tins world that ts now considered as
having Brahmanas for its foremost dwellers
khall soon be made such as to have Ksliatri*
yas (or Its foictros dwellers iliere^snone
V whp IS cap jble of Withstanding my power m
battle.


23 l!-aring these words of Arjuna, tfe
sky-ranging goddess became moved

*4 Then the god of win 1 addressing
tl e king from the sky, ssid — Uenuu ice this
sinful atiilude Bow to the Brahmsnas
By inpinng them you will bring aboit
troubles u I your kingdom

35 The Brahmanas « II either kill >01
king, titoiigit you are, or endued with great
m ght as they are they will drive you away
from your kingdom, despoiling you of your
energy.

36 Hearing this speech, (he king ad-
dressed the speaker saying, — Who n deed/
are you? — Itie Kod of wnd answered — J
am the god of \;ind and tlie messenger of
the celestials. 1 say to you wSat is for your
benefit.

Atjana said:—

27 Oh, I see that you have to-tfaysfi'iinr'
your devotion and attachment tu (lie Bra*
hmaiias 1 ell me now what kind of earti 1/
creature rs the Brahmana

sS 1 ell me does a superior Brahman*
resemble the Wind in any respect?’ Off
«* I e like Water, or Eire, or tl>« botvor*'*'^
Firroaroenl 7—


CHAPTER CLIir.
<ANUSHASAN1KA PARVA)^
CenlinKed

The god of wind said : —

I* Hear, O deluded man, what the st^
tributes are of Brahmanas who have all Isilr
souls. Jhe Brahmana is superior to alf
those which, O king, you have named,

* Formerly, the Barth, lodoignign*
spirit oj rivalry with the king of tlie A »gasr
lorsoQtt her character as Earth. He re-
generate Kashyapa caused destruction in'
btlall her by actually paralysing her,

3- The Brahmanas are always uncon-
querable king, m Heaven as also oiv
Eaith Formerly,- the great Rishi Angi-
ras, through his enerey, drank off i all the
waters,

4 Having drunk off all the waters as 1?
they were mills the great R sin did not, feel
>et Ills thirst to be satisfied He, there*
tnro, once more caused the Earth to be
filled with water by raising* mighty wave

5 On another occasion, when Angiras
hecaiue eiraged with me I fled awa/r
leaving the world and lived for a I >ng ti n*
concealed in the Agniliotra of the ‘Brahma-
fas, through fear of that Rishi,


ANOSHASANA PARVA.


6. The illustrious PuraniurA, an account
o? his having coveted ihe body of Ahalya,
uas cursed by Gautama, yeti for the sake of
Virtue and wealth <lie Rishr did not destroy
ouln^ht the k>n^ of the celestials

7. The Ocean, O king, that was full
in former days of crystal water, cursed
'bythe Bralunanas, became safiite in taste.

■S Even Agni who is 5 gofd litied, and
who biases wi'h ei^ulgeace witert destHUieof ;
omoke, and whose flames funiting together,
bitf I upwards, when cursed bji the angry '
Angtras, became divested of atl these qua* 1
lutes.

•g See. the sixty thousand sons of Sa*
gara, who came here to worshtp*the Ocean,
have all been pulvensed by (hej.Brabmana
Kapila of golden liue.

to. You are notequal to the Brahmanas.
Do you, O king, seek your own good I
I he Kshatrtya of even great power bows to I
Orahmana children who are sblf^m their I
niatliers^ wombs, I

1 1, The Urge kingdom of the Dandakas
«/as destroyed hy a Srahmana. The power*
flit Kshatnya laUjangha was destroyed by
ajsingle Brahmana, «ie , Aurva,

t3!SVoiii too. have acquired a targe
Uingdom, great might, religious merit, and
learning, which are alt difEcult of acquire*
tnent, through the grace of Oattatreya.

13 Why do you, O Arfuna. adore Agni
everyday who IS a UrahmanafilHe is the
bearer of sacnflcial .libations from every
part of (he universe. Are you ignorant of
this fact.

t4^ Why, indeed, da you allow yourself
to be stupefied by folly when you are
not Ignorant of the fact (hat a superior
Brahmana IS the protector of all creatures
in the world and is, indeed, the creator of
the living world f

t5 1 he f.ord of all creatures. Brahman,
iinmanifest, gdied wuh power, and of un*
lading glory, who created tins vast universe
with Its mobile and immobile creatures, {is a
Brahmana) '

t6 Some ignorant persons there are, who
say that Brahman was born bf an Egg.
From the oriemal F/g, when >t opened,
mountains and (he cardinal pnints and the
waters and the Kattti and itie Heavens all
tame inio exisi«nce.

17. So one had seen (his hirih of (he
creation. How (hen can Brahman be
said to have taken his bn-ih from (he origi*
nal Ecg. when es,rculty ><e is said to be
U ihorn T It H said that vast iiicreaie Space
lithe original Fgg It was from Ihrs m
Create Sp<< that the Grandfather was bom.


,327

iS. If you ask, — Wliereon would l!i<
Grandfather, after|lns birth from increati
Space, rest, for tliere was then nothing else I
—the answer may be given thus 1 here
an existent Being of the name of C<n<cioiis,
ness. That mtghiy. Being is 'gifted with
great energy. '

19 There is no Egg. Brahman, how.
ever, is'existent. He is the Creator nf the
universe and M Its King ’—Thus addressed
by ^he god of Kind, king' Arjitna remained
silent.


CHAPTER CLfV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —

Continued,

The gfod of wind said *—

t. Once on alt'otc, O king, a king
named Anga wished to give away the
enure Earth as sscriRvial present to (ho
Brahmanas At this, the Earth beUms
uricken with anxiety.

t. I am the daughter of Brafiman, I
hold all creatures. Having obtained me,
alas, why does this foremost of kings suish
to give me away.to the Brahmanas f

3 Renouncing my character at the seif,
I shall now go to my fatlier. Let this king
with all his kingdom meet with dettruetion I
—Forming this coucluMon, aliO departed
tor (he region of Brahman,

4 Seeing the goddess Earth about to go,
the Ritht ICashyapa himself immediately
entered the visibte body of (he Koddess.
ronounang his own body^ by; (be help of
Yoga.

5. Thus penetrated by the spirit of
Knshyapa, (he eariii grew m prosperity
and became full of all kinds of Vegetable
produce. Indeed, O king, for the time the
Kashyapa pervaded (he earth, Virtue
bMame foremost everywhere and all (ears
ceased,

6 Thus, O king, the earth remained
penetrated by the spirit of Karhyapa for
tliifty t'lnussnd divine years, fully ahve
10 all (hose functions whicfi It used to dis-
charge while 1. was penetrated by the spirit
of Bral mana’s daughter.

7, Up n (lie expiration of this period, the

goddess reiurred from the region of Bra*
bmau and arrived here bowed to Kashyapo
and from that time became (he daughter «l
(liac ftishi. _ '

8, Kashyapa is a Brahioana. This wss
tha (cet, O king, ilut A Brahmana did.


328


MAIIABIIARATA


Tdl lh« naffik t1»e Kaliatclya who it
superior to Ktciiyapti

* 9 Hetri \g Iheie werJt, king Arjuna
remained sitant. The god o( wind once
mors said to Inin. — Hear now, O king, the
■tory o( Utalliya rvlio was born in the family
e( Aog^ras. |

to. The daughter of Soma, named Bha>
dra, came to be considered as peerless in
beauty. Her father Soma regarded Uia>
thya to be the fittest of husbands tor her.

II. The famous and highly blessed
maiden of faultless limbs, observing various
vows practised the severest austerities from
the desire of getting Utathja for her bus*
band. .

la After some time. Soma’s father Atii,
insiting Utathya to his house, bestowed
upon him the famous maiden Utathya
who used to give away sacrificiat presents
In prolusion, duly received tlie girl for his
.wife.

13 It so took place, however, that the
beauttiul Varuna had, from a long time
before, coveted the girl Coming to (he
forest where Utathya lived, Varuna stole
away the girl when she had plunged into
the Yamuiia for a bath.

14 Abducting her thus, the Lord ol the
walerstook her to his own house lhat
mansion was wonderful It was adorned
With SIX hundred thousand lakes.

15. There is no palace that can be con>
sidered more beautiful than tliat of Varuna.
It was adorned with many places and by
the presence of various tribes of Apsaras
and of various excellent articles of enpy.
ment.

^ 1^17 There, within (hat palace, the
the Lord of waters, O king, sported with
the damsel A little wlnle after, Utathya
came to know ol (he ravishment of his wife
Indeed, having heard all the facts from
Narada, Utathya addressed the celelesnal
Itishi, saying —Go O Narada, to Varuna
and speak with due severity (o him. Ask
iiim as to why he has abducted my wife,
and, indeed, tell him in my tiame that he
should give her up

18. You may tell him further, — You are
a proitcior of the worlds, O Varuna, ard
not a destroyer. Why then have you
abducted my wife bestowed hpon me by
SomaT ..

fp. Thus requested by Utathya, the
aelestial Rithi Narada went to wTiere
Varuna was and addressing him, said —
Do you liberate the wife of Utathya, In*
deea, Miy Itave you abducted her • |


ao Hearing tkese words of Narada,
Varuiia replied to him, saying, — This timid
girl is very dear to me. 1 dare not let
her go.

at — 32 Receiving this reply, Narada
went to Utathya and cheerlessly told him,—
O great ascetic, Varuna has driven me from
his house, catching me by the throat He
ts reluctant to restore to you your wife. Do
you act as you please.

22. Heating these words of Narada,
Aitgiras became enraged Having pe-
nances for wealth he solidified the waters
and drank them ofl, by his energ).

24 When all the waters were thus
drunk ofl, the Lord of that element became
very dispirited with all Ins friends and
kinsfolk For all that, he did not still give
up Uuthya’s wife.

25 Tlien Utathya, that foremost of
twice born persons, filled with anger, com-
manded Earth, saying — O amiable one, do
you show land where there are at present
the SIX hundred thousand lakes.

26—27. At these words of the Rishi the
Ocean receded from the spot marked ou>i
and land appeared wliich was highly sterile,
lo the rivers winch flowed through that
region. Utathya said,— O Saraswati, do you
become mvaible here Indeed, O timid Udy,
leaving this legion, go you lo the desert
O auspicious goddess, let this region, deati*
tute of you, cease to become sacred.

aS When that region became dry he
repaired to Angirasa, taking with him
Uiathya’s wife, and made her over 10 him.

29 Getting back his wife, Utathya be-
came cheeiful Then, O chief of the
ilaihaya family, that great Brahmana res-
cued both the universe and the Lord of
waters from the situation of distress into
which he had reduced them

30—31 IChowing every duly, the I Igl W
energetic Rishi Utathya, after getting back
Ills wife, O king, said to Varuna,— I have
recovered my wife, O lord of waters, wit™
the help ol my penances and after luflictmg
such distress on you as made you cry aloud
tn pain Having said this, he went home,
with that wife of his.

L 32 Even such, O king, was Utathya,
that foremost of Brahmanas. Shall f go
lonT Or, will you yet persist m
opinion? What, IS there a Kshatriya that
IS superior to Utathya?


ANUSlIASAMil PARVA


3*9


CHAPTER CLV.

(ANUSHASANIICA PARVA) —
Cenisnutd,

Bhishma said

t. T>ius addressed, ktng Arfuna remain-
ed silent. the god o{ wind once more
spoke (B him —Listen now, O king, lathe
greatness of Uie Brahmana Agasiya.

3, Once on a time, the gods were defea*
ted by the Asuras upon winch they became
very dispirited. The sacriflces of the denies
were all robbed, and the Swadha ot the
(nsnea was also misappropriated

3. Indeed, O chief «! the IlaiHayas, all
the rehgious acis and observances of human
beings also were stopped by the Danavas
bhorn of their prosperity, (he celesti«ls
svandered over the Earili as we have heard

4. One day, in courseof their wandermge,
they met Agasiya oi high sows, that Dra>
timana, O king, who was gifted with great
energy and solar splendour.

5—6. Saluting him duly, (he eetestials
made the usual polite enq lines They (hen.

0 king, laid these words lu (hat high svuled
one,— We ti'sve been defeated by the
Uanavas in baiiTe, and have, therefore, been
deprived of sffl icnce and prosperity Oa
)ou, Iherefoie, U foremost of aKefics, rescue
us from this situation of great (ear.

7. Titus informed ot the condition to
which the celcstufs had been reduced,
Agaslya became highly enraged iluhly
energetic, he at once bUied forth tike the
all consuming fire at the time of Iheum
kcfsal dissolution.

8. With the burning rays which then'
came out from the Rishi, (he Oanavas
beitan to be burnt. Indeed, O kinf. thou*
lands of them began to drop down irons the

»ky.

9 Burning with (he energy 'of Agastya.
the Danavas, abandoning both Heaven and
Earth, fled towards the south.

to. Al that lime the Danava king Vah
was ccicbraling a Horse. bacsifice tn the
nether r^tons lliose great Asuras who
were with him in those icitioiis or who were
living in the bowels ol the Earth, were not
buint.

II. The celestials, upon the destruction

01 their encm et, (t>en regained (heir own
regtofis, their fears entirety remewd.
ceurag^ by what l‘t d«J (or (hem, they
tl>«n begged (he It shi to destroy these
Asuras pile had taken refuge with n the
bowels ct the Earth cr in the nether
trguos.


13 Thus req tested by the gods, Agas*
tya rcpCied (0 them sa)tng, — Yes [ can
Consume those Asuras wl 0 are hvinir under*
neath the Eaith, but if I achieve such It
feat, my penances wilt sitfTer decay. Hence,
I shall not exert my power.

13 Thus, O king, were the Danavas
consumed by the illustrious Uislii with his
own energy, Tlius did Agastja cf purified
soul, O monarch, accomplish that deed with
the help of his penances

t4 O sinless one, so was Agsstya as
described by me. Shall | contoue? Or,
will you say anytl ing tn reply! Is
thero any (vshatriya who it greaic-r tfian
Agastya t—

Bhishmt said:—

’Jtus addressed kmg Aitima re*
mained silent 1 he god of wind once more
said —Hear, O king one of the great feats
of the illustrious V'asfustitl a.

(6 Once on a time tl e cefest'als were
engaged m celebrating a yacrifice on the
shores of the take Vaikhenasa Knowing
his power, the sacnlieiiig gods lliouiil t of
Vestislitlia and made him their piiestin
imagination. "

17 Mranwhile, Weing the gods reduced
and emaciated on account ot the iititiation
they were undergoing, a race «f tisnsvas,
ol ine name oT Khatins, ot staturvrss'gigon*
tic as mountains, Wished to kill them, 1
t8 Those amongst the OeWavas that
were either disabUd'or killed in itie fi^ht
were phinged 1 iio (lie Wilers of (he M niksa
Uke and on account of (he boon of (lie
Grandfather lliey immediately came back
to vigour and life,

19 Taking up huge and (erriVe Rioun*
tain summits and maces and trees, l>ey
agitated llie waters of t<<e like, making
tiwm iwelt up to the heigfilofa hundred
Vo]snas.

90 TTiey then ran against the celestials
numbering ten thousand. AfTcttd by the
Danavas the gods |l>en sought It e refuge
o< their king Vasava

31. Siiakra ho /ever, was to«n art tied
by ttiem In f I* dut/eis > e sought the pro-
tection of Vashishihs At this. t»e holy
Risfi VashisMha assured the ccfestisli,
leinovina iheir (ears,

33 Understanding that tl e gods had
bteotne gtcaily giipifiird i[i« ascetic dd
|)m through merry. He (J tpUyrd b<t
energy and burit » tUoui any tatrtion,
(fiose Danavav ca' ed Kba''ns

»J Having prna m lor weahh. |h*
IImu brou.t ( tt« ftnrsr Gan^a, who tiad
gone to IvaJssa, to I'ai Spat, _fnd»Sif.


33«


MAttADHARATA.


ippcAred, piercing through Uie
waieri of the lake.

34. The lake e,as penetrated by (hat
river. And as that celestial river piercing
through the waters of the lake, appeared it
flowed on, under the name of Sara^ti 1 he
pnlace wl ereon those Dana* as fell came to
be called after them

35 Tims were the dwellers cl Heaven,
headed by Indra, rescued from great dis-
tress by Vasliishtha It wss thus that
tl ose Danavas, who had received boons
'from Brahman, were killed by that rreat
Rishi

3$ O sinless one, t have described to
you ihefeat which Vashishtha accomplished.
Shall I go on 7 Or, will you say anything t
Was there a Kshatriya who could be said
to excel the Brahmana Vashishtha 7 I


CHAPTER CLVr.

( ANUSIIASANIKA PARVA) —

CoHttnurJ.

Bbislima eaid

t. Ihus addressed, Arjuna remained
•■lent. Ihe god of wind once more ad-
dressed him saying,— Hear me, O foremost
one of (he Haihayas. as I dAcnbe to you
the achievement of the great Atn.

3. Once on a time as the gods and Da-
^navas were fighting each other 1 < the daik,
Rahu pierced both the Sun and Moon with
Ins arrows.

3 Ihe pods, overwhelmed by darkness
began to fall before the powerful Danavas,
O foremost of kings

4 — S Repeatedly struck by the Asuras,
the celestials began to lose their strengUi
they then saw the learned Brahmana Am
having penances for wealth, engaged in
the observance of austerities Addressing
that Rishi who had all his senses and in
Vham anger bad been extinguished, they
said -—See O Rishi, these two, vis, the
Moon and the Sun who have both been
pierced by the Asuras with their arrows,

6 On account of this, darkness has
overtaken us, and we are being struck down
by the enemy. We do not see theenlof
j our troubles Do you, O lord of great
power, rescue us from (his great fear.

TheEishi said *—

7, How, indeed, shall I protect jout—
Thev answered, saying— Do you become
the Moon Do you alto become the Sun,
and do you begin to kill these robbers


8 Thus begged by them, Atrl assumed
the form of the darkness destroying Moon.
Indeed, on account of his agreeable dis-
position, be began to look as beautiful and
delightful as (he Moon himself.

9 Seeing that the real Moon and the
real (fie Sun had become darkened by the
arrows of the enemi, Atn assuming'the
forms of those luminaries, began to shine
forth over the field of batUe, helped by the
power of his penances.

10 Indeed, Atn made the universe
slime in light, removing all its darkness.
By displaying his power, he also subj igsted,
the vast multitudes of those enemies of the
celestials

II. Seeing those great Asuras burnt
by Atn, the gods also, protected by Ain's
energy, began to despatch them quickly.

13 Displaying bis prowess and collect-
ing all his ener,;), it was thus that Atn
illumined the god of day, rescued the ce1es*
tials, and killed the Asuras. ^ ,

13 This was the feat that thalfW'C*'
born one, helped by his sacred fire— that
silent reciter of Mantras, that one clad m
deer.sitins —performed ' See O royal sage,
the act achieved by that Rishi who h«d
upon fruits only.

14 I have thus described to you, In full,
the feat ol the great Atn Shall I goon?
Or, will you say anything? Is there a
Kshatriya who is superior to this twice-born
Rishi ?

1$ Thus addressed, Arjuna remained
silent. I he god of wind once more spoke
to him —Hear O king, the feat achieved
by the great Chyavana.

16 Having made his promise to the
(win Ashwins Chyavana addressed the
chastiser of Paka, saying —Do you make
the Ashwins drinkers of buina with all the
other celestials.

Indra said —

17. The Ashwins have been

by os How, then, can these be admitted

into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma
wilh the others T I hey are not classed with
the celestials. Do not, therefore, tell us
$0.

(8 O you of great vows, we do not wish
to drink Soma in the compmy of (he
Ashwins I Whatever other commands ym*

may be pt ased to utter, O learned Bra-
hmana, we are ready to do.

Chyavana said —

19 The twin Ashwins shall drn-k Soma
with alt of you. Both of them arc gods, O


Af«(/sl(ASAfri( ¥aKVA.


33*


ilfie tif Die cefesiials, for they are ilte sons
of Die bun.

30 Let the da what 1 have said.
By acling according Jo Ihose words, the
hods will reap ^reat advantage By acting
oifietwise, cvit wiff ofertaiie ifieirr,

Indra said ~

31, I shall not. O foremost of twice born

t ersons, drink Soina with the Ashwins
et others drink with them as they please.
As for myself, 1 dare not do it.

ChyaVana said •— i

22 If| O destroy*r of Vala, you wil] not ,
obey my words, you shall, this very day,
dilute Suma wuli them in sacrifice, compelt* >
ed by tne.

. I

The god 6f T^fjiid said .*-*•

23 then Chyavana taking Die Ashwins
With him. be|>an a great religious rite for
Dieir benefit Hie gods all became stupe*
fied by Chyavana viidi Die help of Ids Man*
(ras.

24 • Seeing that feat undertaken by
Chyavana, Indra became enraged, lakmg
up a huge mountain he ran against that
Uishi.

aj. The king of the deities was also I
armed with Die Ihundecboft Then the |
illustrious Chyavana, gifted with penances,
cast angry looks upon Indra as he ad* '
vanced. 1

36 Throwing a Utile water at him, he
paralysed the king of Die deities with his
Thunderbott and mountaur As the result
of the religious rue he had begun, he Created
a terrible Asura hostife to Indra,

2f Made of llie libations lie had poured
on the sacred Rre, (hat Asura was called
Mada, of mouili gaping wide bucli was
Die Asura that the great ascetic created with
the help of Mantras, there were a Dmu*
Sand leeDi in his raouDi, caiending for a
hundred Yojanas

Of to'r.'titr wpp<«wiv>sw, Aw fMfgs
Were two hundred Yojaius m length One
of his cheeks rested on Die Eaiih and the
Other (ouclied Die sky,

39 Indeed, all the gods with Vasava
seemed to stand at the root of that great
Asura’s tongue, as fishes when they enter
Into the wide open mouth of a leviailian.

30. NVliile standing wUhm the mouth of
Mada, (he gods consulted speedily and then
addressing Indra, said —Do you soon bend
your head m respect to this twice born per*
aonage.^

3t. We shall without any hesitation


I drink Soma with the Ashwins in our com-
pany,— {hen bowing down Ins head to
ChyavanS) Sbakra obeyed his command.

32 Thus did Chyavana make the
Asliwms drinkers of bo na with the other
gods. Calling back Mada, the Kishi then
assigned him lus woih.

33 Soma was ordered to live iti dice, In
litiriuiig, in dnnkma, end in women.
Hence, O Icing, those men who betake
themselves to these, forsouDi, meet null
destruction,

3f Hence, one should always renounce
these faults to a great distance Ihus, O
king, J hare described to you the feat ac*
hieved by Chyavana Shall I go on 7 Or,
will you say anything 111 reply 7 Is (here a
Kshairtya who is higher Diait the Brahmana
Cliyavapa T .


CHAPTER CLVII.
{ANUSHASANJKA PARVA).*-

Coiiftrtutd,

Bbhbma said:->

t'-2. Hearing these tverdi 6f4he god e!
wind, Arjuna remained silent. At this, (h«
god of wind once more addressed him asy*
ing,— When the dwelleriof Heaven, headed
by Indra, found themselves witiiin the
mouth of the Asura Mada, kt that time,
Cliyavana took away from them Dia
Earth,

I 3 Deprived previously of Heaven and
now of the Earth also, the gods became
i very dispnited Indeed, those great ones,

I afflicted with grief, then threw themselves
' unreservedly upon the Grandfather's pro*

I tection.

I The gods said;—

I 4. O you who are adored by all crea*

' lures of (he nuiverse (he Earth has been
I taken away from us by Chyavana, while we
Avwwiwew afepvrwfoif Ay J.be

pas, O powerful one.

Brahman said

3 Ye dwellers of Heaven, do you, With
Indra repair speedily and seek the prolec*
tMn of (he Brahmanas By pleasl ig them
you will succeed in regaini >g both the re-
gions as before.

6 Thus instructed by the Grandfather,
the denies went to the Brahmanas and
begged (or their protection. Hie Crab*
tnanas replied enquiring —Whom shall we
sab|t^4{e7 — ihuiajked the celestials sgtd
to them, — Do ye subjugate the Kapas.


532


MAtlASlURAtAt


7 The Bratimanas tlien said,— BrirtKine
Item down on lie E^tli first, we shall
qiiickty subjugate them — Aftetr this, the
Bralinianas began a rite having for its
object the destruction of the Kapas As
90011 as this was heard of by the Kapas^
tliej immediately sent a messenger of theirs,
named Uliani, to those Bralimanas.

8 Dhani, coming to them as they sat

on the Earth, thus communicated to them I
the message of the Kapas,— Hie Kapas are
like )ou all Hence, wliat will be the results
of these rites which it appears you are de*
tetmmed upon ? . i

9 Of all them are welt conversant wfih
the Vedas and gilted with wisdom All of
them care for sacriRces All of them have
i ruth for their vow, and for these reasons
all of them are considered a$ equal to great
Rishis

JO. Th« goddess of Prosperity sports
among them, and the^i in their (urn, sup-
port her dnvh respect. They t\«ver know
their vtiy^s uselessly, and they never eat the
flesirof such amntau as have not been kill-
ed in saeiiliees..

ti. Ihey pour libations in the sacrificial
fire (every d^y) and obey the commands of
their precepfors and elders All of them
are of souls tinder perfect restraint, and
■ever take iny food without dividing It duly
among their children

13 They always proceed on ears and
other vehicles together. 1 hey never know
Iheir wives when the latter are m menses.
1 1 oy all act in «ufh a way as to acquire re-
gions of happiness hereafter. Inde^, they
are always righteous in their deeds.

13 They never eat anything themselves,
t when tnettnit women or old men have

) not •.atei) 1 hey never indulge in
play or sports of any kind in the forenoon,
hey never sleep during the day.

14 When the Kapss have these and
many other virtues and qualities, why, m-
devo, wo iM you seek to subjugate (hern 7
You should abstain from the attempt fn-
deod, by such abstention )ou would achieve
what a for your good.

The BraUmana* said •—

15. Oh, we shall subjugate the Kapas
In this mailer, we are quiie of a piece with
the cc'estials Hence, the Kapas deserve
to be Willed by us. As regards Uhaiiin^ he
should return whence he came

(6. After this Dhamn, returmng to the
Kapas. said to them— Ihe firahinsns arei
not diiposed 10 dn you any go h] —H earing I
Ibis, all (he Kapas loik up their weapons I
anti went to«ards tl>c Urahmanas,


17. Seeing llie Kapas advancing Sfjaidsi
them with the standard of their cars upraised,
the Brahnsanas immediately created certairt
fires fdf llie.destruccton of the vital airs of
he Kapas.

18. riaving brought about the destruc*
lion of the Kapas, those eternal fliresj
created with the help of the Vedic Mantras,
began to shine in the firmament like so

many tlouds.

10 The gods having assembled together
in battle, killed many of the Daiiavas.
Hiey did not know at that time that It was
the Bralimanas who had encompassed their
destructiont

30 Then eommg there, O kmg, the
highly energetic Narada informed the
dmies how their enemies, the Kapas, had
been really killed, by the Bralimanas of
mighty energy.

3t Hearing these words of Narada, the
dwellers of Heaven became highly pleased.
They also lauded those regenerate and
illustrious allies of (heirs.

33, The energy and prowess of the
celestials then began to increase, and adored
Ml all the worlds, Ihey acquired also the
boon of immerlality.

33 After the god of wind had said there
words, king Afjuna adored him duly and
addressing him tnswered in these words*
Hear, O mighty-armed king, what Arjuna
said.

Arjuna said *

24 O powerful god, always and by all
means do I live for the Brahmanas. f^e-
! voted to them, I adore them always.

35. Through the favour of Daltatrey* I
have acquired this might of mine. Through
Ins lavur I have been able to perfuriU
great feats in the world and acquire high
merit. .

26 Oh, I have with attention, heard (he
achievements O god of wind, ol the Bra*
i hinanas with all tl eir interesting •details ■*

I desciibed by you truly,

; The ^od of wind said

27. Oo )ou protect and maintain the
j Brahmanas, by performing those Kshsiriya
' duties which are yours by birili. Doyou
' protect them even as you protect youf of>n
senses 1 here is dan,<er to you from the
family of Bhrigti All that, however, wu*

I happen on a dnunt day.


334


MAIIaBHAKATA.


is to Him ttiat Oie warriors dedicate all
kiods of their cars at the time ol war.

ig He Is eternal, and it is under that
illustrious one that the Sicy, Etrih Heaven,
all tilings exist and sta>. He it was wli >
caused the vital seed of the gods Milra <anc)
Varuna to fall within a jjr, wl •'iilc ori,}i
listed the Risiii knoarn by the name of Va-
ehislitha. I

id It Is IvMshna who is tie 1*06 of
wind , It IS I e who is the powerful Asliwins,
it IS he who IS thrit first ol (,ods, via, |iie
Sun having a thousand rays. It is he by
whom the Asuras have been subjuealcd
It IS he who covered the three worlds with
lliree footsteps.

at. He Is the soul of the celestials and
human bent's, and Pitris. It is he who
IS tile SaC'ifu-e peifoiined b) those persons
who are conversant with the rituals oi sacti*
iices. It IS he who rises every day in the
sky (in the form of the Sun} and divides
*1 ime into day and night, and courses lor
half the ) ear northwards and for liatf the
3 ear souiliwards.

i7* ^Innumerable rays of hght come out
Irninhis upwards and dowuwaids andtrans*
s «i‘rcly and illumine the Earth Urahmanas
Lonversant with the Vedis w irship Inin
*lak*ing apotiiontf his rays the Stm sfnnes’
in lh« sky Month alter month, the sacri*
ficer ordains 1 im as a sactfice twice*
born persons conversant with ti e Vedas
hymn Ins praises in saciifices of all kinds,
lie tt IS wlio is the wlieel of the yesr, I avinc;
three naves and seven horses to drag it. It
is thus that lie supports tl e seasons.

34 Gifted With great energy, pervading
nil ilnngs, the ioiem i$C of all cieaiures it is
Krishna w( o diune upholds aH the worlds
I le H the Son, the remover of alt darkness
1 le IS the Creator ol all. Uoyou, O hero,
approach that Krishna,

3$. Once on a time, the great and
powetful Krishna lived, for a while, in the
lurffl ol Agni in the torrsi ofKIandava
••mong some straw or dry glass ^«<>n was
he pleased Capable ol going everywlrrre '
At wilt, It was Krishna who, having subju* '
gatetl the Itakshasas nn I Uragas poured
tliepi at f ballons upon the burning fire,
ad It It Krishna who gave 10 Atiunn •
number c( wlnia hortet It rs t • wl o is the
creator ol all horses. I his world rcprctriris
htt ear. He it is win yokes ihai car for
ssinngrt in motion, tliai tar hat three
W pel*. I

17. It • as ihree knids of moli *n. If bat 1
loux liuitct yoked 10 It. It Iras three naves I

3) It IS this KfisSn* who it the reftfcc I
el the five origtiti clonciiis with lire tky I


1 among them It is he who created the Eartf)
I and Heaven and the nuerventn^ space.
Indeed, it 1$ this Krishna of immeasiirahls
and burning energy who has crested llie
forests and ll e mountains It is tins
Krishna who, d“sirmis of p iiiibl ing Sliakra
who was about to hurl his thunder at him,
crossed tiie rivers and at once paralysed
him He is the one great Ind a who IS
worshipped by the Brahmaiias in greH
sacrifices with the help of a thousand old
Richs

39 It was this Krishna, O king, vlo
alstie was able to k-ep the highly eneigedC
Rishi Durvasas at a guest for some time
III his house He is said In be the one
ancient Kishi He is the Creator nf the
universe indeed, be creates cveryllimg
from Ins own nature,

30 Superior to all the eelesinls, tt is I e
wito leac) es all the denies He scrupulously
observes all ancient ordinances Know. t>
king that iJiis Krishna, who is called Visit*
waksena, ts the fruit of nil deeds which
relate to plea«ure of all deeds wlndi ar^
founded on the Vedas, ami ei all deeds
wliicti appertain to the wdild,

3f. He IS il>e wl ite rays cf lighl
are seen ui alt the worlds He is the three
worlds. He IS the three Kegeuts of all Iho
woilds lie IS ll>e three sscnfiLMl fires*
He IS the three Vyahtuis , iiiJrcd, this sort
j of Devaki is all tl e gods fogeiher
: 3» He IS the Yesr, He is thelSewns I

lie IS the rortiiights , He is t e Hay and
the Niglt,, He is those divisima of t»"»e
whti.li .ire called Kihs, ,tnr] Kaslilhas, and
Matris and M ihuitss, and I.sms, and
Kshanas Know that ll is Vishwakseiia <*
all these.

33 The Moon and the Sun, the Planrl*,
the Constellations and the Stars, all jhc
Parva days, inclucfing the day ol the fu '
moon, tlie cuiijunclioiis of the C nistellsi'uns,
and file seasons, have. O son ol Prid'**
emanated from Ihii Krishna who H Vi*
abwaVsena.

34 ItieRuJras llie Adityas the Vasus,
the Ashwins th-Sirtlyis the V.sluve lfV»s,
the Maiuis, Prayapstl hmiself, Ihe m lh«^
of the celesitals, r I* , Aditi and the se»*i‘

■ UnIns, have all originated from Ktnhna.

' 33 Chancing himself into |l e \V"tJ he

scailers the universe Of wniversil form,
lir becoTies I ire which rnnsnmes all Ihines.
Changing himself into Water, he drenches
■rid aubmerges all, and assuming tl* I***'”

of UrahiTtaii, he creaies all (he various *ni*
mvtf and iManniiaie creatures.

tS He IS Mmteir the VrJa tetlwfe’t'ss
•tl the Vedas, lie is lumtclf the Veda,


ANUSHASAMA PARVA.


335


he (earns s(( the Vedas. He >s himsetf
*11 tlie ordinances, yet he observes nil ihe
ordinances which have been l«id down in
tnauers connected wit(i Kij>hlrousness and .
the Vedas and that force or mi^bl which
r^les (he waitd Indeed knnw, O Yudhtsh*
{(lira, (ha( (ius Keshava is all (be inubiie
and mtatobile universe.

37 He IS ef the form of the most res-
fileiidenC ligh(. Of universal form this
Krishna is shorn m lf<ai bl-iaini^ effut
}’ence. Tlie original cause nf the soul
of all exis(ent creatures, be at brst creaied
(he waters. Afterwards he created this
universe.

jS Know that this Knshna is Vishnu
Know nim to be the soul of the entire uiii
verse Know him to be all the seasons , lie
«s these various wonderful \niianons of
H iture which we see , he is the clouds that
pour ram and the iigiitnin^ which flashes
in the sby. He is the elephant Atravata
In fact, lie IS tbelmmobde and mobtfc uni*
vers«.

35 The eUy of the universe and above
all attributes, this Krishna is Vasudeva
\V(»en he becomes individual soul he is
called Sankarshana Next, lie changes
Jumself into Pradyumna and (lieu nito Ant* '
ruJdlia. I lius, tile gr^ai Krislms. who has
eprunt! ftam lumssK. divides luirseU in
fourfold form

40, For creatingf (his universe winch
consists of the five primil elements, le
betims this work, ind closes it to go on in
Ihe fivefold form of auim.4ie exiitmie' con*
tainiiig celestial and Asiiras and human
being's and beasts and birds He tl is wlio
then creates (he Katth and (he Wind, Ihe
Sky. Liuht, and also Water, Q son of '
Pritlia.

4t. Having created this universe Of im*
tnobile and mobile olijrcis divided into four
orders of being (vte , viviparous, oviparous.
Vegetable, and btlli born), he then created
the Barib with licr fivelold seed. He then
created (he Siy tar pouring copious rein
on the Cailh.

4 S — 44 Fprsooth, O king. It IS (his
Krishna who has creaied this universe. He
las originaied from his own self, it tt he
who causes all tilings to exist through his
own power. He it is wiio has created the
celestials, the Asuras, the human beings, the
woildt, Ihe Itisins, (he departed manrs and
ail cresterres. Desirous of creating, that
Lord of all crcatu'cs dulj created the enure
universe of life. Know (hat good and evil
mobile and immobile, have all originated
(lOin this nne who is Vishaaksena. What
ever extsts, and whatever will come into
bciag, ad IS Keshava. This Krishna is abo


the death which overtakes a(( creatures
when Uteir end comes. He is eternal and it
IS he who upholds the cause of Virtue,
VVii3(ever exisie i m ib' pist, and whatever
wr* do not know, indeed, all that also is tins
Vishwaksena ^

45 All that IS noble and mentonoits
' in the universe, all th^t 11 good a»id evil,

IS Keshava v/ho IS inconceivable. Hence it
IS absurd to tlnnle o( anything whicfi is supe*
nor to Keshava

46 Kvshava is such More than this,

He IS Narayana, the highest of the high,
imrnuiabfe and undccaying. He is (he
eteriMl and changeless cause of (he etilire
inotnte and immobile universe with ns
br).iiiinflg, middle, and end, as alsd
of all creatures wliose birth follows their
wish. ^


CHAPTER CLIX.

(ANUSHASANIKA PAIWA>.—
Canh/iiie/.

Yudhishlhira siid

I leli us O destroyer of Ms Ihii the
prosperxy >v) icH originates from {le wor-
ship of the Uralmuiias You are a master
of this subject, finleed) our graiidfaiiiec'
knows you

Vasoflera said.— 1

3 Hear me, O king, wiih attention,
D chief of Qharat-t's race, as i recite lo you
wiiat (he turrits of the Brahmaiias are, O
foremost one of Kiiru's race
3-*-4 Once on a time wlnle I was seated
at Dwarnvaii, O delighter of the Kurus, my
son Pradyumiia, enraged by certain Brah-
nianas, came to rue and said — O destroyer
of Madtiu, what merit is there for ador-
ing the Drahmanas Whence IS (heir lord-
ship dc'ived both m this world and in tlie
next.

5 O giver of honors, what rewards are
gained by consUntly adoring (he Brali-
nianasf Kindly explain (his clearly to me,
for my ini id IS disturbed by dcubts about

tins.

<$ Wlien Pradjmmna said, these words
to me. t answsied linn as follows D> you
hear.O amg, with rapt atleiiuoii, wl at these
Kords were

y O child ol Rnktnini, listen to m* as t
(ell you what prosperity one may acquire by
adormtr the Urahmanas, When one Incs
to acquire she threefold otjecn ol life (via ,


maimbharata.


5JC


and Pleistirs). or Emandpa-
('ion, or faias aiii] pri'^penly. or the treats
Ri«nt and cure of di^e^ts", or tlie worslup of
tlie deities and the depntted tmnes, he
should take care to please the iwicc-born
ones. *1 hey are each a ki'ig Sniita. I hey are
the dispensers of happiness and rnisery.

9 O child of Rukmint, whether in this
nr m the next world, O son, everything
aereeable has Originated from the Brah>
manas I have no doubt in this.

10. From the adoration of the Brah-
tnanas originate achievernent* and fame
and strength. Men and the i^egents of the
universe, adore the Brahmanas.

11. How then, O son, can we disregard
them, thiiiUing that we are lords of the
E-trih ? O mighty armed one, do not allow
your anger to embrace the Brahmanas as
IIS object.

II In this as aUo the nestl wotW Brah*
manas are considered as great Beings
*J hey have direct knowledge of evrryihing
in the univeise. Venlyt they are capable
of reducing everything into ashes, if
angry.

t'i They are capable of creating other
svoiids anrl other Regents of worlds. Why :
then should not persons gifted with energy
and true knowledge treat them wiln obe-.
dienceand respect 7

14 Formerly in m> honse, O son,
lived (he Brahmena Dnrvasas whose co<n>
plexion was green and tnwny. Cl id in
rags, he had a stick made of the Vdwa
tree iii« beard was long and he was
greatly emaciated, r

15—16 Ife was tallT in sniiir^ than
the tall'St man on Earch \Vand*nn{'
over all the worlds of human beings and
nf the denies aiiil other superior beini*s,
he sail? rnnsUnily among assemblies and
in public »qusics,— Who is there who w''iild
c.<use the Urahmsiia Durvass* ta five in Ins
house, doing the duties oi hmpitahty to-
wards him T

17. He becomes wroth with every one
if he finds even the slightest t'ansi'iono 1 >
tlearing tins about my nature, who is lliere
who will give me re(u<e 7

iS Indeed, he who would give mr
shelter as a gne<’ snnnl 1 not <1 j anything* io
anrer me (—Whni I saw that no one sen.
tilled to give r.im shrhrr ni his hriisr, t
invitrd him and made Inn live it my
absae.

19 On certain dsjs h« wonli eat the
fir'd »i.''ieierH for t'>r r-’r-iU of lUoiisands
of r'lsons On rttier dais le would smt
V»r> littl«. t>'i sr^mr davs t>» nn<||d go
cut el itiy house and woul 1 nut return.


ao fie would sometimes laiigfi wlthont
any reason and sometimes cry nsplrssly
At thrft time there was nobody on Esrth 9
old as he.

ai. One day, entering the quarters which
were given to him, lie burnt all the beds
and coverlets and all the well-adorned
damsels who were there for serving him.
Doing this, he went out.

21. Of inglily praiseworthy vows, he
met me shortly after this and address-
ing rne, ssnl,— () Krishna, 1 wislt to eat
frumenty forthwith.

03 flaviiig iinderslDod his mind previ*
oiii.ly, I had set my servants to prepare
every Kind of food and drink.

24 Indeed, many excelleii' Viands had
been kept ready. As soon as [ was asked,

I caused hot frumenty to be brought and
offered to the ascetic.

I 23. Having eaten some, he q t'lckiy sa"'i
10 me.—D Krishna, talie some of lhi»
frumenty and smear all your limbs with it,

26 Unhesitatingly I did as difecled*
Indeed, with tlie residue of that frumeiUy I
smeared my body and head.

27 The ascetic at (hat time fawjout
beautifui nioiher standing near. Laugh*
Dig the while, he stneated iirr body also
Willi that frumenty.

28 I he ascetic then caused your mother,
wliose bftiJy was smeared over
fruiuent), to be yoked to a car wiiliout *'»/
delay. Ascending that car he started
from my (muse.

Highiv intelligent lliat Bmhman*
shone with effulgence like fire, and struck,
bei.ire me, tn) yuudifiil Uukmini, as it »''«
were on animal born to drag the cars t><
human beings.

ko Seeing this, I did not feel Ih- s'lght-
evl tnef burn of malice or tlie desire to
II jure (h« ttislii. lUvnig yoked RukiniDi to
the car, he went out, desirous ol passu'd
al*o.v,l.lie lij.^h. eaad.at

31 — 3a Spring lliat exirsorihnafy
spectacle, aninc Oavliarlias, filled wil"
angel, «dJre--sed on** anotlier.aiid began t>
eonvers- tlins i— Wl.o else is there on
Fs Ih who weinhi live after h-vnig Jo**"
tSCkinmi to a csr ! Indeed, let the wolld
be filled wttli Brahinan.l Onlyt Let >'0
other Oiderv take bitlli here 1

3J. Tlie pnsnn of a virulent snake iS

greaify poweTliil .^fure powecfnl
p i>i»> IS AUr..).in,na There M no pS)S»
Clan lor a pervon wlio lias been hit Of bi*'f(
hy the virulent sn ike ol a Uiahinana.

14 As the irre«ini*!e n.KVSMS r'f*
CceJed on the car, ttu.niini tuiiried en ti *


ANU51IASANA PARVA.


ro4d And [requerlly dropp'd down. At
Uns the twice born Kisin b<Came anKry A*>d
began to urge Kukmioi on by striking tier
with tlie whip

33 At Ust, 6tled with an irreti>tib1e
passion, t)ie Brahniana leap'd doao Iron)
the car, and fled towards the suulh, tunning
on foot, over a pathless ground

36 Seeing that ioreina>t of Qrahmanas,
flying along Ihe pathless ground, we follow*
ed him, ahhongli we were smeared with
frumenty, excluming behind Imn,— Be
pleased with us, O holy one,

37 Gifted with great energy, the Brah'
mana seeing' me,) said, O mighty armed
Krishna, you hive subdued anger by Ihe
strength of your nature.

33 O you of excellent vows t i>avo not
foil td the slightest taiill 1 1 yo 1. O Govinda,

1 have been liuhly pleased with you Do
you solicit the fruition ol such desires as you
please.

Behold duly, O son what the
power IS of myself when t become pleased
with any one As long ae oelestialsand Iw'
man beings will continue to entertain a liking
for food so long will every one among them
clierish the same hking for you that they
cherish (nr their fond As long, again, as
llt'ro will ba Virtue in the S'verst worlds, so
long will Ihe fame of your deeds last.

41. Indeed, your distinciion will last so
long in the three woil Is U Jauarddana,
agreeable you will be to all persons

42 Wliaiever articles of yours have be»n
broken or b inic or otherwise <l'«royed (by
me) yon ivil! see restored, O J mordiJaoa,
to their former state or they will reappear
even in a better form.

43 As long again, O you of unfading
glory, as you will wish to live, to Img will
you have no fear of Je-iCti aitacking you
through such parts of your body as have
been smeared with the frumenty 1 gave
you.

44 O son, why did you not sraear ihat
frumenty on the soles 0/ your feet as well?
By not doing It, you have acted in a way
that IS not approved by rne — Ihese were
llie words that he said well pleased « th
me on that occasion. After he had ceased
speaking 1 saw that iny bp]} became
filled with great great beauty and spleit'

dour.

45 To Rukmmi also, the Rishi, well
pleated with her, sai 1 — O bea tiilul lady,
you wt)I be |he foremost one of thy sex »,
fame, and yon will enjoy great glory, and
achievements Yon will riever siifler from
deerep (rfde Or disease or foss o( com*
plexiun.


«7

46 Every one will see you engaged itj
waiting upon Krishna, possessed as you
already are with a fragrant.odor winch is
alwaye present in you

47. Vou will becomc'the foremost of all
wives,|ntimbering sixteen tliousand, af
sbava At last, when the tirae comes for
your departure from the wnil4, you will
icquire tie inseparable Companionship of
Krishna hereafter —

48—49 Having said these words la
your muther, the Rishi once more addres-
sed me and uttering the following words,
left the spot Indeed, t1 e Rishi Durvasas,
shining like a ffre, said ,—0 Keshava, may
you be So disposed always towards the
Brahananas —After uttering these words,
that B afiinana disappeared tliere and thtn
before niy eyes.

50 After Ins disappearance, I begin to
follow the vow of uttering certain htantraj
silently without being heard by anybody.
From that day I resolved to do whatever
commands I should receive from the Bratt*
Mianas.

51. Having adopted this vow, O son,
alwsg With your mollier, both of u»,
wiili hearts filled with joy re entered Our
paltce

$} Entering mir house I taw that
ev«ryl< mg which the (tishi had broken fir
burnt had re appeared fresh.

S3 Seeing those new articles, which had
bcsnl'S become more durable, I became
sirsckeit wiib wonder, O son of Rukmiiu,
from that day forth I have always adored
tlie Bralimanas in my mind. ,

54. rius. O chief of nharata's race. Is
wUvt 1 said on that occasion about the
greatness of tlios' Urahmanas who arc the
foremost ol their order.

SS Do you also O son of Kuntf, adore
the higlly blessed Bralimanas every day
with gifts ol wealth end kine, O powerful

36 It was tlius ihat I won Die prosperity
1 enjoy— the pro->pentv that is born of ll.e
fav'oiir ol Brahmsiias. Wiiatever, again,
Bhishma has s.nl of me, O chief of the
Dll iraus, 11 all true.


33*


MAIIABIIARATA.


* CHAPTER CLX.

( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA }.—

Conttnutd.

TadhishtWra said

t. You 5>iould, O deflroyer of MAdhUi
'explain to me that fcnowledg^e winch you
have acquired through the favour of
Durvasas.

3. O foremast of all persons havme
Intelligencei 1 wish to know everyllun^
about the great blessedness and all the
names of tiiat great one truly and in
detail !

Vusudeva-flaid

3. } shall recite to you the good which 1
have acquired and the fame which I have
I won through the favour of that great one
1 I shall describe to )ou the subject, after
\ iiaVtilg bowed unto Kaparddin.

' 4. O Icing, listen to me as I recite to
^ ou that Shata<Rudtiya winch 1 repeat, with
controlled senses^ every morning after rising

from bed.

5. 'The great lord of all creatures. Tit ,
the Grandfather Brahman himself, having
c penances for riches, composed those Man«
trat, after having observed especial pe«
nances for some time. O sire, it is Shank^ra
who created all the,creatures in the univet*e.
molnie and immobile.

' 6, There is no being who is supener, O

menarcli, to Mahadeva. He is the highest
I of all beings in tiie ttirce woitds
^ y. there vs no one who is capable of
standing before (hat great Being Indeed,
there is no Being iii llie three woildt «vl o is
Ins equal.

8 \Vlien he stands, filled with anger,
on the field of battle, the very scent of Ins
body deprives all foes of conscuni^ness and
they svho are not killed crenibte and fall
down.

jv tiff futrs yW

ttrings of clouds Hearing those roars m
battle, the very hearts of the celestials break
III twain.

Wlien the holder of Pinakabe*
comas angry and assoming a terrible mien
merely cavil f is c) e up n Heii) , Astira, Gan-
dharva, or snake, that individual cannotob-
tain peace of mind by taking shtlier in the
rccessess of even a mounuin cive, Wiicn
lliSI lord of all creatuiei, ns, Dak>lia,
desirous of celebrating a sacfiRce, spread
hit sacrifiee out, the brave Bhava, yielding
to anger <al Uaksha't sligtit of him), pierced
the Sacrifice, bhuoting 1 u artow Icam Ins
t«t»lbla bow, he reared aloud.


13. Indeed, when Maheshwara became
angry and 'suddenly pierced with his arrow
the embodied form of sacrifice, the celestials
became filled with sorrow, losing happiness
and tranquility of heart

!4 On account of the twang of his bow*
string the whole universe became agi*
tated, Ihe celestials and the Asuras,

0 son of Prillia, all became cheerless and
stupefied.

15 The Ocean rolled in agitation and
the Eirrth trembled to her centre. ihe
hills and mountains began to rnove froi^
their bases and ran on all sides. Ihe vault
of the sky became cracsed. .

t6 All the worlds became covered wi’h
darkness Nothing could be seen. Ihe
light of all the luminaries became darkened,
along with that of the bun himself, U
Bharaia.

17 The great Rishis, stricken with fear
and desirous of doing good to themselves
and the universe, performed the usual rites
of propitiation and peace.

18. Meanwhile, Riidra of terrible pro*
wess rushed aftanist the celestials Filled
with anger, he lore out the eyes ot Bhiga

19. Excited with anger, ho attacked
Pushaa with Ins foot He tore out llie
teeth of that god as he sat empHjed l>
eating the large sacrificial ball (called Pt>*
rodaslia).

30. Trembling wuh (ear, the crleJhalii
bent their t>eaii» 10 Shanic&ra Without
being appeased, Rudra ovco more pieced
on Ims bowstring a sharp ami blazing
arrow.

31. Seeing his prowess, the Jeelesfial*
and the Histiis became all alarmed lliu»«
foremost of gods began to pacdy him.

33 JonFing their hinds in respect, tie)*
began 1 1 recite (he Sliaia-RuJriya Msniras.

1 bus lauded (>y the cele<tisls, at Ust M*’
lieshwara became gratified.

33 The deities then assigned a larR*
ahare to him. rrembhiig witti fear, O king,
they sought refuge with him.

34 When Rudra became pleased, <ha
embodiment of sacrifiee, wdiicli had been
cut in twain, became once more united.
Whatever limbs of his had beenj destroyed
by tlie arrows of Mahadeva, became onCe
more whole and sound

35 The Asiiras gifted wiili greet energy
had formerly three cities |ii the firmsinml.
Uileof these, had been made o( tru» >

of silver, and (tie tliird o( gold.

36 With alt his weapons, ,^fJghsvst
the chief of ihs celsstiah, srtl u»*sVt« t»


340


MAtlABiURAIA


fnrm of hU wliich is mild and aiispicioust
is said to be engaged in ilie practice of ttie
Vow of celibacy.

S Hiat other form of Ins winch is highly
terrible perforins all the destructive opera-
tions in llie universe l^ecaiise he is great
and the Supreme I.ord of all (Isliwdra}i
tlierefore he is called Maiieshwara

7. And because he hums and oppresses,

is keen and BeiCe, and '''Uh great

energy, and is engaged in eating flr&h
and blood and manuw, that he is called
Kudra.

8. Because he IS the foremost of all the
celestials, and b*cause his dominion and
acquisitions are sery exteusivci anti because
he protects the v>«st universe, therefore U>e
is called Alahadeva

9 — 10 Because he is of the form or color
of smoke, therefore lie ts called DInvjjatr
Because by all Ins deeds he performs sacri*
hces lor all and seeks the welt being of
every creature, therefore he is called Shiva
or the auspicious one Living 1 1 the sky,
he burns tlie lives of all crc'^tures and is
besides, fixed tn a particular path from
Which lie does not deviate

tl. His emblem, again is fixed and im*
movable for all time He is, for these
reasons, called Siiianii He is also of mul*
tiferm aspect He is present, past, and
future.

ta He It mobile tnd immobile For
this he IS called Vahurupa Ihe celestials
called Visliwedetias live In his body He is,
for this, called V^warupa having an uiii
venal form. ^

> 3 . He has A thousand e>esi or, he has!
numberless eyes{ or, he has eyes on all I
sides and on every p>rt of Ins body, llis '
cFiergy comes out through I is ej es. 1 1 e<e
is no end of his eyes

14 Because he always nnunshes ail
creatures and «purts also willi them, and I
l/rcause he is tl eir 1 urd or master, lI>ereiore
IS he Called rashupali (the lord of all
creatures.

>5 Because Ills emblem always observes
the vow of Brahmacharyya, all the worlds,
therefore, adore it I his act of srofship is
said to please hint highly,

16 If there is one who kdoces lunj by
creating his image, and another who adore*
Ins emblem, Ihe latter it is wlio wins |,real
prosperity forever.

17. The Rishis, the celestials, (he Gsn*,
dharvas, and the Apsaras. adore that cm - 1
Hem oI his which is ever eiect and up-
raised.


iS Ifliisamblem is adored, .Afalesfl'
wara heenmes highly pleased wiih llie
adorer. Affeciionale towards his devotees,
he confers happiness upon them with a
cheerful soul.

19 lliis great god loves to live in ere*
matiria and there he burns and cansinnes
all dead tiodies, lliose persons who cele-
brate sacrifices on such grounds attain at
the end to the regions of heroes,

20 Engaged in Ins proper duty, he it i*
who IS considered as the Death who live!
Ill the liodies of all creatures He is, agaiui
those vital nirs called Prana and Apana,
in the bodies of all embodied creatures,

21. Hl has many burning and terrible
forms. All those forms are adored in llie
viiofid and are known to Bralimanas gifted
with knowledge.

21 Amongst the gods he has many
Significant names. Indeed, the meanings
of those names are derived from eiiher lus
greatness or vasiness, or his feats, or Ins
Cond ict.

23. ihe Brahmanas always recite ih*
evceilent Shata Itudriya in his Iionor, that
IS Ml (lie Ved** as also that which lias been
composed by Vyasa.

24 indvid the Drahmsnas and Rishi>
cAi him tl e eldest of mII beings,

C5 He IS the first of all the celestials,
and It was from Ins mouth that he created
Agni. It at great deity, ever willing to
grant protection to all, never forsakes l>d
suppliants

, id— 27 He would much rather give up

; Ins own life and suffer all possible afU cMuns
Inmscif Long I fe, health and freedom
from disease, afllaeiice, wealth, various
I kinds of pleasures and enjoyments, are
j cm lerred fay him, and it is he also who
|stiairtri ihein awsy I he lords'up a"d
. afllience tiat one sees m bliakra and the
other celestials are, indeed, his.

rt kl IS "lie who IS always engaged Vti

all thai IS good and evil in the three woilds.
On .account of Ills fullest control over
all objects of enjiyment he is cal'ed
Ishwara.

29 Because he is the master of llie vast
iiriiverse, therefure lie,i$ called Alatieshwara.

He whole universe is prevaded by I im m
various forms Hw inoiith macs an I burns
tlie waters ot the sea in the form of the huge
ciure't head I


. 34 ;


&IA 1 IABI 1 \RATA


Bhishma said j—

19 Virtue IS sometimes seen (0 be des«
troyed by a wicked man of great power. If
you Uiink, O king, that virtue sboi.ld iMlIy
be of three sorts, 1 answer tliat yoitr con«
elusion ts supported by reason.

20. Ihe truth is that virtue is one and
tndivisibie, althougli it is capable of being
seen from three different points. *

21. The paths, of those tliree, which form
the foundation of virtue have each been
laid down. Do you act according to the
instructions laid down. You should never
wrangle about virtue and then seek to have
these doubts of yours removed.

23 . O chief of the Bharatas, let no
doubts like these ever take posse'^sion of
your mind Do you obey unhesita.
tingly what I say. Follow me like a blind
man or like one who, having no sense him-
self, has to depend upon that of another.

, 23. Abstention from miury, truth,

I absence of anger (or forgiveness), and
{ liberality or gifts,— these four, O kmg do
I you practise, for these four form eternal
virtue.

' 94. Do you also. O mighey<arm«d prince,
follow that conduct towards the Brahmanas
which IS consistent with what has been
observed towards them by your father and
grandfather, Ihese fare .the principal
marks of virtue.

25. 1 hat foolish wight, who would des.
troy the weight of authority by denting
that to be a standard which lias alwajs
been accepted as such, would liimsell fail to
become an authority among men Such a
man becomes the cause of much sorrow
in the world.

36 Do you respect the Brahmanas and
treat them with hospiUliiy. Do you always
serve ihem in this way. The universe
rests on them. Do you understand them
to be such.

37. Ictl me, O grand father, what the
respective ends are of those who fiale
virtue and of those who worship and
observe it.

Bhishma said —

3S. Ihosa men who hate virtue are said
to have their hearts possessed by He
qualities of passion and daikness. Sucii :
men have always to go to Hell

3Q 1 hose men, on the other hand. O
king wlio always observe *iriue those men
who are given 10 irnlh and smceriry. are
called good I hey always etij .y {be plea-
t" «s or happiness of tba eeUnul


[ 30. On account of their waning upon

I tlieir preceptors with respect thnr hearts
I always turn towards virtue li deed they
who worship virtue, attain to the region of
the celestials.

31. Those individuals whether men or
celestials, who are shorn of ctip'dny and
malice and who emacme or afUct their
bodies by the practic of austerities succeed,

' on account of the virtue which (hey thus
acquire, to attain to great happiness

3* The righteous always adore them
with love and affection as a hungry man's
stomach longs for ripe and sweet fruits

Tndlxishtbira said

33 What are the marks of the wicked,
and what are tliose deeds which the gmii
do? Csplatn to me this, O holy one.
Indeed, tell me what characteristics are
of the good and the ivicked.

Bhishma said r—

34. Ihe wicked are evil in their prac-
tices, incapable of being governed bv ridet.
and evil tongiied Ihe good are hovever,
always good in ilieir deeds Indeed (he
acts these men do are considered as tlie
characteristics of good deeds

35 The good or the righteous, O kmif,
never answer ihe two I. dls of nature on the
pubiK road or 1 ) the midst .of a cowpeih
on a field of paddy.

36 After feed ng the five they take ihe'f
own food Ihey iipver i.«!k while eaimgi
and never go to slet.p with wet hinds.

! 37 Whenever they see any of the follow-

ing, they go round them lor showing them
respect vi* , a burning fire, a bu'J, t' 0
image of a deny, •» cowp-n, a crossti'il
place of four roads, and an old and viriuous
Brahmann.

33 riiemselves standing aside they
give the way to those that are old, those
that are afll tied with burdens, ladies, ibo**
that hold high appointments in llie
qr town adiniiiistraiiun, Brahmanae, kme,
and kings.

39 Ihe righteous or good mao '*
who protects his guests, servants and oU ef
dependants, his own reiaiives and all tl os^
who seek his protection, buch a mao
always welcomes these with the usual pohl®
enquiries.

40 As ordained by the denies hum*''
beings should lake their food twice a day,
»»» , morning and evening Duimg |h®
tniereal one should not eat anything UV

foKowiiig this rute about eating, one IS saio

to observe a last.


ANUSHASAHA PARVA


343


4t As <l‘e sacred fire «aitj hr I«ba«
tiiin« to be poured upon ii «ben the hour
for llonti arrive*, so a woman, when her
period 15 over, expects sexual union with
her husband

41 One, who never knows Ins wife at
»«)/ olher tunc except after the period of
mensei, IS said to observe the vow of Bra*
Iimachary53 Amnia (nectar), Drahmanas.
and kine, "these three are considered as
equal.

43 flence. one should atwajs adore.
With due riles, Hrahinanas and kine One
does not commit any fault or stain by eat*
inft tie meat of animals killed m sacrifices
with the help of Mantras from the Yajur
Veda.

44. The flesh of the back hour, or that
el aniRiaU not killed in sacrifices sliould
be avoided even as one avoids tie fl-ili of
bit own son Une si onid ne\crc.<use f is
jtucsl to 1*0 wiihout fiiod whether he |
lives in his own country or in a loreig 1
land.

45 After complelmff his study’ one
si oiild pive the due present to tis pr«*
ceptor, Wl eti one sees I is preeep or, he
should receive him with respect and adoring
iiiin present him a seat

46 By adoring Ins pfee«p(or, one in
creases the penod of I is Me n-s also his
lame and prosperity One shontd never
censure the old. nor send them on any

I itsmesf

47— 4Q One sfonfd never be «eated
wl «u any One that is old is Manding
UvactmK thus one protects the duration
01 his life One sho iIJ never cast Ins
eyes on a naked woman, nor a naked
man One sliould never indulge in sexual
congress exerpt in privacy. One should
cal also without being Been bjT'Wliefr'
Ihecrptors are the fureinisc of shrines,

II e heart is the loreinott of all sacred

oHiecis, knowledge IS lie foremost of all ,
objects of search, and contentment «s the
foremost of all happi less Morning and ;
Sfvefirrrft tint Wa-t, VbVnfe-jpwtxwn*

sets of the a^ed,

5'' One aeqiiire* wisdom by Constantly
WMtiin'' upon llie asred Wl ile reading
tie Vrd^s or emp{o>rd in cxiing, one
sl».a I use his right hand

51— S) One thoild always keep Ins
speech and m>od under pMfeci conirut, •*
also his senses With well cooked Irumm*
I), Yasaks Knshara, and llavi (clarifird
bulitr). one should adore the depaiicJ
msnes and the celestials in tic btredlh*
called Asl faka I lie same si ouM be used
1,1 aJjtfjg lue I'Lmcis Oi>e shwuIJ not


undergo a thave svithoitt ealhng down a
blessing upon himself If one sneezes, one
slioafct be bfessM by those present Aft,
who are ill or sutTer from diseases, should be
blessed, llie extension of their lives should
be prayed for.

SJ One should never address an emi*
nent person famtiiaily. Under even the
greatest d /Hculttes one shonidnever do this,
to th 2 u such a person and to kill him are
equal Learned persons are degraded by
such a manner of address.

54 Such a word can be used to those
who are inferior, or equal, or to disciples.
A sinful man always speaks of the sms he
has commuted.

53. 'llsose men, who have dehberatefy
commuted sins, meet With destruction by
trying t<i conceal them from the good. In*

I deed, ilie confirmed sinners fry to conceal
I tliair sinfU deeds from others.

56 Such persons think that their sms
are seen neither hy men nor the relesiials.
rite Sinful men, Uden With his sms, takes
buth Mt a miserable order of bemg

57 1 he sms of such a man continually
grow, even as the interest charged by an
usurer daily m duplies itself. If having
ommitted a sm, one seeks to have iC
envered by virtue, that sm becomes
destroyed and leads to virtue iii*tead of tJ
other Sins

5$ tf a qisntity of wster be poured
upon salt, the latter is immediately dissoU
ved So when expiation is performed, sm is
dissipated

59. Tor these reasons one should never
coi ceat a sin Conceafrd it [11 sure to in*
crease Having committed a sm, one
should confess it before the good They
would then destroy 11 iorlliwith.

61 If one does not enj >y m good limo
«hat he has stored with hope, the result is
fhai the stored wealth passes into another
mart's hands after tl e death of 1 im who lus
stored it

til. "Tiie wiseVtavc saiiilfiiatViie'rnmA
every creature is the tru* teil of virtiw
lienee, all creaiu'es in tins world liave an
inflate tendency to achieve virtu*.

6> One should achieve virt 1* alone or
S iigle handed. Indeed, one should not
proclaim h nis*lf viriunis and w«tk witli
ihe standard uf virtue upraised foe pu/poser
efsliow riwy are said to be traders m
virtue w!«> practice ft /or cnjjjmg ii«
frui 1

63 One stouH x'rslm lie erlestislt
willioin gi»« 4 ««y lose, I nients of p'i.le.
bMidaily, one alwuld seise lit pici.aytor


344


MAIlAEIURATA


wtihout deceit One sliould malce arran^e-
inenls Icf <ecunng to Inmseli ) invaluable
riches in (he iie\C ivoild which consists in
2,ifts made here to wonliy persons.


CHAPTER CLXm,

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).— '

Conttnued,

Tndhis'hthira said —

1. It IS seeiiUhat if i person happens^
to be unfortunate, he fails to acquire nches
how greatsoever Ins sirengifi. On the i
other hand, if he happens to be fortunate,
he amasses riches, even if he be a weak or
a foolish wight,

2. When, again, the time does not come
for acquisition, one, cannot make an ac*
quisUion, even if he tries his best. When,
honever, the time comes for acquisition,
one acquires gretit wealth without any
exertion

3. Himdreds of men may be seen who
gain no result even when they try Uieir
best Many persons, again, are seen to
mike acquisitions without any exertiot

4 If riches were the result of exertion,
then one could, with exeitioi, acquire it
forthwith Indeed if the case were suf no
learned man could lliets be seen to take tl>e
protection for (he saUe of his livehood, of
one destitute of fearntng

5 Among men, that winch is not to be
nliaincd, O chief of the Bharatas, is never
nliamed Men are seen to fail m gaming
results even if they try their best

..6 One may be seen to seek riches by
himdreds of means (and yet failing to
acquire >1), while nnollier, without it nil
seeking It. gets It. Men may be seen doing
evil deeds conliiiuatly (fur wealth) and yet
they do not gam it,

7, Others get wealth without doing any
evil act whatever. Oltiers, agon, who
follow the duties assigned to them by tl e
scripture, are without wealth One m^y
be seen to be without any knowledge* of the
science of ethics and polity even after |>e
has I^ludied all the Uedtises on that
science.

8. One, again, msy be seen appointed

as the prime minister of a king without
having at all sindied (he moral and pofiticif
sciences A I anted min may be seen wira .
has weallli An ignorant matt may be I
teen having neslih • UjIIi kinds of men, j
b^am. may be tccii who has wealth. J


9 If by ih* ?pq nsilion of leirnlng' 009
could acq lire the happiness of riches (lien
no man of learm l uI J be found livin,',
for the vt-ry m-aps of hit 1 veliho > 1 , n ider
the protection uf one shorn of laarning

to liilcedr if one- coiil 1 obtain, b^ tlie
'icquiSKiiMl of leaning, aif desirable ohj.-cCS
tike a tliirsiy individual having his thirst
satisfidd upon getliiig water, ilien none 11)
tins worl I would have shown idleness m
acquiring learning.

It. If one'’S lime has not come, one
does not die even if cut {with hundreds of
shafis On the other hand, one dies if Ins
hour fiae come, even if it be blade uf
grass Wilii whicli he is struck.

Bhislima said — ■

12 If one, by peiforming arduous works,
fads to acquire w.-allli, he slioutd then
practise severe au<[ei|iie$ Unless seeds
be sown, no crops appear.

13 It IS by m*kiiig gifts that one gets
numerous objects of enjo) ment , one becomes
endued with intelligence and wisdom hv
wailing upon ll e eiders I lie wise have
said that one becomes long lived by pract '
sing the dnt> of absteiuion fiom cruelty >0
all creatures.

S 4 Hence, One shosld make gifts and
not s hull and one should adore iiulividinh.
Indeed one shuidd b<* sweet speech ed to*
wards all and alwajs do what is a^reealle
to others One should seek In alia 11 m
puriiy, one Should alwajs absiam from
doing III) iry io any ciexiure

15 It is hut proper, O Yii Itiishihira.
that you should be pissessedby peaceful
seulnnents, since their deeds and Naiurc
are the rnling causes of I appmess and
miser) to even insects and ants.


CUAPICR CLXIV.

(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—

Continued \

Bhishma said —

1. If one does good deeds or causes
others to do them, he stiould then expect t<*
altai i to the merus of virtue , likewise if one
does evd deeds and causes otliers to do
them, he sliouid never expect to attain <0
(lie'merits of virtue.

2 At all times, it isTime, which enter-
ing the uiidersianding of ill crealure*, s^'*
them to deeds of virtue or sin and ItiCU
confers happiness or misery upon the ni. ,


ANUSfMSANA PAtlVA


345


3 * When ft person, seertiff the frurts of
vutue understand* virtue to be superior, )t
IS then that he indities towards vinue an!
puls lailh in it One. h nvever, whose tin
derstatiding is not Hrm, cannot place faith
III It

4, A* recards faiih m virtue, it is this
To place faith in viitue is the mark of ii>e
wisdom of all persons One, who <s ac* j
q united wilh lyfot should be done an,)
what should not be done, with a view to
oppoiinneness should, with care and
devotion, do what is ri^ht.

3 1 hose virtuous men, who have in this

life beer^fesseit wiiii riches acting of thrir
own accord, taire particular care of their
souls so that the) msy not, in iheir iirxt
lives. Irave to lake birth as persons with
the quality oi daiknets predommating in
them.

6. Time can never make the cause of
misery One should therefore kno v (tut
the soul which is virtuous t* certainly pure

7. As regards sin, it may he said that,
even when it is very great H »* inespahjr* of
even touching viriiic w) ich is alvayspro*
tected bv time and which shines lue a
burning fire

8 Ihese are the two results aclueved by
Virtue, tie. the purity of ti>e soul and u >•
susceptibility of being touched by imqiiiy
Indeed virtue is fraught nub viciory Its
effulgence is so great that it lights up the
three worlds

Q A wise man cannot catch hold nl a
Binlul persnit and forcibly make > nn piont
Wlien seriously urt,ed to act pio»sly,rba sin.
ful only act wfili }i_) pocrisy, moved by leaf

10 Even the *rij{l tea IS among lie
Slmdras never betake ihnnselves lo such .
Itpocnsy under the pretext II at persons
oi the Shiidra order arc itoi petiniiied to '
live according lo any oi the foui piescrtbcd '
modes. I

fl. I shall tell yon panrcttUrly what the |
duites truly nre dI ilie lour castes. So far as
their bodies are concerned, the individuals '
itoVnrgni'g' v\r a'lf ,bu\" .nwilnr .keve i^ir
’primal elements for their consiiiumi m-
rgredieut^; they are 11 of thesamesubsiance
l|n this matter.

I* For all ihal, their practices rrlaling
lo hfe or the world and the duties of virtue,
vary despite these distinctions and sufficient
liberty of action is feft to them by wliicli all
individuals may attain to an equality of
condition.

13 *llie regions of happiness which
represent the resulls or /rewards of virtue
ace not eternal, lor they are destined to


r'mn'* to an end. Virtue, however, is eternal
I Wiieu ihe c^use js eternal, why is the efT.ct
iiftso* Ihe answer to this is as folloivs.
Only tint virlue is eternal wUich is not
prompied by die desire of fruit or reward.

14 All men are equal as regard^
their pliysical organism All of them,
again, liave souls winch ate equal in ilaiiire.
Wlien <li<s«o|ii(iin comes, all else dissolves
away Wliaj remains i* {he desire for
arq iirinit viniiL, Miat, Indeed, re.appcars
(ill next life) of Itself

• 5 Wien such IS the result the in«'
rq lality of Cfliiditim, seen am' ng human
beings, cannot be considered in any way
aiionialous So also it is seen that thnscr
creaiiires dial belong l» the pilerniediaie
orders of existence are eq lally >11' yel, a^out
llieir acts, to the n fiuence of ex<nnple.


CUAPJEll CLXV.

I (anushasaNika parva) —

I Ceiitutiieii I

' Vaisliampayana said.—

I Oes'rous nl acquinr g the mtnl whrelt
destroys si >s that p«rpeiiiaior of Kuril's .
race, VI# Yudhislidiira the sou ef Paitdu,
qtieMioiied Dlislina who tvas lying on a,
bed of arrows saying. '

Tadhisbtlnrasaldt— i j

3 \Vi I indeed is ' beneficial (or a
person in il is wGillT*\Vhat is that bv
doing which one may acquire happiness 7
By w( at may one be'pui'^ed of all hi^
sms T Indeed ivhut is that which destroy^
sms 7 ' ' ' '

Vftisbampanana said i

3 On this ^siifijeci, the rnyafson of
Shuntaiiii O firemotr'of men, VI ty recited
the names o( tl e celcstMls to YudhisUdurS
who was desnousot lieariiig.

Bliishma said _ "

4 O son, tie fvf^U'ving names "^of {fj^

celestials wuh diose oi the ttiyhis. If diily{
recited morurug, noon, ahd evening, destroy
ftli bins. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

S — 4 Acting with the help of h»s sensesi
whatever sms one may coinmit by day ot
by night or by the two itv|hghr«/ willingly
or unwiltm^ly, one is sure to be cleansed
ibercform and became thoroughly pure by
reciting tiiese names. One, tfiat takes those
nam^ has never to become bhnd or deaf;
indeed, by taking those names, one always
succeeds m getting wliat 1$ beaeficul, j


MAIIADIIARATA.


7 SmcU Ji roan nrver uUw bsrtU tn
intcrmeciMtr ordtf of betni*, *i**''“r ROM lo
liell And never l>ecnmea a Immair bemi; of
nny of the niiaed castea. lie h«s never
(o fear an) CHlatnily When deal!) cornea,
he never hcc»tnes stirpefred,

8 . The master of all the ccfesitals and
Apsaras, resplendent with rflulstence, ador*
ed t»f atl creatures, incotrcervahle. mdescnb-
ahle, ttie fife of all living; beings, and unhoni
IS Jthe Grandfather Urahinan, that l^trd nf
the universe. Hrs chaste «ile ts bavitin.
'Ihett comes that origin of the Vedas, the
creator Vrsimii, otherwise called Narayaiia
of immeasurable power,

10^34. Then comes the tliree*eyed
t,ord oi Uma , then Si^nda the Cummaii*
(ter iti-chief of the celestial army, (hen
Vrshakoa , t len Agin the eater of sacnn.
cial libaiioiia, then Vayu the god of wind ,
tlien Cliandramas; then the sun god, gifud
with eftulgnce , then the ilhtstrions bhakra
the husband of Sachi, and Varna wiili
Ins wife Ohumorna • and Vaiuna with
Gaiiii! Kuvera the lord *>f riclies with his
Wile ItiJdhi; the amiable and itlusoiuns
cowSiirabhi; the great Kishi Vishtavas,
bmnkalpa, Ocean. G«nsa 1 the other saued
Kivers t the Maruts. the Valakhill)as
crowned with success of peiiance'i : (he is>

, land'barn Krishna, Narada, Parvata,
Vishwavasu , (he Hahas; the Hulnis,
'lumvuru, Chitrasena; the celestial me$«-
eenget ,( the highW<btessed c«lcs\t-tt n>a\>
dens; the celestial Apsaras , Urvashi,
Meiiaka, Ramva, Mishrakeshi, Al^mvasha,
Vishwacliii Gliritachi, Panchachada. Iilut-
t><ma. the Adiiyas, the Vasus, the Asbwins,
the Puns; bharma, (Kigliieousness) ,
Vedic tearmng, Penances. Diksha, Perseve-
rance tin religious acts) the Grandfather,
Day and Night, Kashyapa, tlie »ou of Ma-
rtchi Shukra, Vnliaspali, Mangala the son
of Earth. Vudha, Kahu. bhanaisUcli,<ra
the Constellations, the Seasons, (he Months,
the Fortnights, the Vear, Gsruda tire son ot
'Rinata, tne severa'i Deeans, fne sons o't
Kadru, ria, the Snakes, bliatarudra, Vi-
pa^ha, Cli njfabhaga, SaraswaU Smdhu
Devika, Piabhasa, the lakes of Piishkara,
Ga'ga, Mahanadi, Vena, ICaveri, Nar-
mada, Kaulainpuna, Vishatva, Karatoya,
Amvuvahini, Sarayu, Gandaki, the great
river Loluta, lamra, Anina, Vetravati,
Parnasa, Gautami, Godavari, Vena, Ktisn-
navena, Dwija, Orishadvati, Kaveri, Van-
ktiu, hlandakmi, Prayaga, Prabhasa, the
sacred Naitrusha, lire spot sacred to VisU-
weswara orMahadeva, via ,Kasli> that lake
of crystal water, Kurukshetra, full of many
sacred waters, the foremost of oceans '(via ,
the ocean of milk), Penances, Gifts, Jainva-
roarga, fiiranwaii, Vuasta, the rivac Plak-


.sttavati, Vedasmnli, Vedamall, MaUva,
I Astinravati, ail sacred spots on Carth, Gan-
gadtvara, the sacred Kisfnkulya, the nver
Qiitravaiia, (he Charnianwaii, the sacred
nver iCaurhiki, (he Yamuna, (fie river
Bliimaratlii, the great rivrr Vahiida, Ma-
hendravaiit, Indiva, Nihka, Saraswali,
Natida (lie other Nandi, the large sacred
lake Gaya, (.Plialuuiirtlia, Dharmaranya
(the sacred forest) inhabited by the celes-
tials, (he sacred celestial river, (he lake
created by the Grandfather Brahman, nhich
ts sacred and celebrated over the three
worlds and auspicious and capable of purify*
ing ail sms, the Himavat inoimtaj^^aving
excellent herbs, the Vmd>i}a ^iintain
variegated with various kinds of metals,
containing many I iriltas and everbrown
with medicinal herbs, Meru, Mahendra,
Mala)a, bhweta gifted WKli stiver, ShriiitS-
vat. Mdidara, Nila, Nishadha, Dardura,
Cliitraknia, Anjanabha, (he Gindliamadaiia
moiintdins, the sacred bomagiri, the vartoos
other mountains, the cardinal points of
the compass, ilie stibsidiaiy points, the
Earth, All the trees, the Vishvedevas, the
rirniament, ilte Consiellaii ins, the Planets,
and it>e {>ruies,-«Iet these all, named and
unnamed, rescue and purify us

35 The man, who lakes the name* of
the»e, becomes purged of all liia sins By
surging their praises and pleasing them,
one becomes freed from every fear.

36 Indeed, the man, who delights m
singing the h)iniis m laudation of the
deities, becomes pu g d of all such sins as
lead to birlli m impuic orders.

37—38. After this recital of the deilfes.

I sImII name those learned Brahmanas
crowned with ascLtic merit and success and
capable of purify mg one of every sin. 1 hey
are Yavokrila a'n 1 Uaihliya and Kal shivat
and Austiija, and Uhrigu and Angiras and

Kanwa and the powerful Medhatillu, and

Varhi endued with every accomplishment.

l.l>rse.aJl. hrlruj;» i/v ihit Ea.s>jy.'j. i;>yj,MJj).

39— (O Others, t,jr, Unmuchu, Pf**
muchu, Miimiiclui, all ht,'lily blessed the
highly energetic bwasiyaireya, the higl ly
powerful Agastya, tlie son of Mura and
Varuna , Dndliayu and Urdhavah 1 these
two foreino>t and celebrated of Rishis,—
these live in the Southern quarter.

41 — 43 — Listen now to me as I name
those Kishis who live in the Western
quarter. I bey are Ushaagu with his
uterine brothers, greatly cnergeiic, Dk'
•ghaiAinas, Gautama, K-rsliyapa, Ekata,

Dwita, Inta, tlie righteous souted^son of

Atri (v«s , Durvasss), and the powerful
Saraswat. Listen now to me "as 1 name


anvjshasana parva.


3H7


ihoie Rtsfirt wJ'O t'icre Rie ceieseui in
sacrifices, living m Uic Noclliern region.

44—47 they xre Airi, VAsishlhn,
Sli.iktri, P.ir«»ara's son Vyass of meat
enerf’y, Visliwamitra, IJliaradwaja, Jama-
dagiu. Oie smi of Kicliika, Atidila-

faba, Sfiwttakein Kofiala, Viptila, Dcvata
l^eVasharinan, Dliaumya, Ha'itikasliyapa,
l.oin«slia, NacInUeta, Lomaliarsliana Ugra>
sliravis, and Ufirigu’s son Oiyavana. llns
IS (he number of Uisliis gilled wuh Vcdic
learning.

43i 1 hey are primeval Uishis, O king,

whose names, 1/ iaken, are capable 0/
purifying one of every sin. After this I
shall recKe die names of the principal
kings.

49— eS They are Nriia, Yiyan, Nahu»
sha, Vadu, highly energetic Puru, Sagara,
Dhundhumara, Dilipa of great prowess,
Knsastivra, Yanvanashwa, Cintiashwa,
baiyayat, Onshinanta. Dharata wfio t>ec'ime
an illustrioui Emperor ever many kings,
Desharathai (lie heroic llama, (fist des>
(foyer of «aksfias,Sfiaihavind<t U(i*s,<rk(fia,
Harishchsndra, ISUriiita, l)fidl<ara«iia. die
liiglily rortuna(e Alaika, Ai(i, Karan thima.
(hat ioreme(( of men, Kashmira, Oaksha
Amvaiidia Uukura, higl ly itfiisttiMis
Univ'ita, Kuru, bamvaraiw, Mandiniri ot
tminitigated prowess, (>•« royal sage
Mucliukuiida, Jahmi wl>0 was mukh favoii>«
cd by Janhavi (Gaitga}, (tie fiist (in point
o( time; of a)] kings, "is , Piiilitt the son
of Vena, MarabtMitu, Friyankara, Irasi*
daiyu, bhweta ihs( foremost of royil sages,
die celebrated M^tiablusln, Nnni AsUuka,
Ayu. (lie royal sage Ksl iipa, Kakshe)ii.
l-'talarddana, Oirodasa, budisa, Kusfialcsti*
wara, Alla, N« 1 a, (tie ruyal save Mann,
dial loid ol all,c<«alurcS, llavnlliia. P,istia«
dhra, IVahpa, blianiaiiii, A)a, the senior
Vadii, Iksliaku of great fatne, Anaraatya,
Jannjsnvha (he ruyal sage Kakshasena,
and many others not named (in htsiocy).

59 llitt man, wlio rising early 1,1 (he
morning, lakes (tie names of tliese kings a(
the two iwilighis.ris , at auffset and stinrlsr,
with c pure body and mind and witJioui
distracted atiecicioii, wins great rcfigrous
merit,

Co. One should smg the praises of the
celestials, (hecelertial l<ishis,and (he royal
sages and say,— > lliese lord of the creation
will ordain my growth, longevity and lame.

61. Let no calamity visit me, let no sm
dchle me, and let li etc he no oppqne> is or
erieinies of mine. I oisooih, | wi]| •(•oy«
hate iictory and a» auspicious cud hetc*
alter.


CHAPTER CLXVI.

(ANUSHASANIKA PAUV.M.—
Confinhrd.

Janadejaya said : —

1—2 SVlien (hat foremost person
among (he Kaiiravav. vig , Bhishma, was
iving on a bed of arrows— a bed that is
Hlw,tys coveted by heroes— and when the
Partdav^s were siCirng around him. my
emi-grandfalher Yiidhishthira of much
wisdom, heard these espositions of mys*
tcrfcj Hbnttt die siily(<*c{ of duty and had
all I IS doubts removed.

3. lie heird also what the ordinances
ahont gifts, and thus lisd all his doubts
rcMttved about the topics of Virtue and
wralili. You shoiilJ, O learned Urahmana,
tell me now what else did (1>« great
Pandava king do.

Vaiahampayftna *ajd:—

4 Wlieii lihishma became silent, the
entire liody of kings became perfectly
sdrnt. Indeed, they all ut modonlesa
there, like figures painted on canvass,

5— A Iheu Vyasa the son 0I Saiyavatl,
havuig thoiigtit lor a inoment, addressed
<!>«. royal son ol Ganga, saying,— O king,
the Kuril king Yiidliishthua lias been res*
(or«d <0 hrt own nature, wall all hts brother*
and lollowers.

7 With highly Intelligent Krishna by
hiv side he bends his head iii respect to you.
You should give him leave fur rctufiiin,{
to the cuy.

8. thus addressed by the holy Vyasa,
tile royal son ol Shanianu and Gaiiga dis«
missed Yudhishtlura and I it counsellors

<7 Addressing his grandson in a sweet
smirr, the royal sen ol bhantanu, slMsaid,— •
Uosou return to your cuy, O king. Let
the fever of >Our heart be removed.

10 Do you adore the celestials In van*
ous sacfkficcv di.iiMgmshed by large gilts
of food and iKhes hke Vayati tninseK, O
foerinosl of kings, giltcd with devuiion and
scll'conirol.

II. Devoted to the practices of the
Ksliarriya do you, O furl of I’rittia, pfease
the departed manes anl |l>e Ccfestials,
You shall tl en srquire great beneru*. In*
deed let the fever of your heart be re*
tnrvcd.

13. Do you please all your subjects.

, Do you assu"* iteru and rslabftih peace
’among alt. Do ijcu alto Iwner all your
W'i»isl"rs widi smIi itwards as they
dwvc.


348


MMIABIlARATAt


13. I.et aI) ^diir fritirid« and Vvel! wisliera
live, drpeiidii)t> 011 you for ilieir me-tits, as
turds live, depeiidiu>' for their means upon
B full grown tree Uden with fruits and
standing on a saCred spot.

14 When the hour comes for depar*
inrcdrom tins wqrld, do )uii come here,
<0 King I shall relinq iish my Uoly when
t/ie Swtr scoppidg til Ills soitlliwani course,
Will bfgiii (o return northwards.

15 the' son of Kunu answered, — 'So
be It !" and sainted Ins grandfather with
respect and then Started with all his rela-
tives and lollowers, for tlie city of fl istina-
pur.

16—17. Headed by Dhntarashtra and
al'io Gindhan ifho was greatly devoted
to her hiisbind and accompanied by the
Hisht<. an 1 Keshava ^s also by the cili2ens
and the-inhabuants of the countfj^ and by
hi> couMscllois, C) m march, that foreMio%l
one of Kmu’s racci entered the city of
lidStlIMpUr. '


CHAPlTR CLXVIt. I

(ANUSJIAS’ANIIU PARVA)— '

CaiitmiKd,

VaisliAmpAyaua said :

I. ilfeU having di^ lionored the
citizens and the inhahitatus of the province,
the ro)al son of Kunii dismissed them to
their respective liornes.

3. the Pandava king then consoled
tllose Women, who hail lust (heir heroic
htisbands and sons in the battle, with pro-
fuse gifts of wcakli

3 Having recovered his kingdom,
ViidTnshlhira caused hrmself to be duly
insfalied on (he throne 1 hat foremost of
men tiled assured all fiis subjects by various
deeds of good will

, 4 I hat foremost of rislueniis men set
fuiilseU to acquire the aiibstxntiai blessings
df the Brshintnas of llic foremost military
officers, and the leiJoig citizens.

5 Having passed’ fifty nights in tlie
capiti), the blessed moiiarcti recoDccte 1 the
lime mdic-ited by lus grandfather as the
hour of Ins departure from this world.

6 Accompanied by a number of pries'S
be then lelt the city of Haslinapiir lasing
seen that the sun, ceasing (0 go southwards
had begun to proceed in his noithwartl
course.

7— S YudhUhthIra, ^the son of Krmti
look with him a large quantity cl cfanlcd


butter and fTorat garlands and scents Km]
silken cloths and excellent sandal wood and
AcJiiUria Agallocha and dark doe wood,
for cremating the body of BUisItma. Vari-
ous kinds oi rich garlands and gems also
Were among those stores.

9— it. Placing Dhntarashtra at Che head
cinii q leen Gsndhart Celebrated for her
virtnes and his Otvii mother liiiiiti niid aV his
brothers also the lugtily iiitelligenc Yudliisli-
tlura, accompanied by Krishna and wise
ViJura, as also by Yuyutsii and Yuyu-
diiatia, and by his other relatives and fol-
I iwers funning a large (ram, proceeded, his
praises sung (he while by eulogists and
bards lire sacrificial fires of Bhishmz
were also borne in the procession.

iz. 1 bus accoinpaiued, the king started
ftotii liisctiy like a second king of theceles-
ii,>U boon he cane upon the spot where
(he son oi Shaiitanu was siill lying on Ins
bed of arrows.

13— (d He saw his grandfather waited
upon with reverence by Parashara's
iiitelligent, son Vyass, by Narada, D
, niyal sage, by Uevala and Asica, and
also by the surviving unslaitl kings
assembled from various parts of the coun-
try Indeed the king saw Ihat liis great
grandfather, as he lay on his heroic bed,
wis guarded on all sides by the warriors
appnited for tint duty- Getting down
ironi Ins car, king Yudiiislithirs, with Ins
brothers, saluted lus grandialher, that
chastiser ol ell enemies t hey alto saluted
the Kishis with the Island-born Vyasa at
tlicir head I hey were saluted iu retarii
by them.

17. Accompanied by his priests each of
wlioin resembled the grandfather Brahman
liiinself, ns also by lus brothers, ViiJInsh-
tlura, of tindecayii'g glory, then approached
that spot whereon Uiiishma lay on his bed
of arrows surrounded by those reverend
Kisl IS-

18—19. The* king Yudhishlhira the
just wilU all his brothers?^ addressed that
foremost one of Kuril's rice, the son of
the Kiser Ganga, as lie lay on that bed of
1ms siynig, — 1 .nm Yudhishtlura, O kn'B-
balitaiioiis to line, O SOU oi the’ Kivrr
Janbxvi 11 thou hearesC me still, O, ItH
me what I am to da for thee.

20— zt. Cirrying mth me thy sacfificial
fres, I luve come he-e, O king and wait
upon thee at the lour appol l»d Precep-
tors nf all braii(,hes of leariinig, Urahma"**'

,ltilHi]is a'l iny brothers, thy -on the king

UhritirasI Ira of great energy , are aff firr®
wthiny counsellors as also Vasudera of
gttat prowess.


anushasaha parva:


340


24 Yfie Temnint of ftmUin wnmors,
'and all t1>e denizens d{ Kunijaiv-iia. 3>e
alio here Opctnng Ihy eyes, O chief of
If uni’s race, do tlioti see them.

23. Wi'alever should be done on ibis
■occasion have all been arranged and pro>
'vided for by me Indeed, at tits hour
svbich thnti hadst spoUen of, all things have
been kept in readiness

Vaishampayana saifl

74 Thus addressed by the highly inlel*
t gent Kunii’s son the son of Gangs opened
hi&eyes and all the Bharatas assembled
there and stood around Intn.

25. TJie mighty Qhishma then, takinf;
the strong hand 01 Yudlnshthira address-
ed him, in a voice deep as that of the
xlouds. ‘

26 By good lock, O son of Kunu, you
have coma here with all yoor coansellors,
O Yudhishihira. The thoasand rayed
maker of day, the iioly Sun, has begun Ms
■northward course

37 1 have been lying on my bed here
lor filly eigl t nights. JSiretched on these
aharp pointed arrows, I have fell this period
tb be as long as it it vas a century ,

38 O Yudhisilnra, the lenar mcntb of
Magha has come fins is again, the
lighted fortiTight and a fourth part of it
ought by this (acaording to my calculations)
be over,

29 Having sai I so to Yiidhishthira the
ton of Dliarma Gatiga's son Blushma then
saluted OhritarashUa and said to him as
follows.

Bhisbma said

•30 O king, you know tvefi the duties
All your doiihts, again, relating to the
science of wealUi have been welt solved
You have served many learned Brahmanas

31. You know the subtile sciences con-
nected wiih (lie Vedas, al( (lie dunes of
relij>ion, O king, and (he whole of tbe/our
Vedas.

32 You should not grieve (herefure, O
soiiol ICiiru that which was pre-ordained
has come to pass. It could not be other-
wise You have have heard tie mysteries
relating (0 (he deities from (lie I ps of the
Island born Bishi himself.

33 Yudhislhim and his broUiers are

morally as much your sons as are the son*
of Pandu Following the duties ol religion,
cherish and protect (hem. In (licir (titn.
Hey are always devoted td iheaervtce 61
(heir elders. » <

45


31- ffmg Yudfiistitfiir'a.lhe jusf, is pure**
souled He will always be obedient to f
joti 1 know (hat he is given to the virtue
•flf mercy or abstention from mj try. He is
devoted to his elders and pfecepbrs.

33 Your sons wore alf wicked sonfeef.
They were lull of anger and cupidity.
Overwhelmed by envy they were all of
wicked conduct You should not gtievc for
them. ' I

Vaisbampayana said •—

, 35 Having said this mach to Dhiita-

rashlra o( great wisdom, the Kuru chief
then addressed Vasudevaof great arms. ^ >

Bhishma said:— i ”

37. O hofy one, O god cl all gods, O
thou adored by all the deities and Asuras, '
O (hoa who didst cover (he three worlds
with lliree steps of thine I bow unto thee,

O w (elder of (Its conch, (he dircus, and (Its
mace.

38 Thou art Vasodeva, thou art of
getden body, (lion art the one PurutUa for
active ai>eni), thou art the creator (ol (he
anivrrse) (hooartof liDgeproportions Thou
art sentiency Ihouart subtle Ihou art
the Supreme and Eternal Soul

39 Do thou O lolus eyed one, tavo fflo,

O loremosi ol all beings. '

40 Do thou give m« permisstoi, O'
Krishna, to depart from this world, O thou
who art supreme happiness, O foremost of
all beings I hou shouldst always protect
the sons of Pan III *lhou art, indeed,
already their sole refuge.

41 Formeily, 1 rpolre to the foolish Dur-
yodhaiia of wickc t understand iig (hat there
IS Virtue where Krishna u, and that there
IS victory where Virtue is.

42 I fuTiber advised him 'that rfepen-
I ding on Vasudeva as I is refuge, he should

make peace w th (he Paiidavas Indeed,
i I repeatedly told him — * Tins i> (I e hilest
lime for you to make peace-' ' '

43 fi e foolish and w eked Ouryodhanx
however did not do what I said Having
caused a great havoc on Earth, at last, he
himself S^ve up ins I fe

44 I know tl ee Otilluilnoui one, la be
(hat attOent and best of P sh;s wlio lived
(or many years in l1 e company of Nara, in
hermitage of Vadari

45 rieeeleiliaJ fluhi Jviradr told t-'e
tl IS as also Vyasa of austere penmec-.
I-ven (hey havessid to me jiar Thyself
and Atyaia -ore ihe old Kub's Haray«iia
and Kara born among men,


350 .


MAHABllARATA^


46 Do iIjou, O.Knshnii, grant me Stave.
1 siial] renounce my body> Permuted by
tlit*, I shall aitani to the highest end.

Vasudeva said 1—

47. I give jou leave, O BUsbma, O
king, to aitdin to the status of the Vastls
O ^ou of great splendour, you have not
been guilty of a single sfii, >n this Aotid.

/ 48 O royal sage, you are devoted to
/your father. You are, therefore, like a
I second Markandeya. It is, therefore, that
I death depends upon your pleasure like a
’ slave.


Vaislianxpayana said

49 Having said these words, the son
of Ganga once more addressed the Panda*
v&s headed by Dhritarashtra, and other
friends and welNwishers of his.

'50. 1 wish to renounce my life. You
should give me leave. You should sltive
for attaihing to truth. Iruih forms the
highest power.

51. You should always live with Brah*
manas of riglUeous conduct, devoted lo
penances, ever abstaining from cruel con*
duct, and who liave their souls under res*
Iruint.


CHAPTER CLXVIII.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—

Coiiltuited.


Vyasa, the sight seemed ta be a strange
one. O king.

J. Within a short lime, the entire body
of Uliishma became arrowless and soreless.
Seeing it, all ll ose great personages, headed
by VasudevJ, and all the ascetics with
Vyasa, became filled wtih wonder.

6 1 he Vital airs, restrained and unable

to escape through atiy of the outlets, at last
passed through the crown of the head and
proceeded upwards lo Heaven.

7. The celestial fcettle*drums began to
play and Qoral showers were rained down,
the Siddhas and regenerate Rishis, filled
with dehgtit, exclaimed, —Excellent, Es*
cellent.

8. The vital airs of Bhishma, piercing
through the crown of his head, shot up
through the sky like a large meteor and
soon became invisible.

9 O great king, thus did Shanlanu’s
sou, that pillar of Bharaia's race. unUS
himself with eleriiiiy.

Then the great Pandavas and
Vidura, taking a large quantity of wo®“


53. Having said these words lo lus
friends and embraced them all, the intelh*
gent Bhishma once more addressed Yu*
dhishlhica, saying,— “ O king, worship all
Brahinanas, especially those who are gifted
VMth Wisdom, them who are preceptors,
those who ate priests capable of assisting
at sauifices.


VaisliaiBpajana said

%. Wa-ewjj >-0 Vw vM \Vit V*\nVA,
Bhishma, the son of Shantanu. remained
silent for some lime, U chastiser of
enemies.

3 He then held forth Ins life breaths
successively m those parts of his body
... 1. — , Yosa. Ihe - •-*


and vaitous kinds of fragrant scents, made
a funeral py re.

It— 12. Yuyulsu and ethers stoed
spectators of ll>e preparations. Then
Yudhishll ira and the great Vidura
ped Bhishma’ body with silken cloth and
floral garlands Yuyutsu held an etcellent,
umbrella over it. .

»3. Blnmasena and Arfuna both beU 1
m their hands a couple of pure white yalc- I
tails. The two sons of Madri > eld |
kead'gears in tlieir hands.

14. Yudluslithira and DhntarasMra
stood at the feet of the body, taking up
palmyra fans, the wives of the lord of the
Kurus stood around the body and began to
Ian It softly, the Piiri sacrifice
great Bhishma was then duly performed.
Many libations were poured upon the
sacred fire. Ihe singers of SamaiissSHfJ
\T.av<7 %vmvtri.


\ t icll >


lOvC up.


of tl at great one, restrained duly, then


3 Ihose parts of the body of Shan.
I Ill's sen, on account of the adoption of
\oKa from which the vital airs went op,
became soreless one after another.


4 In tlie midst of those great persons,
including those great lUslus headed by


16—17. Then covering the hod/, ^
Canga's son with sandal wood and blac«
aloe and the dark wood and other fragrant


fuel, and setting fire to the same, the
with Dhritarashtra and others, stood on InC


right side of the funeral pyre.

18. Having thus cremated the body ^
Ihe son of Ganga those foremost ones 0 *
Kwu’s race proceeded to the sacred Bhagi*
ratlii, accompanied by the flistus.


19 -


Tliey were followed by Vyai**


Natada, Asita, Kristina, by l’>e
Uie Oturata family, as also by stKh


ANUSHASANA PAnVA.


35 *


t'tiittns of Hsstinapore bs liad ccme to the
place. •

20. All of them, arrived at the sacred
river, duly offered obiatiotta oi water to tlie
great SOI) of Ganga.

21. After those oblations of water had
been offered by ibem to her son the goddess
Bhagiratli), rose up from llie river, weep*
mg and distracted by sorrow.

22. In (he midst of her lamentations,
sh* addressed the Kurus, sating,— Ye aiti«
less ones, listen to Rie as 1 say to you all
tiiat look place.

23 Gifted with royal conduct and dis-
position, and endued with wisdom and
high birth, my son was the benefactor ol
ail the elders of Ins Family. Me was devo-
ted to ins father and was of high vows.

34. He could not be defeated by even
Rama of Jamadagm's race with Ini higli*
ly powerfut ceiestui weaponsj alas, that
hero has been killed by Shikliandin. '

2 S Yekires, forsooth, my heart is made
oi adamant, lor it does nut break even at
(he disappearance of (hat son Irom my
viev.

86. At liie Swayamvara at (Casln, lie
defeated on a single car the assembled
Kthalriyas and carried away the three
princesses.

27. lliere was no one on Earth who
equalled him m power ; alas, my heart does
not break upon hranng the slaughter ol that
sonol mine by Sliikhandin.


2S— 30. Hearing the goddess of the
great river thus bewail the powerful Krishna
consoled her with many soothing words.
Krishna said ,~-'*0 amiable one, be com-
forted, Do not give way to sorrow, O >ou
of beautiful features Eorsootli, your son has
gone (o the highest region of happiness.

31 He was one ol the Vasus of great
energy, ihrnugh a curse, O you of beau-
tiful features lie had to take birth among
men. Vou should not grieve for him,

32. According toKshatriya duties, he
was killed by Dlianaiijaya on tlie field of
I batile while engaged in battle. He has not
been killed, O goddess, by Shikhandin,

33 I he very king of the celesuaia him-
sell coufd not kill Ulnshma in baitle when
lie stood witli stretched bow 111 hand,

34 Oyou ol beautiful face, 'your son has
happily gone 10 Heaven All the gods
assembled together could not kill linn m
battle.

35 Do not, therefore O goddess Gangs,
grieve lor that sen of Kuru’s race Me
was one of tl e Vasus, O goddess, your sen
has gone to Heaven. Let the fever of your
heart be removed "

Paishampayaas said.'—

315. Ihus addressed by Krishna that
foiemosi of att rivers east off her grief, O
great king, and became consoled.

37 O menaieh, having honored that
goddess duly all the kings there present,
headed by Kiishna, received her permission
to go away from her banks.


Finis Anushasana Parya.


K PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION

or

THE MAHABHARATA,

(TRANSLArnO LllERALLV FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT).


^SHWA-MEDHA. EAEVA-

VOL. XIV.


EDITED 8c PtDUSUED DY

MANMATHA NATH NUTT, {5W;) M.A , M.B-A.S

Rector, Keshub Academy,

Author of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranavt,
Srmad Bhagaiatam, Kamanduktya, Niltsara, Dkagavad Cita,
and many other varks

^o, Nayan Chand Dutt's Slreeft Calcutta


CALCUTTA

r«tvTtD ar II C Da»s, Ettsiia r«tsi,
40, tiitjrjn C/difJ Dait t Strtit^


lOOS.


ASHWAMEDBCA. PAIiVA


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CiXUPTtR I — 'YwdhisliJf'ira s grief and
consolation by Lfliriiarashtra—^p i.

Chapter 1 1 — r*ie conversation belween
Vudlx.Iici ira and l{risliii^ — p I

Chapter HI — Co't3ol^l>on offered by
Vyasa— p 2

Chapter IV — The story of live Royal
Sage Matutta — p 3

Chapters V 10 X — ^The story of Maru^a I
and Vriliaspaii continued— 'p \

CiiArrzR XI — The story of Vntra and
Indra— p 13

CllAFTSR Xll — Mental and Physical
Diseases as described by Rrishtu—p 13

Chaptbr XUl —The Means of Salvation
as described by Kristina— p 14
Chapter XIV — flie exhortation of the 1
Ruins to Yiidliishdiira for going to ffiosa
layas— p t6

Chapter XV — Ktishoa's desire of going
to Dwatlca— p 16

Chapter XVI —The story of Anugiu—

P «r

Chapter XVfl —The dissolution of flte
body and the ac<^ iirement of another Ihe
Bitammeiit ot tlie bout td Brahman — p 19

Chapter XVIII —tTIic fruits of liuman
aciiois— p 21

Chapter XIX —The characteristics ot
a Liberated Person— p 2^

Chapter \X— Tie d scourse of the
married couple, ihe description of Brah.
man— p IS

(jjAPTER XVI — llie t«j. UnJw3iajjiiijv-<v
Minds— p 26

CiiAPTFR XXII —Tile seven saciilicing
presei ts — p 27

Chapter XXIII,— The five sacrificmg
Riiesis— p 28

Chapter X\fV — Ttie first creatton in
a ctcaiuie born— p 29
CiiipTER XKV.— llie Chaturhotra Sacn.
ficc— p 30

Chapter XXVlI —The extensive forest
of Brainna described— p 31

Chapter XXVllI —Nature dcrcribed—
P 3*.


CuAPTCR XXfX — riie diicoiine befiveeri
Kartavirja, A'J nia and the Ocean— p 33

Chapter XXX — Alarlt^'s discourse
about coiitroVmg the various organa of the
body— p 34 , ,

Chapter XXXI —The three enemies—

P 3<t.

Chapter XXXI f — Tie Means for deso
iroyMit* CjotsiR Xiie discourse of Jaii.iku

— P 36

Chapter XXXIIl — fhe Knotvledge of
Sell -37

Chapter XXXIV— The Source of the
knowledge ol Self — p 38.

CsAPfER XXXV —An account of Bral>«
m»— the higl est object of Knowledt^'^p 38.

Chapter XXXVJ — Ihe three qualities
and the means uf Impruvemsiit— p 40

Chapter XXXVII— The quality oi
darkness— p 44 f

Chapter XXXVIII— The quality of
gooctneAs— p 4?

Chapter XXXIX —The unlied stale of
the U ree qualaies described— p 43

Chapter XL — An account of the Great
Soul — p 44

Cuaptsb XLl— rllioprinciple of Great*
ness— p 45 —

Chapter XLIl A^The five great elemeots
— P 45

Chapter XLfIt— The foremost objects
in Nature are enumerated— p 47

CiiAiTER XLI V — The creation of Day,
NnJil..Stars^etc — 9

Chapter XL V.— ihe WJieel of Life—
P 50

Chapter XLVI — The Conduct of the
lwice*Oorn— p 51,

Chapter XLVH —An account of Renun*
Ciation — p 53

Chapter XLVIII — Tlierelation between
Mature and Soul — p 54

Chapter XL 1\ —Description of Duly

P 55

Chapter I —Abstention from Injury.
Associ*(k») and disassocialiuii 0/ boul aiid
Nalucc— p 56.


CONTENTS.


Chaptir LI — The Mmd and lUc Dissnla- '
tion of the Body described — p. 58.

Chapter Lll.— Ihe departure of Krislma
*-p 60.

Chapter L!II. — The meeting of Krishna
and Utanka — p. 62.

Chapter LIV. Spiritual Science descri-
bed by Krishna to Utanha— p, 63

Chapter LV,— Krishna shows his
supreme form to Utnaka^p, 64,

Chapters LVl to LVlll —Ihe story c(
Utanka and Saudasa— p. 66,

Chapter LIX. — The return of Krishna
to Dwarka — p 71. '

Chapter LX— Krishna describes the
wonderful battle — p. 72,

Chapter LXl. — An account of Ablii-
manyu's death — p. 73.

Chapter LXII —Obsequial offerings of
ALlmnanyu— p 73.

Chapters LXUl to LXV.— Yudinsh.
Ihira'k ai.quisitioii of wealth turned into earth
by Maruita — p 75.

Chapter LXVI.— Krishna’s return to
Hasiinapur— p 73.

Chapter LXVtI.— Subhadra's lameuu-
lion— p. 79,

Chapter LXVIII — Knsfma is requested
to restore Abliimanyu’s sen to life— p, So.

Chapter LXIX, — Krishna restores him
to hte — p. 81.

Chapter l.XX.— Great rejoicing— p. 82.

Chapter LXXL— The return of the Pan-
davas— p. 82.

Chapter LXXII.—Yudhishthira'a desire
for fJorse-SactiRce— p 83.

Chapter LXXni,— I he horse is fet loose
anu'if uah'isii'itiira is iniiiaiea— p,

Chapter LXXIV.— The fijjht between
Arjuna and Tcigartas— p. 86.


Chapter LXXV, — The fight between
Arjuna and Bhagadatta— p. S7.

Chapter LXXVI.— llie .defeat of Blia*
gadatta — p 88.

Chapter LXXVII —The battle between
Aifuna and the cemainlag Samdhavas
— p 89.

Chapter LXXVIII.— The speech o»
Dusshala— p 90. '

Chapter LXXfX. — The arrival of Arjuna
at Manipur. Hearing of the death ol her
husband and son, Chitrangada goes to the
held-^p 92.

Chapter LXXX— Uhpt. the daughter
of Ndga Uingi also, goes there. She revives
Arjuna — p 93.

Chapter LXXXI —She gives an account
of the whole tinng— p, 95
Chaitisr LXXXI I.— The relnrn ol Ihe
sacrificial horse homewards— p. 97.

CnAiTSR LXXXIII.— The relutn ol lh»

sacrificial hoise to Owatka— p« 9?*

Chapter LXXXlV.— riie battle between
Arjuna and Candhara king— pe 90 *^
Chapter LXXXV— The beBinninj ol
the Hotse-Saclifice of Arjuna— p. too.

Chapter LXXXVI— The ertival ol >
messenger from Arjuna— p. tot*

Chapter LXXXVII -Yodhishlhitseoee
out to receive Arjuna— p. loa. c

Chapter LXXXVIll.-Tlie
Babruvshana, Chitrangada and Uwp'""

p. 103.

Chapter LXXXIX. — The ceremotiy
begins— p. 105.

Chapter XC. — A description of I
sacrifice— p. to6.

Chapter XCL— The ordinance abo"*
life sacrince— p. 1 1 !•

Chapter XCIL— The highest end of*'
sacrifices— p 113


ts:t 2 mabca.bhaua.i’a

(IH ENGLISH).

ASHWAMliDMA PARVA,


OHAPTEB 1.


Having iaUtiei ftarayati/i ani ftara the
best af malt bettlgiai alto Iht Goddttt of
Learning, let tit cry iuetest.

Vaishampayana aaid

t — 2 Afler t*'e Icing OhritArn^Utr* li»d
offered libations of WAter, llie inighty armed
Yudlushthira, with Ins senses bewildered,
keeping the former in lus fronc, ascended
the banks (of the river), Ins eyes filled with
tears, and drept down on the bank of the
Oangn hits an efephant pierced by (he
hunter.

3. Then, asked by Krishna, Ohimalook
him up sinkiiiit. (Ins must not be so, said
Krishna, the grinder of hostile armies.

‘•‘4. The Pandawas, O king. beheM
Yudhishthirs, the son of Oiarma treiihted
and lying on tlie groiind, and also sighing
again and again.

.3. And seeing the king despondent and
feeble, the Hamlavas overladen with grief.
Sdt down, surrounding him.

6 And gifted with Ingh inlelli'rnce.
and wise vision km,! Dhriearaslnra greacl/
afflicted Arith grief for his sons, ad tressed
the kieg, saying,-^ Uise up, O forvinott of

1 Do you now satisfy your diriies. O
Knniis son, yon hav» coiiqneied Mis
Esrih like tlie Kshatriyas,

8 Do jou now, O king <r|<iy her with
eur broil ers and friends O foremost <f
le piens, I do not see why you sliould
gilive O king, having lost a Crntury of
srni like wealih got in a dream, it is
Gandhsn and 1 , tiho should mouiii.

9 Not having lisiereJ wcigl ly words
of ifie gieal Vidiira, wl o songt ( cor weft
ben g, I, .of perverse senses, tt ow) rrpetil

JO Ife vuluci/S V'iduia gifUd wtth


divine insight, had told me — your family
i vnll be ettinet for the sins of Dnryodliana.

11—13. O king, if you wish for the well*
I being of your family, act np to my advice,
Iteiiounce this wicked king, Suyodhana,
and let not eillier Kama or Shaltuni by
any means see him. Put down their gam*
bliiig too, and anoint tfie pious king Yudhi*
shthira. IJiat one of eomrollrd senses
will righteousTy govern the C irth.

> 4— >3 If you would not heve king Yii«
dlmhthiia, son of Kunii, then, O monarch,
do you, celebrating a sicriflee, yo irself take
charged the kingdom, and regarding alt
creatur*s impariially. O king, do you let
your kinsmen, O yo t advancer of your
kindred, subext On your bounty,

16 When, O Kunii’s son, the far*
sighted Vidiira said this, foolishly ( follow*
edihe Wicked Duryodhana.

17. ffaving puJ no heed »o the sweet
words of that seiste one, I have obtained
this pnverful grief as a co ifcq lenc*. anJ
have been plunged in nn ocean of misery.

r8. See your oil father an J 171’ther. O
, king, plunged m misery Bit O master
of men, 1 find no reason fur your sorrow.


CllAPIEfl tl.

( ASHWAMnDlllK\ PARVA)—
Coiilm ueJ,

Valshampayana said

I. Ttius acensKd by the mttfligrnl king
Olintatashtra, YudI i$l ihua, gifted With
understsianding, breeme calm And then
Keshava iKtishna) sa d to 1 im.

» If a pVr»en irr*olg«s f«r#sivtly in
snrrow («r i >s dtpailtd manes he giKVO
tliens.


MAIlABHAKATil*


3 Da yeu (now) celebrate many asacri*
fice wnh suttable presents to tbe priests;
and do }ou please the celestials with Soma
] nee and the manes of your forefathero.
With tlieir due food and d*

4 Do you also please your giie^'s with
meat and dimlr and tlie poor ith Rifts
after llieir hearts A person of your high
inte'iigence siiould not act thus

5 Y >11 know what oiighl to be known,
you have performed what ought to be done,
and you have 1 card the duties ol the
Kshainjas, rebited by Qliishma, the Son
of Bliagiraih? by Kiishna Owaipayana,
Narada and Vidura.

® Therefore jou should not act tike a
stupid, but following the course of your
lotefaihers, sustain the burthen (ol the
Empire).

7 It IS proper that a Kshalriya should i
attain the celestial region for certautby his
Towrt) renown Of heroes, those who came
to be killed never shall have to turn away.

8. Renounce your grief, O powerful
hmg Indeed, what his taken pUee v^s
uettined to happen so You can in no
way se« those that have been killed in this
svar.

Cr Having said this to Yudhishthua,
prince ol ifie pisus, the hi<h spiriied
Govifida stopped} and Yudlmlnhira
Riiawercd him thus.

14 ‘OGovnda, I know full well your
rondnese.for me You have ever {.ivoured
me with your love and friendship,

11 And, O holder of the mace and t1»e
discus, O scion of Yiidu’s race, O glorious
ona, if (now) do you gladly permit me to re-
tire into the woods then you would do what
IS greatly desired by me.

12 After liaving killed my grandfalher.
and that foremost of men, Kama, who
never flet} Irom the Held of battle, I find no
peace.

13 Do JOU, O Janarddana, so ordalir
that I may be freed from this heinous sin
and tliat my mind may be purified

•4 As Priiha's son was speaking thus,
the liii,! ly energet c Vjasa, .knowing the
cuiia of fife, seotlii ig I im, spoke these ex-
cellent uords,

»5 '^ly child. ijmir mm? ,»s not yet I
cahne I , an I i/ierelore you arrj again
stirt-futJ by chiMlsii ferhn<s And where-
fore. O bhifd cJo we over in 1 over a},ain
ttifd V olif words to the «\fuds t

t6 You 1« low the ilii les of the ICsha-
trtyas 'who fiv- by warfare A king wha
*has d ne I Is duty, slio dd not allow himSclf
to be uvcrwliel neu by grief.


17. You bare faithfully listened to (ftd
entire doctrine of salvation } and I hare
repeatedly removed your misgivings origi*
nattng from desire.

iS But not paying dub heed to what
I have iiDfolded, you of perverse uoder-
sfanding have doubtless forgotten it clean.
Be tt not so. Such ignorance is not worthy
of JOU.

19 O 5inle«s one you are cognizinf
of all kinds of eapialion ; and you have
also heard of the virtues of kings, as weir
as the merits of gifts.

20 Wherefore then, O Bharaia, know*
mg every form of morality and versed in'
all ibe Agamas, are you overwhelmed (witb
grief) as if from ignorance.


CHAPTER ni, ,

{ASHWAMPDHIKA PARVA)^

ConhnueJ,

Vyasa Baidi—

». O yudl.islilhfra, your wisdnm, ^
conceive, is not sufficient. l/one does ar
woik by his own power.

7 It IS Gsd wlio engages him in rfeed*,
good or bad, G bestower of honor. Wha*'
IS the cause ilwv for repentance f

J You consider yourself as having
perpetraled impious deeds Do yoor

therefore, O Bharaia, listen to llie way I'V
which sms, may be removed. I
* 4- O Yudliishthira, those who com^mit
sms can always free themselves from them
through penance, sacrifice and gifts.

5 O king, O foremost of men, smfuf
people are purified by sacrifice, auste'H***
and charily.

6 The great celestials and Asuras
celebrate sacrifices for acquiring religious
merit ; and therefore sacrifices are ol gtcaC
importance.

•J ft IT through sacrifices that the Rt«a*
Celestials had grown so woudrmHl) pOWC*
fill, and haviti,; celebrated rues did they
defeat the Oanavas.

8. Do you, O Yiidhishthira, prepire
for the Kajasuya and the Horse-Sacrmce.
as well ■*. o Biiaraia, for ilic Sarvamedha
a id the Naramedha. t

9— 'So. A»J as Dasharaiha's son. R*ma>
eras Dushmaiua’s and ShakuiiiaU's sonr


ASIlWXMEDHX PAftVA


yoTir antfstor, Oie lorfl ef iheUatlh 0* .
f^ceednigly powerful kin^ DlisraCa ftad j
^oite, do >ou according to llie ordinance
celebrate {lie Horse-Sacrifice with pr«cnls

11 Yudlijslilliira replied — Undoubted- j
ty, the Horse SacriBce purifies princes But !
I have a purpose ol which jou sItotdJ i
bear

12 Havii g caused tins 'bufie slaiiebter
of Irindred I cannot, O best olgtlis imce-
liorn ones, d spense gifts even on a small
scale, ! Iiave no riches to give.

13 Nor can I for riches solicit tl eee
joung sons nf kings, living wretchedly with
their wounds 5<e{ green, and undergoing
suffering.

14 How, O foremost of twice born
ones, having myself destroyed (he Earth,
can I, overwhelmed with sorrow, levy dues
for celebrating a sacrifice?

15 Through Duryodhans’s folly, O best
of ascetics, tlie kings of the Earth Iiave met
with destruction, and we with ignominy

♦ t6 Duryodhana hath wasted the Earth
for money; and the treasury of that wicked
«on of Ohriiarashtra is empty.

17. fin this sacrifice), the Earth is the
aacrifieial gift, this is the rule (hat ts pres-
cribed III the first lostanee The learned
observe the usual reversal of (Ins rule though
aanctioned

18 Nor, O ascette, do I hUe to have a
fiUbsinule In this matier, O reverend sir,
jeu should favor me with your advice

Ip Thus addressed by Praha’s son.
Krtslina-Uwaipayatia, thinking for a while, '
Spoke to the righteous king 1 liis treasury,
(now) exiiausled, shall be full. O son I
ol Hritha, in (tie mounCom Himavan j
(Ilimsfaya) there is gold winch liad been
left behind by Qrahmanas at the sacrifice of
(he great Marutta.

22 Yudhislitlura asked - How in (bat
Eacrifiee) celebraied by Maruiia, was so
much gold collected? And, O foremost of
speakers, when did he reign I

Vyasa said:—

23 It, O Pfitha’s son jou are anxious '

to liesr, about that king of ilie (varandhama
line, (hen listen to me as I tell you when :
that highly powerlul king having immense
riches rei;.ned I


CHAPTER IV.

(ASmVAMEDHIKA PARVA )-

CoitfixKr 1.

yudhishtUira said:—

I. O righteous one, I wish (0 fiesr the
, lustory ol tl at royal sage Marutta Do you
O nwaipiyaiia, describe this to tne, O sm-
I less one.

Vyasa said •—

2 O child, in the golden age Mmu was
lord wielding the sCeptre His son was
known under the name of Prasandhi

3. Prasandhi had a son named Kshupa.
fCsItupa's son was femg Iksfiwaku

4 (le O king hid a hundred sons pos-
sessed of pre-emment piety. A kJ All of
(hem were made mottarclis by kinglksh-
naku.

5 The eldest of them Vinsha, became
an (deal bowman Vinsha's son, O DhO'
rata, was (he auspicious Vivinsha.

6 Vivinsha, O king, had rfleen Sons ,
all of them powerful archers, respecimg
Brabmanas and speaking the truth ggntle
and ever-speaking fair I he eldest brother
tCbamnetra, oppressed all itis brothers

S. And having conquered the entire
Jtingdom shorn of nil (roubles, Khamnetra,
j eould not reiaiii ins anpremacy? nor were
' (he people eatislied with firm.

I 9 And dethroning hira, they, O fore-
most of kings inve>ted his sen Suvarcha
with the ngins ol sovereignly, and ex-
perienced |oy.

10 — H Seeing the reverses of Ins father
and lus expnUion from the empire he was
ever busy with encompassing the well bei ig
of the people, being devoted to Brahman,
speaking the trulh, prnciisiiig p irity and
controfhiig ins senses and thoughts And
tl<e subjects wvre well pleased wAh that
great one canstant in virtue.''

fa But he being constandy engaged In
virtuous works his treasures and vehicles
became greatly reduced, A»d on hit*
treasury having become exhausted, (he
feudatory pnnces gathered round him and
began to give Ii m trouble.

13 Being ihtii oppressed by mary ene-
mies while fits treasury horses a id vehicles
weretmp'ise'ished tlie king s iHered great

' tribulation along wiih his retainers and the

14 Althonch his pswer decreased great-
ly, yet the enem es CO lid nut kill (he king,
(iwlis power. O Yuihishthira, was estk-
idisbed m virtue,


4'


MAIIaBIIARATA.


15 And when Iis liad reached the worst
point cf misery aloni; with the citiz-‘its, he
blew Ins hand, and Irom iliat there appear*
ed a supply of Torces.

16. And then he defeated all the kings
living along the borders of his dointitions
And from tins incident, O Uing, he hath
been celebrated as Karandham-a.

17. Mis sOn, I^arandhama was born at
the commencerrent of the ireta age, equal
ling Indra himself, Igifted with grace, and
invincible even by the immortals

tS At that lime all ^he kings were
under Ins (control , and alike by vi tue of
Ins riches and ol prowess, he became their
emperor.

19 In short, the righteous king Avikshii
became like Indra himself in heroism , and
he was ^iven to sacrifices, delighted i»
Virtue and held his senses under control.

30. And III eneigy he resembled the sun
and III patience, Eirtli herself , in inietli
gence, he was lilee Vrihaspaii, and in
calmness the mountain Himavan hnns'lf.

8(, And that king pleased the hearts el
his subjects by net, tliougtit, speech, sell*
control, and forbearance.

33 lha lords who celebrated hundreds
of Morse Sacrifices, and wlioni thefMwerful
and learned Anglia himself setved as
priest,

33 His tan excelled his father rn the
possession of good qualities, named
Marutta, that lord of kings was righteous
and of great fahie, having (lie power of
ten thousand elephants, and li.e unto
Vislmu’a second sell.

3t— 35 Desirous of celebrating a sacri- I

hce, that virtuous king, coming (0 M >unt I
Meru on (he northern side ol llimaval, |
made thousands of shining goTdert vessels
tt> be forged 1 here on a liCge golden lull
he performed the rites

sd. And goldsmiths made numberless
basins and vessels and pans and s-^ts

37. And the sacrificial ground was near
this place. And lliat riglileous king
Marutta, with other princes, celebrated a
Sacrifice there.


CHAPIEK V.

<ASI1\VAMEDHIKA PAUVA.J—
Confinurd.

TuJhislitliira. said

t. O b»-st ol speakers, how (hat king
wave,! «« powerful T Anil how, O twice*
born on*, did be gel so mucli gold 7


And where now, O reverend sire, is
alt his wealth ? And, O ascetic, how can
e secure the same ?

Vyasa thereupon said:—

3 — j As the nu nerous children of the
Prajap-iti Daksha. the Asuras, and the
Celestials challenged each other, so nn the
same way Angira's sons, tlie Ingldy energe-
tic Vrihaspaii aud the ascetic Samvarlta,
of equal vows challenged each other, O
king Vrihaspaii began to worry Sainvarita
again and again

And always troubled by liis elder
^brother, he, O Unarata, renouncing his
riches, went to the foiest with nothing to
cover Ills body except the open skj.

7 — 9 (At that lime), having defeated
and desiriyed the Asuras and gained the
sovereignty of the celestial regions, Vasava
liad app iinied as Ins priest Angira's eldest
son. that best of Brahmanas, Vriliaspati
Formerly Angira was the famdy*pf>est e*
king Karandhama, peerless amoijg rrte"
might, poaer and character, powerful hte
Shatakratu. rigliteous*souled and of t'S**
vows.

•v— II. O king, he had vehicles, and
warriors, and ituny adherents, and beauti-
ful and nth bedsteads, produced through
medilaiion by the breath of Ins mouth
And by his native vtriu*s, the king had
brought all the princes under his control

IJ— 13 And having lived as long as he
desired he ascended the celestial region 11
Ins b.dily form. And hi» son named Avik*
shit— conqueror of enemies— righteoui ll**
Va>*ti. brought all the Cartli under luS
sway And both in ment and power mc
king resembled his fatlier,

had a son named Marutta,
gifted with energy and reiemUlmg Va»ava
himself, i Ins earth tUd in oceans felt her*
sell attracted towards him.

15, He always used to drfy the k'og of

the celestial- , and, O son of Pandu, Vasava
also defied M {rules

16 And Marutta — master of Earth-*
was pure and perfect And desp'ie hi
striving, Shakra could not prevail ove
him.

17 And unable to control Inm, he ridm?
on the horse, along will* ihe celestia
suRimuning Viihasp«ti, spoke to him thus.

iS — 19 O Viiliaspsli, if we wish to ^

what IS agreeable to me. do not
pr»lely offices for MsCL
celestials or (he depaitei
O Vghasptll ulilaine! the


alf of the
I hav'i.


-orlds while Marutta 1


*1*1/


llic king of the Eadb.


5


ao HflW, Q Br»t»mana. having acted as
priest to the immortal king of the cetesiiaU,
will )Ou uiiiiesitaUnety act as a priest to
Marutia subject to death ?

2t, May you (are well Either tike up
my side or that of tlie king, Msruit*, or
forsaking Marutta, gladly come over to

23 'thus addressed by the king of the
Vrihaspaii, thinking for a moment, replied
to the king of the celestials.

33 You are the Lord of creatures, 9«id
jn you are the worlds established And you
have killed Namuchi Vishwarupa and
Vala.

Z4 You, O hero, alone, bring about tlie
highest prosperity of the celestials and O
slayer of Vela, you sustain the earth as well
as the celestial region.

25 How, O foremast of the cetesiiats,
having officiateii as your priest shait f. O
destroyer of Palta, serve a niortat prince
and listen to what 1 say.

i 6 Even if the god of fire ceas* fo
cause heat and warmth, nr (he e-<rth
change its nature, or the sun cease to give
liglic, I shall never deviate /ram (he uuth.

Vaisliaiopayana said

77, On hearing these words of Vrihas*

f )4«c litdra became freed from his envious
eelnigf, and then lauding him he repaired
to Ins own palace.


CHAPrCR VL

(ASHWAMEOHIKA PARVA)—
Conttnmd. ,

Vyasa aaid ;

I Regarding it |S ci(ed the ancien^
legend of Vriliaspact an^ tlie >v»e Maiutta
a On hearing of (he agreement made
by An^irs’s son Vrih^snaii wiih (he king
or' tlie cerestiJik, .-f^^ruita matfe tfie

necessary preparations for a great sacrifice
3 (^fa^utta) having conceived iha idea
of, a sacrifice ><i Ins rnhid the e>oqteat
grandson of Rarandbaina wentloVrilias-
pati and spoke to him thus
4—5 O worshipful asceftc 'l have
hlfended to celeh'raie the sacrifice -which
you did propose to me ooce on a previous
occasion, according to your msiruciions
and 1 now w>sii to appdlni you as oflio-t*
ting priest at tins sscrihi.e, the materisU
vrliereoi'^I havi. col1i.i.Led, O excetlent Oiw
you arcour faiiiily-pnest, iliecefore do you?


take tfiAse sacrth lit things and celebrate
the sauiiice juurself ' '

Vnhaspati said —

6 O king I do not wish to perform
your s-acrific' I hive bean appointed as
priest by the King the Celestials and I have
prumised to hiin to act as such.

Marntta saM

7 You are our iieriditary famity>priest,
and therefore { ciierish great regard for
you, and i have acquired the right of being
berped at sacndces by )Oii and therefore
It IS proper that you should officiate as
priest at my sacrifice.

ffrihftspati said —

B liaving, O Mariitta, acted as
priest to the celestials, how can I act as
sucli to morcat men, and whether you do
leave this place or stay here, f tell you
1 have ceased (q act as pnest to any but
iliecclesli-ils. '

9 O you of mighty arms, I am unable
to act as yourjpriest now And according
to your own desire, yon can appiiu any
one «s your priest who will perform your
sacrifice.

Vyasa said —

to ihiiSj told, king Msrutta became
confounded wnh shame, and while ratutit*
Mig liome with his mind stricken with
aiiKiety, he met Narada on his way
' ii>»t2 And »i> seeing the divini R’slti
I Narada, th^i king stood befure him wnb
I due sal ijaiiCHt. and with liis hands cUsped
I together, and then Narada addressing In n
thus said,— O royal sage, you appear
to be not well pleased in your mind, all
well with yon where hove you been, O sin-
levs one. and why js this your mental dis.
quietude 7

13 And O king, ][ there be no objtq.
lion to your lelluig it to me d > yon O best
of kings, diiUose it> me so that O pinic*-,

I may re noye the disquietude of yuur mind ,
wllii all my efforts ^

Vanhampayafla ccatanned '

(4. ’{Imis addressed by (he great Riihi
Nar^tda, king Alaruta informed him of the
refusal lie liad received from his religious
preceptor ► ^ *

Marntta said —

15 frying to find out a priest to ofTieia
ale at my sacrifice 1 went to that priest of
tie (imnuriaU Viihaspati, ilie ton of
A»K>''-<s. but be did nvt choose to accept)
■ny uffst. ^ ,


6


MAttABIiARATA


16 Having mel witU tins letmai ttora
liim I liave no desire to live anj longer
now. for b) Ins at andonmg me tlius, I Itave,
O Narada, become sullied wiili siii.

Vyasa said —

17 Thus told b} (bat king, Narada

O p wesfni pTinte, TOAde dirt reply Vo bim
W1U1 words winch «ee>ned to revive that
son of A\ ikst It '

Narada said: —

18 — 19 llie virtuous son of Angiras
Samvaria by name, is travelling over all the
earth in a nude state to the amazement
all creatures , do you, O prince, go to him,
if Viiliaspati does not wisli to ofEviate at
your sacrifice, the poweiful Samvarta, if
pleased with you, will perform your
saCHActi

Marntta said

3^— 3t. 1 Feel as if Riled with new life,
by these yeur words, O Narada. but O the
best of speakers, do you (ell me where I
can Rnd bamvaUa, and bow t can remain
by his side, and bow I am to act eo that be
■nay iiit leave me, for I do not wish (0 live
n 1 meet with a refusal from him also.

Karada said —

a, Ocsifoiis of S'Cing Mabe<bwara.
O prince, ,lie roves about at Ins pleasure tn
the City a! Varanasi dressed as a maniac
33—34 And having reached the gate of
the oty, you must place a dead body some
where near it, and the man who shall turn
away en seeing the dead body, do you. O
prince, know (bat man to be Samvarta,
and knowing him, do you follow 1 1$ fool
steps wlierever that powerful man wishes to
go, and rinding him (at length) m a lonely
place you must seek his protection with your
(lands ^vpid togeiher.

35 And if he acquire of you as to the
person wlio lias given you (he information
^beut his own sell, do you leti him
(hat Narada has informed you about
Samvirta,

35 And if he should ask you to follow
me, you must tel! him unhesitatingly that I
have entered into the Rre.

Vyasa said:—

36 H^vii g signiRed Ins consent to the
proposal of Narada, (hat royal sage after
duly adsnng him and wiih I is permission,
went to the city of Varanasi, and liavutg
reached there, itiai famous prince did as he
liad been asked, and remembering tlie
words of Ntrada, he placed a dead body
at the gate of the city.


39 And by coincidence, that Brahman*
also entered the gate of tl e city at the same
time 1 lien on seeing the dead body, he
suddenly turned a /ay.

30 And on seeing him turn back, that

f irmce, the son c( Avikshit fo'loived Ins
ooisteps wtih Ins liands ] ined together,
and with a view to receive instruction from
liini

31 Ard then finding him m a lonely
place, Samvaria covered the king with inud
and ashes and phlegm and spittle

32 And though thus worried and op«
pressed by Samvarta, the king followed
that sage with his hands joined together in
prayer and endeavouring to please him
33 At length overcome with fatigns,
and reaching the coo) shade of a fig tree
with many branches, Samvarta desisted
from Uis course and sat dawn to rest.


CHAPTER Vll.

(ASHWAMBDHIKA PARVA )-

Continued. . ,’

Samvarta said— ,

1 How have you come to know me, ati^

who has referred you to me, do you tell Ihi*
to me truly, if you desire me toalo ivliat I*
good to you _ j

2 And if you speak truly, you wi
g»m all the objects of your heart, and should
you (ell a he ) our head shall be cut into a
hundred pieces

Marutta said

3 I have been told by Narad*, wander*
ing on his way, that you are tlie son of our
family priest, and thfs (information) h**
bent my mind (towards you), with great f»*
wAwuvtw..

Samvarta said

4 You have told this to me truly, h*
(Narada) knows me to be a peeformer ct
sacrifices, now le'l roe where is Narada
living at present.

Maratta said —

5 ri at ki ig of celestial saints (Narada)
having given me this information about joU,
and commended me to yojr care, has enter*
ed into the Tre. •

Vyasa said — *

6 flearmg tl ese words of jhe In’?

. Matutu, Samvarta was highly pUased, ana


ASttWAil^DIIA


ii\6 ! \ Ico aid perteclty able ia d» all

tl »i.'

7—9 Then. O prince, tbut Qrahm^ina,
^avi 3 maniac, and continually ^cnld-

in^ 'firiKM wich raJ^wacdi, aa^iii »<XOl‘
ted I im It <■', 1 am am ctM wilb a brain
disorder, and, 1 alivajs xCr according to |lie
freiliil caprices of my own itiind, wJ y are
)0U Iben berlt upoi having th s sacrifice
peilormedbya priest r{ such a peculiar
naiurc my broil>rr is able lo O0ii.iate at
sacrifices, and be bas gone over lo VasaV4
(I»dra), and IS en^iaged in celebrating; lit
Sacrificesi do you therefore have yoiir sacri*
fice perfotmeu by him>

{0 — If. My elder brother has taken
away by force from me all my hoi/tebolj
articles and mystical pods, and sacrifionp
clrentt, and has now left to me only ()>«
physical body of minet and, O son of Avik*
shit, as i e deserves all respect from me,
f Cannift by an) rreanaa/^iaiejtj'aoa^e/t'
iiee, unless he permits me.

t j You must therefore po to Vrihaspati
first, and taking his permitsion 50<t can
return to me tf you have any desire tis cele*
traie M saenUce, and then only shall J
cfTietate at your sacrifice,

Marutta «ald *—

13 Oo you hiten to me, O Samvarta, )
did poto Vrihispati first, b It wisUine the
patronage of Vasiva, he did not wish to
have me as his sacnficer.

t4>-l5 ffe taid^Ifavinp •ecnred the
pnrst hood of the Immortals, I do isot wish
to act for the moriair, and. 1 have brer>
(otbiddcn by Sbakra (Indra) to cRlciste at
^faruJ/a'a aarr/Kco, at he (old me that
hiarulia havinp become kmp, sras alsvays |
filled sviih a desire to rival 1 im And to
this your brother npreed by saying to the |
destroyer of Vala (Indra), Be it so

16 Know, O best oI ascetics that as he
bad succeeded in pettrnf the protection of
the King of the Celestials | went to I im
with graiiCed heart, but he did not agree
to act as my priest.

jy. And thus repulsed. I nosv svisb to
■pend all I possess, lo lave this sscrifice
oerformed by y<Ai and to n Kstrip Vatava
by the merit ot your good offices

IS As I have been repulsed by Vnhas-
piti lor no fault ol mine, t have now no
desire, if (Irahmona. la go to hirn to Seek
brs help in llu* sacrifice.

SamTirlA latd —

1 can crrtamly, O Img, do all
that ysMi wuH, if enty you agree to d ( all
that I shall ask you to do, but 1 apprehend


D*at Vnhaspati and Fur&h Idra (India]
when they will learn that I am engaged in
celeiiraiifig your sacrifice, will be filled
with anger, and do all they can to injure
you

2< Therefore, do you assure me of youf
sfeadfestness, so as Jo ensure my coolness
and constancy, as otherwise, if I am filled
sebh anger agailist you, 1 shall reduce
(destroy) you and your kindred la ashes.

Hamtta said i—

iJ—tJ If ever I forsake yna. may |
never air-sin the blessed regions ns long at
the mountains shall esist, and the thousand*
rayed sun continue lo poorheet] if I for*
take yon, may 1 netrer gem true wisdom,
and remain for ever add eced to worldly
(malerial) works,

Samyarta said

^4—95 J-tslen Da/m of Av/krW, og*
Cellent at it your inclineiinii to perform this
a«. so loo O king, have I m my mind the
atnbiy 10 perform the sscrifiee, I tell thee,
O king, that your good things will become
imperishable and that you ihslt lord it ever
Siakra and the Celestials with Oaa*
dhatvas

36 For myself, I hare no wish to heard
ricbeter taerificiAl presents, 1 shall only
do wl at IS disagreeable to both ludrA and
my brother.

37 I shell certainly make you attain
equably will, Shakra, and I tell you
I'uty that I ahall do wbat is agreeable
to you.


CfiArTCn vjii.

(ASllWA.MEDUlKA PARVA )—
Coofirtiird.

Samvarta said •—

I ri>eve It a peak named Aloa/tkan on
thesemmiis ol tlw Himalaya mouniams,
where |hv worshipful husband ©f Uma
(Mahadeva) it constantly practising auwere
penanCes.

a — 3 There the powerM and worah pbi
fodet great power accompanied bylrewifc
Vma and arrrse { with Ms C'hfefif, and sur*
rounded by witj gnblms M many sertf.
fanewutg t IS random wish or fancy, eons*
lanityl »ts in the shade el ho^e loren trees,
or in the raves, or cn lie rugged peaks tl
the great mcaotiin.


.e


.{—6 And tliere tlie Rudr« Ihe Sajt
dlijfls, the Visliw«idevas the Vaiiis, Yamai
Varuna, and Kuvera wiih isll his folldwrrs,
and tl e spirits and globins, and the two
Asliwms the Ga idtiarvaSf the Aps.<ras, the
VriksluSi as also the ceUslial sages, the
Sun Gods, as well the gods p estdtrtg
over 0 e winds and et d 'pints of all sortsj
adore tlie great lord of Uma, gifted wtth
diveise characteristics ^ ,

7. And tliere, O king the adorable gojf
Sports with the wild and playful fotloners of
Kuvera, having- wend and ghastly appea*
ranees.

8 Shining With its own spleridoiir, that
mountain looks resplendent as the morning
stin. '

' 9 And nn creature' with his natural eyes
rnade of flesli, can ever see its shape or
figure, and neither heat nor cold prevails
ifiere, uor does tfie sun slune or the winds
blow. ‘

loi And, O king, neither does senility,
tior hungeri nor thiritj nor death gnor fear
SifDiet any one there.

.(19. And O foremost of conquerors there
exist mines of gold, resplendent as the solar
fays on all sides of that mountain And, O
king, desirous of doing good to him, the at
tendants of Kuvera protect, these mines ol
gold from intrutfcrs, with uplifted arms,

18— ji. Come hefe, and appease that
adorable god whoh known by ttie name of
Sarva. Qedha, Rudra Shitikantha. Suntpa,
Siivarclia, Kapardi. Karala, HaryyMkslia,
Varada, Iryakvha, Pusl nodantabhid,
Vamana. Shiva, Yamya, Av/rfktjrupa,
Sadvritta, Shankara, K'liemya. Harthesha,
Sthanu, PurthTia, llaiinetra, Munda
Krisha, Uliarana, Bhaskira, Siitiriha,
Devadeva, Ranha, Ushnishi, Siivaktra,
Sahastaksha. Midhvaii, Ciri»>ia, Praahanta,
Yata, Chiravasa^ Vilwadanda, SiJdha,
Sarvadindadliara, Ulrica Vyadha Mrhan,
Dhanestia, Bliav", Vara.. Somavaktra,.
SiddliainanUa, Cl<akstiu, fliraiiyavaliu,
Ugra, Uikpsti Lehtiana GovUltin Shid*
dhamaiitra, VrisI nu, Pibliuaair, Bhulapati.
Vrishv, Matrihliakla Setlaiif, Madhyama^
Siuvahasta, Vali, Olianwi, Diiarf,ava, Aja,
KridmAitelra Vlivpaksha, I ikslinadansli,
irX.'likshns. V..idm tn iramiiici >, Maha.
dyuti, Ananga, Sarva, Uibpiiti BiluliHa.
D pta, Dipiaksfu. M-<hau]a,*''''Vas<ireias
iiuvapu, PiiUiu Umtivasa. Kapalmvii
.Suvatnainukuta, MAfiedcvn, Kri'hua, ley*
amvaka. Ana,.li.. Ivrodhana Nrishania,
Mridu, Vaf usali, Dandi, I.,pialHpa,
talcarma, Sahssrashira , Sal>asra>Charai>a,
• Swadh»*waR.iipa, Valui Rnpa, Uanahlri,
Ptuaki, M^Ua-Dtvs, Malia,Yugi, Avyaya,


Trishtilahasl^, Vdrada, Tryanivaks, dhd*
\aiieshwara. Tripuraghna, Irinayana, In*
lokeshn, M»,hanja, Snrvabhiitft- Prabhava,
Sai-vabliiita' Dharana,Dharaiiidhara Ishaoa
Shankara, Sarva, Shiva, Vishwesliwarai
Bhava, Umapati Pashiipati, Viihwariipai
MaUnsawara, Vinipaksha, DasSiabhiija,
Vnshavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu Shivaj
Raiidra, Sharva, Girisha, Ishwara, Ski-
knntha, Aja, hnukra, Prithu, Prithuhara,
Vara, Vishwarupa, Vinipaksha, Vahurupa;
Umapati Anangangaliara, Hara, Slia*
ranya, Mahadeva, Cliaturmiikha.

31, There bowjngto that deity, you must
seek his protrction And thus, O princci
making yotif submission to that- great Ma*
liadeva of great energy, you will acquire
(hat gold.

33 And the men who go there thus,
succeed in getting the gold. I hits insiruc*
(ed, Alariiita, the son of KarandJiaina, did
as he was advised,

34 He made nuperhunlm arrangements
for the celebration of his sacrifice. And
artisans made golden vessels for that sacn*
Oee.

3^—36 And hearing of the prospeniy
of Mariitta, echpsing-that of ike gods, Vri«
Inspatl, too, became greatly sorry at heath
and, distressed at the thotfgkt that his rival
Samvaria should became prosperous, he*
came sick at heart, and the glo* e*
complexion left him, and kis body became
emacited.

37' And when the king of tlie c®”’*
10 know (had Vnhaspati wa< much agerie*
veil he went to him attended by the Im*
mortals and spoke to him thus.


‘ CHAPTER IX.

I \

(ASHvVaMEDHIKA PARVA.")-

^ ConliniitJ,

Indra Baid-—

I Do you, O Vrihaspall, sleep m pesc<v
and do )ou hkeyour servants dir you se««
the welfare of ii. . 1

celestials, O Brain


celesinls, and do the
ina. protect you.


bed O


Vriliaspati said —

7 I do sleep in pesce, In my
Lord of the criestials, and my setvsntS ■.
to my liking, and 1 nlwats seel, {he ** '
being of the celestials, ami they c!^.tl^u m

well.


ashwamcoha parva.


Ttiira eaid

3 Whence ihen 1* iWt p*m, mentfttar
ph) 5'cal, nnd why arc you pate and ch*»i;ed
ti* appearance at present, tell me, O Brah«
mana, who iJiose people are, who have
caused you pain, so that I may stay lliem
all.

Vriliaspati said:—

4. O Indra, I have heard that Marutia
wi(l celebrate a preat sacrtRce at which rich
presents wilt be given by him (tn Brahrna*
nas] and that at his sacrifice Samvacta will
act as the offieiatin^ priest, and, therefore,
do I wish that he may not olTiciate as priest
at that sacrifice.

Indra said

5 You, O Brahmnna, has attained all
the objects of yoiir desire when you have
become the excellent priest oi the celestials,
versed in all the sacred hymns, and have
pot over the influence of dtaih jnd de*
crepiiude, what can Samvarta do to you
now 7

Vriba8p%ti said I

6 . Prosperity of a rival Is always painful, 1
and do you, therefore, with your aiten* '
cfant Rods persecute the Asuras with their
hith and kin, and slay the most prosperous
•monR them { hence, O (.ord e( the Rods, '
am 1 changed m appearance at the thought
that my rival is prospering, therefore, O
Indra, do you, by all mesus, restraui Sam>
varia and king Maruita.

Indra turning to A gni said

8. ffo yen, O Jalaverla, felJowluR my
direction, go to kinR Msrutts to present
Vfi)i»fpifi to him and S»y to him that this
Vnhsspsti will oflieiate at his saciifice and
make I im ImmorUf.

A gni said:—

9 I shall preteniTy, O worshipful one,
Ro there, as your messenger, to present
Vrihaspati to king Maritiia ; and to make
Indra’s words true, and to shew respect to
y.<.\ha;\n»iA itrjrwMrA-

Vyasft said— •

in "1 hfii tl e R'eat F ire Cod srenl O'* luS
errand, laying waste all the (oreslt and
(tee*, like ll>e powrtlut wind, roaring and
rrsolting at ramlom at il>e end the
winicr srssrn.

Marnttft sttid* —

ir. *re I t find the Fire eortrr 5rs
Its r*n ml.rdmei*, ittsd»v, ileiefme,
do, eu (!) aiiinr, < Fri I im • lr<>i and srater,
aid a tew end •aici Iti *ail u g ilc Icct.
^3


lAgni said

I I*. 1 accept your oirerlngs r>f wat*r,
[seat, and water for washing the feet, O
sinless one, do you know me as the mes>
seoger of Indra, come to >ou as ordered
by him.

Marntta said

13 O Fire-Gnd, Is the ctorlous King
of the Celestials happy, anti is he pleased
with IIS, and are llie other celestisfs loyal
to him T Do you enlighten me duly on all
these matters.

Agni saidt—

»4, O kioR. Shakra ft perfectly fiappy,
he IS pleased with you, and wishes to make
' you free from decrepitude, and all (he
I other gods are loyal to him, do you, D
' lung, listen to the message of the King of
the Celestials.

15 And the object for which he has
sent me to you is to preserl( Yrthaspati to
Marutta; O prince, let this priest perform
your ssc^ce. and make you who are only
a mortal, attain Immortaluy,

Hamtta said t—

16. Thu twice bom Brahmans Sam*
yarta will perform yonr sacrifico, and 1
pray to Vrihaspati, that he having acted
as prrest to Mahendra it does not appear
srell for tilm now to act as priest to mortal
men.

Agai said

17. If this Vriliaspatl nflielale as yottr
pnest. then you witt by the blessings of tf>e
King o( the Celestials attain the highest
place in the celestial mansion and acquiring
fame you will, forsooth, conquer the licavenly
region.

18. And, O king, if Vtlhsspsti act at
your pries( you will be able to conquer
alt (he regions inhabited by men, and (he
heavenly regions and all Ihe highest ie»
gions created by Prafapaii and even (he
entire kmjrdom ef the celestials.

Samvnrtfi said j—

19 You must ntver come again ihns
to present Ynharpai) to Manilla , for know,
O Tavaka, (Arni), '1 >ou do. 1 Insmc mv
temper, w»J-b«r» yen smh mj fierce evd

•yes.

Vyati said t—

»0. Ttun fcirng dettmcilen by fee,
•<*d trrmbimg Iks tlur leaeet •{ the
Ashsrsttla tree {hem •thgieta), Ayat re«
Itfined to tU gods, ard iiie great Shakia


10


mahabhasata.


seeing that carrier of oblations (Agni) m ilie
company oi Vnsbaspaii said~as (otiows .

Indra said —

21. You, o Jataveda (Agm). went lo
ptiesenl Vriha«t)aii to Manma according to
iny direction, now wliat did that sacnRcmg
king say to you, and did be accept my
command ?

Agni said : —

‘ 22. Your message was not acceptable
by Manilla and wtien urged by me, tie
clasping the bands of Vnhaspaii. said again
and again, that Samvarla would act as Ins
priest.


23. And be also observed that he did
not wish to attain tbe woildJy and ibe
heavenly regions, and all tbe bigbest re.
gions of Prajapati, and that if lie were so
iiiinded, be would accept llie terms ot
Indra.

Indra said-:—

•. 34 Do jou return to that k,ng and
meeting bim. tell him these wordtnf m.ne.
ful 0 meaning and if be nhey them not,
I shall strike bim wiih my thunderbolt.

Agni said

„ J « ‘krs king of (he G.ndharvas.

CO there as )our messenger, O Vasava.for.
SUk.r .1 ‘‘’''♦•'Mself Know. O

* '“‘'''’y Samvarla.

words aajje, ,,

fierce evil e)es if you on any account come
Vnliaspoiito kmg


as I do rj'st strike the weak with nif
thunderbolt (Vnira got the better ot me for
a time ) Blit wlo among mortals can Inc
m peace by creating enmity with me

3 ® f have banished the Kalakeyas (0
the earth, and removed the Daiiaxas from
the celestral rei,ion and hive lerminiled
Hie existence of Pralilada in heaven can
there be any min wlio can leave m peace by
exerting mj enmiiy,

Agni Said

3* — 3 * Do yoK, O Mahendri re«

member that formerly when the sage Cbja*
vana ofBctated at tlie sacrifice of Sharyali
w«h ibe twin gods Ashmns. and himself
appropriated ihe Soma oflerng alone, you
were filled with anger, and when bent upon
prevenimg Sharyali's sacrifice, yon did vio*
lenily strike Chyavana with your thunder-
bolt, that Brahmana O Purandari, yield*
»i»g to anger, was able by tlie power M •»»
i devotions lo seize and hold fast your hand
: tviili yoar Ihimdeibolt in M.

33 “ 3 ® And in anger, he igam crested
a terrible looking enemy nf yours, the Asura
named Msda s*iimi>ig all shsp*s on see*
mg whom you did shut your eyes with fr»V
whose one huge >sw was placed on earth,
and tlie oilier extended i» liie celesiisl
regwns ar>d who loolrert terrible with In*
thousand sharp teeth rxiending over a hun»
dred Yoianas, and had four promiuent ones
thick a set, and shifting like a pillar oj
Sliver, lynd extending nver t«vo limdred
Vojanas And whfn grinding his teeth It
followed you with his terrihle and opliht'
pike with the object of slaying yen, you ou
seeing thst leijibfe mooiter, presented a
(piiihil) sight io all ihe bystariders ihm,

O destroyer of Danavas, overcome
fear of tbe monster, with your har>ds cissp*
ed in prayer, you did seek the proteCam 0*
the great sage.


ASHWA&IBDltA TARVA.


II


patiently tlie insolent prK]« o( Aviksinta's
s III, and so shall I ^rjnd him with my tliuii*
derbolt.

2. Therefore, O Dl'filarashira. do jtwi
according to my direction go to king
rulta, attended by Samyarta, and deliver
tins now to him — 'do you O prince, accept
Viihaspait as your sptntuat preceptor’, as
otherwise 1 shall strike yod with my dread*
ful thunderbolt.’

Vyasa said

3 Then Oiifitarashtra went to that
monarch’s court and delivered tins news io
him front Vasava.

Dhntarashtra said

4— S O kiiiK, know that ( am Dhrita*
rashira the Gandiiarva, come here with the
object of delivering to you the message of
Jiidra, do >ou, O foremost of icuti;*, hsieii
to the words wtuch the great lord aC all the
worlds meant for you —-that one of mcom*
prehensible deeds (IndraJ only sard this i
much— ’dujou accept Vnluspati as your |
effioating pnesi for iJie saenhee, or if you
not comply wub my request 1 shall '
strike you with my dreadful thunderbolt.’

Uoxatta'said

6 You, O Purandara, the Vnhwadevas.
the Vastia and the Ashwius ye all know, that,
III (his world (here is no escape for the resufts
of plaj ing false to a friend, il is a great sm
liue.tlut of UriihRiHticrde.

y Let Vrihaspad (therefore) ofTiuate as
priest (0 (hat hfaltendra the supreme Ueva
tend) the highest one holding the thunder*
boh, and, O prince, SamvarCa will act as my
priest, as neither Ins (Iiidra*s) words, nor
thme commend (hemsclyes to me.

The Gindharra laid

8. Do )TU O foremost of king', listen to
t1 e terrible war cry, o( Vasava roaring in
tl e sky, assuredly and openly will Mnhen.
dra burl his thunderbolt at you, do you.
therefore, think of jour well being, fortius
IS the time to do K.

Vyasa said —

9 Thus addressed by Dliriiarashtra,
and hesring the rosr of Vasava, the kmg
communicated lli s news to Samvaits firm
m devotion and the highest of all Virtuous

MRrntta said

to. tndyed this rsin cloud tl lating In the
air, indicam that Indra must be near at
present, p erefore O piince of Drahmanas, I
■ leek s'lt’tcr (tom joj, dj joii, Q best of


Oraliinsnas remove this fear ol Indta
from niy mind.

II. lilt Holder of the Th inderbolt is
coming eneompwinB the ten direciloni ef
space with his dreadful and snperlminan
refulgtiice and my assistants at ihis taeci*
ficial assembly have been filled with fezr.

Samyarta gai^

12 O foremost of kings, your fear of
Shafcra will soon be removed, and I sliall
soon remove this terrible pain by means of
my magic ((ncaiitaCio'i). be calm and have
no fear of being overpowered by Indra.

13 You have notinng to fear from ifie
God o( a Hundred Sacrifices I shall use my
stsj tug c^iarmf, O king, and th« weapons ol
all tlie gods will avaif them not.

14 — 15 Let the lightning (! ish in all the
direcltons, and tlie winds entering into the
clouds pour down ram m die midst of the
forests, and il>e waters deluge the heavens
and the ^/Idslies of lightning Dial are sren
will avail not, you have nollimg to fear, let
Vasava pour down ll>e rains and plat Ins
terrific thunderbolt where he will, Doaling
among the masses of (clouds) fur your des*
(ritction, for the god Vahni (Agni) will pro.
tect you m every way, and maite you atUin
all the objects of your desire.

JJarutta said —

16 Ihis dreadful crash of the thunder-
boll together with llie roaring of the winds,
seem dreadful to niy ears and my heart is
stfickeii again and ag'in, O Brahmana,
and my peice of mind is gone at present,

Samvarta said

*7 O king, the fear in your mtnd from
this terrible thunderbolt will leave j'liu im*
mediately 1 shall remove the thunder by
the help of (tie winds, and setting aside all
(ear from your mind, do you accept a boon
from me accirding to your heart’s desire,
and ( shall do it foe you >

Maraita said -

18. I with, O Drahmana, that Indra all
of a sudden should come baddy at tins tarn-
lice, and accept the oblation offered to him,
and that all the other celestials also c-'me
and take their appointed shares ol the oRer.
tngs and accept ilie libations ol Soma diet-
ed to them.

Samvarta said

19 t have, by the power of my incanta-
tions, attraacd Indra bodily to this sacrifice.
See. O king. Indra coming with Ins lioises,
and adored by Die Oilier celeslula hatteniiig
(0 tins sacririi.e.


12


MAltADIIAR\TA.


Agm said.—

30. I>>ent1ie King ot the Celestials at*
tended Ly tl>e otlier denies and nding in
ins chariot drawn by the most excelieiU
liotseS) approaclied the saccificui attar of
hat son of Avusliit and drank the Soma
bjujns of lint peerless king .

21. And king Maruita with liis priest
rose to receive Indra coming with itie liost
of celestials and well pleased in mind, he
welcomed (he King or Deities with due
and foremost Iionors according to tlie
bhastras.

Samvarta said

22. Welcome IQ you, O Indra, by your
presence here, O learned one, this sacrt5ce
)ias been made ^raiid, O destroyer of Vala,
aud Vritra, do you, again, drink this Soma
yuice produced by me to'day.

Marntta said • —

33 Do you look with kindness upon me,

1 bow to you, O Indra, by your presence,
iny sacriAce has been perfected, and my
tile loo blessed wilfi good resuUs. O
burendra this excellent Bralnnaiia, the
youi gci brother of Vnhaspati is engaged
ID celebtaiing my sacrifices.

Indra said

24 1 know your priest, this Inghty ener*

pttK aseeue, the younger brother of V rihas*
pad, at whose invitation 1 have come to j
this sacrifice, t am, O king, well pleased
with you, and my anger against you is
gone.

Samvarta said;—

35. H, O King of the Celesiialf. you are
pleased with tii, do you yourself kivc atf the
directions for ihis sacrifice, and Surendra.
youiself vfdain the sacrtfici-tl portions (for
the gods) so ihai, O yod, all (he world may
know that it has been done by you.

Vasava said —

26 t hus addressed by the son of Angira.
Shakra Ininsell gave directions to alt the
celeMialt to erect the IimII of assembly, and
a thousand well furnished excellent rooms
looking grand as in a canvass, and quickly
to cuinpicle tl>e slaircsse mastive and Jur.
able, lor (he ascent n) ihe Gandharvas and
Apsarat and to furnish that portion of Ore
saciifiLi. I ground reserved (or the dance of
llie Apsaras, like the palace of Indra in the
celestial region.

sS— 39 O king, thus directed, the re*
frowned ilenijeiss ol heaven quickly earned
o It the directi''ns uf Shakra And then O
kl <g, India w 11 pleased and worst ippr’d.


thuksaidti king Mi mti — O p ir\y, W
associating with you at this sacfift.e, yotr
ancestors who have go te bifore you as
welt as the other ceUstiaU have been
luiflily pleased and accepted the oolaiioiu
off.Ted by you.

30 And now, O king, let the foremost
of twice born ones, ufTer on the sacnhciaf
altar a red bull beloiit>ing to tlie Pire-God
and a snered anij duly consecrated blue
bull with a variegated skin, befongiig (o
the Viihwedevas.

31 'then, O king, the sacriliciai cere*
mony grew >n splendour, wherein tl e
cefesiias themselves collected (he food, airj
bhakra (he King uf the Celestials, possessed
of horses, and adored by the Brahmanas,

: became all assistant at the sacrifice.

32 And then the great Samvaria ascen.
diug the ahar, and looking radiant as the
second embodiment of the Burning Fire,
Ivudly addressing (he celestials wiih salts*
faction, ulTered oblations of clarified butter
to the lire ivuh incanlatiou of the sacred
hymns*

33 And then the Destroyer of Vafa first
drank ti>e Soma }utee, and then the assembly
of ottfcr celestials who drank Soma, and
(hen in happiness and with tlie king's per*
mission they relumed home well pleased
and delighted.

34 Ihen (hat king, the destroyer ol
his enemies wxh a delighied heart, placed
heaps ol gold on various spots, and distri-
buting tlie immense riches to the Brah«
manas he looked glorious tike Kuvera the
King of Riches.

35 And with a pleased heart, the king
filled his treasury with different kinds of
wealth, and with the permission of hit
spiritual preceptor, he returned (to Ins
kingdom) and continued to rule the eniue
kingdom extending to the limits of the sea.

* 36 So vntuoui in (I is worW wis (hat
king, at whose sacrifice such an eiiurnioiis
q Miility of gold Was collected, and now, O
prince, you must collect that gold and
atioting (he gods with due rues, da you
Celebrate this sacnrice.

VaiBbamp\yana said —

37. (hen (he (‘aixlava prince Vtklhi'h*
Ihiia wax del ted on (leanng (Ins spreclt
«f (he Son el SalyMVall (Vyasa) and deSi*
fOus of Celebrating hit sacrifice wiih those
riclies. he coniuhed again and agaui with
Ins inuiuiers.


ASIIWAMEDHA PAKVA


CHAPTER XI.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.l-
Continued


Vaishampayana said:

Wl.ti. V)A>a oi

sr'dTe:;' d ‘?r ' KA.«."a

tlie son of Pnifia, afflicied m "f'"**,*. .
Hi'oU of ,,.s ,olat..=s and U.nsjn." dlod ^
baido, a.d appoarioe C'"' 'o""
s m darkened by ecl.p«, or fi • * "
by smoke, tliat support of
race (ICnslma). comforunp ‘he sou oi
DUatma, tried to address bin*


Vasndeva said —

4 All crookedness of heart brings on
dtiaociion, and all rocWndo 'aads lo

Dral n,a t Ins and tins only IS fho afm and

ol lect of all true wisdom, wliai can meiiiai
disuaelion do (to him).

5 . Your Karma has not yet been dw-
Ifojed nor have your enemies p*®”
jugated, for you do not yet
enemies that live within your own body.

6 1 shall (therefore) relate to you truly

■s I have heard it, the story of the war ol
Indra with Vritra as it happened

7-8 Formeily the Earth. O king, was

encompossed by Vritra, and by ‘hu absirae*
turn ol earthly mailer the seat o all sme^
there arose bad odors on all sides
Performer of a Hundred Sacrifices (In •}.
being much incensed by this deed, ihor
his thunderbolt at Vntra.

0 And being deeply wounded by the
Ih inderbult of p iwreful Indra, Vntra
ed tnio the (waters), and by doing SO, n*
d»tro}ed their property.

to 1 he waters being seized by Vntra.

the r 1 n „d property left them At this
In Ira becam* wroth and again smote h«n
with his thunderbolt.


bun. lost InJiA ’".'15

„,„,1,.|....»1 b) 0,5;

bS.i'y — ■i'J. •«*'"

smote him with Ins ihnnderbolt

,T And thus smitten by the powerful
l,idra »e suddenly entered into »•«
(stkraM body, ard took away .l»

essential attribiitei.

t8— so And overtaken by Vritra. he
„|h.,,n...iPl. tlm-dirb.;, .nd »


of his invisible siiuiioc' . a- .


they in turn told it to r


It And he (Viilra) smitten by the
l^u.lde^bo!t by the most ‘ , 5

W..., ... ,1.. maitEf and abstracted


ifunderbolt by the most pow'**”* * j
went to the luminous matter and abstracteo
Its inherent property.

IS— 14 . The luminous
whelmed by Vntra and us P”?®!*’'' __,v
and form^being thereby lost. ‘|** *.*

Indra again hurled his thunderbolt at him
And thus wounded again by »"«*« "^ « ***

piwer. Viiira entered all no a *“ mad*

ll-e gaseous matter, and therealtei mado
away with us Inherent property.


CHAPiEii xn.


( ASHWAMBDHIKA PARVA.)—
CenUnued-


Is-'o. And tb.s mAR-' I:*'"'
psaeitd by Vntra and «* .preperty,


VBBudeva said ^

t Ihero are two kinds of diseases,

without the inieraclion of the ivro

_ The disease that u produced m the
hriv IS called physical, and that which is

_ The cold, the warm (phlegm «n
s.?s aa well as the windy humoiryO

th/ phyiicAl b”*'..

"“In.’" d'2.“ pfopon,™., .nd.C...

oood tieallh ^

S any of the three preponderate, aome

remedy i> laid down

A Happiness is «*ereom» by ‘“"OWr

toifOW.


14


mauabharata.


7 But you, O son of (Cuutf. do

neither ’ wUh to recall your sorrows nor
your happiness, what else do you wish lo
recall barriii{; tins delusion of sorrow. Or,
perchance, O son of Prilha, it IS your
innate natine, by which you are at present
overpowered. JVou do not wish to recall
to your mind* the painful spectade of
Krishna standing in the hall uf assembly
witli duly one .piece of cloth to cover her
body, and wliife she wss m her menses and
before all llie Pandavas. And it is not
proper that you siiould brood over your
departure fronr the cily, and 'your exile
with the hide of the antelope for your
dress, and your wanderings m the great
forest, nor sliould _) un recall to yuur mind
the Ction from JalaSurX the fight with
Chiirasena, and yuur troubles from tbe
SJindIfavas

ij — 13 Nor It fs meet, O son of Pritha
and conqueror of your foes, that you should
recall tiie incident of Kic'iaka's kicking
Draupsdi, during the period of your exile
pasted in absolute concealment, nor the m«
cidents of the Rght which took place
between yourself and Drona and Bhisiims
'1 he limj lias now arrived, when you must
fighi wliieji each mustda single handed with
his mTnd

14 Therefore, O chief of Bharata'srace,
you must now prepare to carry the struggle,
against your mind, and by dint of abstrac*'
lien and the merit of your own Karma, you
must reach the other side of the my sterious
and unintelligible (mind).

15 III this war (here will be no need for
any weapons nor for friends nor attendants
*ihe battle which is to be fouxht alone and
single-handed has now arrived for you

16 And if defeated in this struggle, you
shall hnd yourself In the most wretched con-
difibn, and, O son of Kunti, knoWmg tins,
and acting accordingly, shall you attain
success

(7 And knowing this wisdom and the
destiny of all creatures, and following tie
conduct of your forefathers do you duty
govern your kingdom


CfUprER xni.

(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA,)—
ContimnJ, ‘

VasQdeTA said •—

I. ’ O foremost of B'larata’s race, salva*
lion IS noi kttai led by removing tlie exter-
pat tilings (like kingdom, etc), but by'


giving up things which satisfy the flesh

(body),

3. The virtue and happiness which one
attains who has renounced only the exteriul
ob|ects, but who at the same time possessed
by passions and weakness of*tiie flesh, let
these be the portion of our enemies,

3 The word wttii two fetters is Mrityu
(death,) and (he word with three letters is
Shashwala Brahman, or the eternal spirit
the consciousness of ego, or the slate of
being addicted to worldly objects is D alh,
and die absence of that feeling Is iinmorta-
lity. ^

4. And these two, Spmt and D*alh, O
king, liave their seats in the souls of all
creatures, and reinaimng unseen, they, for-
sooth, rage war willi each other.

3 And if, O Bharata, it be Iru* that no
creature ts ever kilted, then one cmnimw no
sin for the death of a Creature by destroying
Its body.

6 What matters tlie world to a man, if
having acquired the sovereignty of the entire
earth with its mobile aod nn nobile creation,
he does not become attached to it

7 But it tlie man wiio havuig renounced
(he world, has adopted the forest mide of
life, living on wild roots and edibles, O sm
of Pntha, has a craving for the eailhly
things, and IS addicted to them he may be
said to bear deatli in his mootlt,

8 ; Do you, ,0 Bliarata, watcliandob.
serve the character of your exiernal and
internal enemies. And tlie man who is
able to perceive the nature of the eternal
reality is able to g*-i over (he iiiniunce of
the great fear (perdition),

9— lit Melt do not like the conduct of
those who are engrossed m earthly desires,
and there is no deed without having a desire
(at Its root) and all desires are as it were,
the limbs of the mind 1 herefore, wise
men knowing tins, cintrol their desires.

I he Yogi who comm ines with the Supreme
Spirit knods Yoga lo be the p»rfect way
to salvation by r<*-isoii of the practices of Ins
many pristine births' And remembering
that, what the soul wishes, is not condu-
cive of piety and virtue, but tliat (he con.
trot of (he desires is. at the root of all
true virtue, such men do not engage in the
practice ol chanty, Vedic learning, asceti-
cism, Vedic riles, whose object le attain-
ment of eaithly prosperity, ceremniues,
sacrifives, religious rules and meditaiion,

- with the desires of securing any advantage
(hereby. •

I? an,iIl'tslra'iion ,of this truth, the
‘sagis, well read m anueiit Uarning, reciU


ASDWAMCDIU PA^VA.


lli«e versfs called b) die name of »Kama-
^)U, do you, O Vudhulithira, listen to^he
tesiial of them in full,

13 (Kama saj-s) No c'e'liiee U aWe to
destroy itt* without followioK the proper
meihods (?iff , stib]<ii:;atian of all desirea and
practice of Yt^a, etc ) i

tj— 15 If a man Unaving my power#
tries to destroy me by miiUerjog prayers,
etc., I prevail over him by deluding him
niih the belief that 1 am the e^o within him
If he desire to destroy me hy means ol
sacniices with many presents, I ueccive him
by appearin(rin his mind as a most viftn*
ous Creature amoncst the mobile creation,
and i[ he wish to destroy me by mastering
the Vedas and its auxiliaries, I overreach
him by appeaiine to lus mmd to be the
soul of virtue Amongst the immobile ccea«
tion,

16^19 And if the man whose strength
lies m truth, wish to overo’me me thy
patience, I appear to lum as his mind, and
thus he does not perceive my eaisteitce, and
'• the roan ol austere religious praeticrs.
^ish to destroy me by meaneof asceticismi
Isppear m the dress of asceticisrn an his
fluid, and thus he |s prevented from know*
ifg me. and thejoaii of (earning, who with
Ibe oirject rf attamiitg salvation svish w
drsiroj, me, 1 frolic .and laugh to tlie (oce of ,

Such a man mrent c/» sa/vatioo. i nm the

‘vedastmg one wuhoiit an rquit, whom no
creature can kill or destroy.

20 Therefore, you too, O punce. divert
yobi* desires (Kama) (o virtue, so that^by
this means, yog may aCUtu what «s /or your
good ^

21, Do you, therefore make preparations
g *he due performance of the Horse-Sac'iv
with presents, and vanoin niher sacra-
great splendour, and BCCOmpanied
With presents.

2i, Let not, therefore, grief overpower
you again on seeing your friends lyine kil-
led on ti « battle field Y<nj cannajt see the
men killed m this battle afive again.

23 Therefore, should you perform mag-
nificent sacrifices puth presents, si^that you
attain lame in ilus world, and reach I
Hie perfect way in the next. I


CHAPTER XlVr

(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA )—
ConitttKtd.

VaiAampAjana said —

r. I hose great ascetics cnn*o(ed fhd
royal saint Yudfatshflura, bereft of liiS
friends, witfa these words.

3—4 And, O menarcfi, that kmg ex*
lioried by the worshipful Vi>htarashrabe
liiiiiself, and by Dwaipayana (Vvaraf,
Krishna, Oevssihana, Nsrada, Bhimsf
I N.«ic<ila. Krishna (Draiiprdi), Sahadeva,
j and the sharp wilted Vijata as well as by
I otber great men, aud Brahinanat yersed
I in the scriptures, became relieved of all
I mental suflermg and sorrow ortginalmg
i (rom the death of his dear relations.

3 And that king Yiidh|sliif*fra after
performtng the -sihsnqu'nl percmmies of
Ills departed frfeni/s, and honoring the
Srahmanas and ibe celesttaU, brogghtthe
kingdom of the earth with its girdfe of
oceans, under his sway.

<J. And having regained lus (ungdenSi
with a traiiqu'l mmd, that prince of l<uru’s '
race thus addressed Yyssa, Narada and
the other sa^et who were present,

* 7 { have been consoled by the words of

on great, aiici'ni and aged saints as your*
s Iveo. an f I -have /ww no cause fc/t/or
the least sorrow

I S And Idci’WKe f have attained great
nches. m<h which ( may adore the celes*
Hats, therefore, wiihjour help, f ahall now
celebrate the saci ifice. ,■

p-^to O the best of the twice borns, we
have heard that those tHimatayan) regions
are futi ef wonder^ therefore, O Brahmana
saint and grandfather do you so ordain
that under your protection we may safely
reach the Jlimalaya moiiniams, the perfor-
mance of my aacrifice being entirely^ wuhin
your control, and then the worshipful
celestial saint Narada and Devaslhana
have .*Ua addressed exq iisite and well-
meaning words for our belioof.

»I No unlucky man in limes of great
sorrow arid distress, has ever the good
(ortuiie lo secure the services of sudi pre-
ceptors! and friends approved of all vtr-
lupus men,

rr — 13 Thu* addressed by {he king,
those great saiiiis, comrrtrnding the king
and Krishna and Arj ina lo go {lie Hima.
layaii regiaus, tlwu and there vanished
before the assembled raiiUii id*, and tb«
king, the ro>a( son of D larma, tlisii seated
liumell (here for some tune.


i.uiuenAftAtA,


14 — 16 An(i Hie t’ninJavas then on
Account of the deatl» of Bhishma, were
enRa<ed Sn c«l braiing his filnerat cere-
tnuiiies Aid their time, while thus en-
gaged, seemed too long in passing, and
performing the last rites for the bodies of
Bhishma, Kama and Other foremost
TCau avas, they gave away large nresenis
to Brahmanas And then the foremost
descendant of Kuril again performed with
Dhritarashira the funeral rltei, and having
distihnited profuse riches amongst the
Biahmanas the PandaVa chief wtth Ohrlta-
rasliira in advance entered the city of
lUsiiiia fifagar, and consoling his uncle,
havi ig ejesof wisdom, that virtuous prince
continued to govern Itie earth with hb
bioitieis.


CHAPTER XV.

(ASnWAMBDMIKA PARVA)—

COiiltHtrlJ,

Janajnejftja said —

I O best of the twice-boms, whert the
PaiidaVat had reconquered and paCiRed
theif kingdom, what did the (wo warriors
Vaiudcva and Ohanenjaya dot

Vailiiampayana said s—

t— 4 O king, Vasudeva and Ohsntnjaya
were highly pleased when (he Pandavashad
succeeded m regaining and pacifying tlieir
kmedoms, and (hey deported (liemselves
with great glee, like Indra and his wife m
tlie celestial regions, and amidst picturesque
forest sceneries, and tablelands of moun-
tains and sacred placee of pilgxmage, and
lakes and rivers, they travelled with great
pleasure like the two Ashwins in (he Nan-
dana garden of Indra.

5 And, O Dharata, the great Krishna

and (he son o( Pandii tDhansiiJaya) enter-
ing the bcautiljl hall of assembly at Indra-
prastha, passed their time in great mem- |
ment. '

6 And Uiere, O prince, they passed
their lime in describing theslirrtng Incidents
of the war, and the sufferings of iheir past
Uvei.

7 And those two great ancient sages
pleased. TtcMed the genealogy of the races
of saints and gods

8 Then Keshava, knowing ihc full
significance of all mailers, addressed Partha
In sweet and beautiful words of escelient
siyle and meaning


9 And then j^narditaha consoled HiS
son of Priiha affl cted by the death of Ins
sons, and thousands of other relatives.

10 And he of great asqettc merit and
knowing the science of all things duly
oniforting him, rested for a while, as if a
great burden had been removed from Ins
own body,

ti< Then CJovInda (Krishna) comfor-
ting Arjiina with sweet speech, addressed
these well-reasoned words to him.

Vaattdeva said:-*

|3 O Ar|iina, the terror of jour
enemies, this entire earth has been con-
quered by the king, the son of Dliarma,
depending on the power of your arms
13 And, O best of men. (he virtuous
kloe Yudlushlhira now enjojs the sover-
eignty of the earth without a rival, by tlie
power of Bhimasena and the twin brothers.

14— -17 O you. who know whst virtue
IS, It was by virtue alone, tint the king has
been able to regain his kingdom shorn of all
enemies, and it was by the action of virtue*
that king Suyodhana has been slait m
battle, and, O son of Pntha and pillar of
the Kuru race, the wicked ions of Olirita*
rashtra, avaricious, always rude in speech*
and bent iipnn a sinful course of conduer*
having been rooted out with their (ollowers*
the king, the son of Dliarma and lord of the
earth, now peaceably enjoys the entire king-
dom of (he earth wiih your help and I too*
O son of Pand i, have been pleasantly pas-
sing away my lime m your company, amidst
woodland scenes.

t8 O terror of your enemies what
more need I tell you, but that where yoil
and Pntha, and the king, the sort of
Dharma, and the poweiful Bhimaserta and
the two sons of Madri are, there am I
drawn with exquisite delight.

19— ao. O descendant of Kuru, m these
delightful and sacred and celestial halls of
assembly, a long time has gone away m
sour company without my seeing Vasiideva,
Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni
race

*1. And now I am desirous of COmC
tothecitywf Dwaravali Do you, tfierefore,
O most courageous 0! men, assent (0 my
departure.

SI When king Yudhishthirs was
ttricken heavily with sorrow, I with
B) ishma, have recited to him many appro-
priate legends suited loihe occasion with a
view of di<pr1lmg his gritf, and the pi ant
and great Yndf ishthira though our sover-
eign, and versed in ill featiiing, faid due
heed (0 our words.


;^SHWAMED1IA pahva.


A\-n That soa of Dharma hoaors

truth, and i» gratelul and
will Ills virtue, and good sense and the U
lity of his power always endure.


a§ And now, O Arjuna. if it P'®®*®.*
do you JO to tint Btoat pnoee und toll li.m
of my desire to leave this place.

sS— 31 For, O you of ni'ghty arms, even
If death comes to me, I am
anything that may <^'SP'®*** V‘{?'
speak of, my going to the city of D y’

Osonof Piiiha, ■"'i ‘^**“''^*?* L only
I now tell you truly ®ani|

what is good and agreeable

there can be nothing equivocal m Inn y

way, that the necessity for my st^ng
no^’longer exists, when. O Arjun*.
monarch the son of Dhritarashlra,

fulled with his armies and attends •

the earth, my friend. wiHi »* belt o JM*.
and Its mountains and woods a"d «

and the kingdom of the Kuru k> g
With various gems, have P?**®** ” » _ 4

control of that wise son of Dharma. A .

O foremost prince of Dharau s

that virtuous prince govern the ,, f

dom of the earth in virtue, and «'ib tl.e

respect and approbation of

Siimlus, and having his praises • y

extolled by the panegyrists.

3» Do you, O pride of
•ecompany me to day to tlie king,
advanMf of the Kuru race, anif sound him

of my intended return to Owaraka.

33 As Yudhishthira tlie *i

the Kurus, always commands my |o ^

K.p.ct, 1 i,..., O .c of

my body and all the riches that l
my house, at his disposal.

34 And. O prince,

when this earth has come under .

Irol and that ol the worshipful YudImUlhira
of excellent character, there no long j
mams any need for my slaying here .exceys
for my love for you
3S* And Okmg when the
Arjina had been thus

noble.l earled Janarddana, he, “Jj

lie honors due to him, sorrowfully «P'«'*
by merely saying ‘be it so. j


|oy, in palace of celestial beauty.

1 One day. those two hstlessfy y"* J.®
a parlicolar part of Ih. P"

“riXa .otrorrodod by Ibo.t rtUl.ve. ond,
"‘"‘^air’du'. .on

iLr,^Tor.'d''rradr^^^^^^^

ful palace, ,r> mi^htv-armed one,

P”,";o.SE4KoV.-'.o„. opob-

the approach of the battle.-

< O son of Dcvalci, your form a'*® ”
ihS iSd of the universe, thert became
known to me.


CflAPlER XVI.
'(ANUGITA PARVA)

after killirg their on. O iwice-

sembly rooms what conver .

born one took place between them


VaUhampayana said— ,

s' -nJ .ddrotUd

lS,«rP«'Sa

(oiiows. '

Vaeudeva said — ,

’ s' '"d*« '■

considered as mysi JesSnbed to you

'T' ;'C.»dy

learn lhat you did on of all ll.at 1,

SJV'/rrnlb.. ^

■ "‘'"r.r.lii a°n5°yVJr'™3l,“, prams"

destitute of ‘b for me. O Dha-

SnW.. P».f.P l-f'. »"

r. "’or. ,h>. sr.flicr.nt

....he It again in detail. ,

,, 1 described to you. O Suprernc

t. Iiavine concentrated myself m
SrJ’a I Shall iiow however, recite to you
I?|?d h story upon the same s ibject

S‘ an'''under5iiidmg adapted to my


iS


MAHABHAttA^A.


leactun^, j-ou may succeed in attaining to
Itie luglicst endi

O chssttser of enemies, on one oc>
casion, a Dralimana came to- us from the
celestial regions. 01 irresistible energy, he
came from the regions of llie grandfather,
lie i\as duly respected by us •

i6. Listen, O son of Prilha, unhesita*
tingly to what he, O chief of Bharata's race,
said, m answer to our enquirres, according*
to heavenly foiins.

Bratmana said •—

17 — 18 Ihat which )0u ask me, O
Krishna, about the religion of Moksha
(Eraancipalion), led by )Our compassion
ior all creature^— (hat, indeed, which des-
troys alt delusion,— O you gifted with Su-
preme power, 1 shalt now teU you duly, O
destroyer of Madhu. Uo you listen with
rapt attention as 1 discourse to you, O
Rldidtfs^a,

19. A Brahmana- named Kashyapa,
possessed of penances and the foremost of
all persons knowing dotres, came to a cer-
tain other Urahmana wha had become con-
versant with all the-enystenes of religion.

30. Indeed, the Tatter had mastered
all the knowledge which the scriptures teach
about the departure and reappearance of
beings and possessed (hat direct knowledge
of all things winch Vbga gives Ite was
well skilled in the truths of alt subjects
lelatingto (he world He had mastered
the Ituih about pleasure and pain,

31. He knew the (ruth about bwlh and
death, and underetood the distinctions be-
tween merit and dkmerit. He had* seen the
ends attained to by embodied creatures
high and low on account of llieir deeds.

22-~2i He lived like one freed from the
world Crowned with ascetic success and
” gUted with perfect tranquillity of soul, he
had alt his senses under complete control.
He seemed to shine with the resplendence
of Brahma and capable of going every-
where at will He knew ihe science of
disappearing at will from before t1>e eyes
uf all He used lo< move about in the
company of invisible Siddlias and celee-
tial musicians He used to sit and- talk wKh
them on some spot retired from the bustle
ol humanity. He was as unattached to alt
things as the wind Kasliyapa having
heaid of him truly, wished to see bins.
Gifted with, intelligence, that foremost of
all Brahmanas approached' tlia sage.

35 Himself possessed of penances,
Kasliyapa, moved by the wish of acquiring
merit, fell, with a rapt heart, at tlie foot
of il e sage when he had seen all those won-
derful Biuibutcs..


*6 Stricken with wonder at the sight of
^ose extraordinary cpiilities, Kasliyapa
to wait upon that foremost of alf
Brahmanas, with the dutiful respect of 9
disaple waiting upon his preceptor and suc-^
ceeded m pleasing Jinn

*7- By his devotion, O scorcher oP
enemies, rendering to him the obedience due"
from a disciple to a preceptor, Kasliyapa
pleased that Bralimana who possessed all
tliese qualities and was gifted besides with-
scrip(urul learning and excellent conduct.

P/eased with Kashyapa, the Brah-
mana one day addressed Inin-cheetfully and
spoke-«s follows, having the highest success'
in View. Ijsten to those words, O Janard-
dana, ns 1 repeat (hem.

The snccessful Ascetic said —

29 By various deeds, O son, as also by
the help of merit moriah creatures attain to-
diversn ends here and residence tn Heavenr

30 Mbwhere one can enjoy the highest
liappmessp nowhere one can live for good,
lltere are repeated falls from the highest
region^ acquired with such sorrow,

31* On account of my indulgenoe in-
sin, 1 had to oome by various miserable and
i'*^’picious ends, filled as I was with lus(
and auger, and deluded by cupidity,

3? I !»ve repeatedly undergorie deailr
and re birth Miave eaten various kinds of
food, I have sucked at various breasia.

33 I have seen various kin'dTof mothero,
and Various falhers dissimilar to one
anoth^ I'have come by various kinds oP
happiiiess and* misery, ^sinlkss one.

34 On various occasions have I been*
separated from' what was agreeable and
untied with wtiai was disagreeable ffkving
acquired wealth mill great labour I have-
tiad to pul op with ns loss

; 35 1 have receiveif from king and rela-

I livw •iisuUs and excessive misery. I have
, suffers,} from severe mental and pJiisicaJ
psin

3® 1 have undergone humiliations and

death and imprisonment under circum-
stances of great seventy I have had falli
into Hell and have suffered great torturer
in the domains of Yama.

37 1 have again and again, suffered

lorm decrepitude and diseases, and front
fr>qiik„i and great calamities In this
rwMid 1 have repeatedly suffered from all
Unise aflilctiens wliicUartse from a percep-
tion Q( all pairs-of opposites.

^ After alt this one day, laden with
sorrow, despair came upjn me I toote


ASHWAKieonA


tg-'/


wtuge ni the formless. Sufferjng from
^reac distress, I gave up ciie Hcrid wuh ail
Its ]oys and sorrows,

39 Tinding out llien this ■path, 1 exer*
med myself lu it m this world. Afterwards,
tlrrougl) tranqudlit}’ of soul, 1 acquired t)>e
success you see,

4o. 1 shad not have to come to tfns
world a^ain Indeed till I attain to ab>
sorption into eternal Brahma, till. In fact,
tl e final dissolution of the universe, 1 ahall
look on those happy ends that will be mine
and on lliose beings and that form thta uoi'
verse.

4t, flaving acquired this excellent Stic,
cess, I shad after departing from this world,
proceed to what is above u and thence to
what IS higher,

4t Indeed, I shaft come by tfie condi*
tion, wtuch IS unmamfest, of Brahma. Do
not doubt this, O scorcher of enemtes, f
shall not return to this world of mortal
creatures.

43 0 you of great wisdom. 1 have he*
pleased with you. led me what I
shall do for you the time has come for
iat «compli5hm«nt of that purpose for
which you nave come here.

.44* 1 know that object for which you
have sought me. I shall soon depart from
this world. Hence It IS that 1 have fiiven
yeu ihia Innt.

45 O yon of great wtsdom and «x,
perience, ( have been highly pleased with
you for your behaviour. Do you question
I shaH discourse on what is bene*
hciaf to you as desired by you.

4® I think your intelligence is great,
indeed, J Speak hrgi 1y of it, for it was sMlh
help of that uiteHigeiice tliat you were
able to recognise me (Surety, O Kashyapa,
you are endued with great mielfigeiKe.


crwpreK xwf.

(ANUGlfA PAUVA) —

CoJiiinurf/.,

VasudcTa said •—

• Touching the feet of that sac* ih*
Brahmana asked him some very difficult
q lesiions. That foremost of all pious per*
smjthen described those dude* that were
referred to.


Ea*liy,apa said —

» flow does the body dissolve awf,
«nd how 13 another is acquired ? Haw does


one become liberated after passing ifirougfj
a repeated round of painful re* births ?

3 Eiqoying Nature for sometime, how
does the iiuliv du.<l Soul cast off the parti*
cular body 7 How does the Individ la] Soul,
freed from the body, attain to wliat u
diflerenl from it, («r , Bralnnan) 7

4 Ifow does a human being enjoy the
goM and bad deeds done by ImaT Wheie .

I do the acts exist of one that is devoid of
I body?

I The Brahmana said

5 llms urged by Kashyapa, (he Ltbe,

' rated Sage answered (hose questions one

after another. Do you listen (o me, O
(icro of the Vnshm race, as ( recite to you
the answers he gave.

The Liberated Sage said •

6— y. Uport the exJiausiion of those
deeds capaife of profaiigi/ig fi/e and bring*
ingon lame which arc done in a particular
bodythatthe tiidividual Soul assumes, (he
embodied Jiva, with (he span of his fife
shortened begins to do acts hostile (o fife
and beafih On itie approach of destruc*
(ion, hks understanding deviates from llte
proper course.

$ the man of impure soul, after even
a correct understanding ol his constituheii
and sirengih and ol (lie season of both his
own life and of the year, begins to eat at
irregular intervals and to eat such food as
u hostile to fum,

<) At such a lime he does practices tliat
are greatly harmful tie sometimes eats
excessively and sometimes abstains alio*
gelher from food. /

to. He ests bad food or bad meat or
takes bad dunks, or food (hat has been
made up of hosule ingredients He eats^
food that IS heavy and more than what is
benefkiaf, or (before the food previously
taken, has been digested.

II He indulges m physical exercise and
sexual pleasure in excess, or through avidity
for work, suppresses the urging* of bis cor-
poreal organism even when itiey become
pronounced

12 . IJt, he takes (uicy food or indulges
in sleep during daytime. Tood (hat is not
properly digested, of itself excites the faults,
wbeii tw tunes comes.

ij iFrem such exciiement of the faults
in bis body, he gets disease ultimately
bringing on death Sometimes the person
engages in unnatural deeds^ike strangling.

t4 Through these causes the living
body of the creature dissolves away. Uu.


go


, MAiiADIiARATA.


Oerstand correctly tlie manner as 1 declare
It to you.

•5 Urced on by the Wind which be*
comes violenE, the heat in the body, be*
cominp' excited, and reaching every part of
the body one alter another, restrains all the
vital hirs •

l6. Know truly that excited all over the
body, the heat becomes very strong, and
pieices every vital part where life inay be
said to live

17—18 On account of this, the Individual
Soul, feeling great pain, quickly takes teave
ol the body Know, O iaremost of twice*
bom ones, that when the vital parts of the
body become thus afflicted, Individual Soul
passes away from the body, suffering from
y,reat pain All living creatures repeatedly
suffer from birtli and death

19— an It IS seen O chief of Grafimanas,-
ihat tl e pain nlncli is felt by a person ‘when
renouncing his bodies is like to what is felt
by Vnm when first entering the womb or
when coming out of it His joints become
niraust dislocated and he derives much dis*,
tress from the waters.

31 , Moved by (another) Snolenl wind
the wind in the body becomes excited
through cold and dissolves away the union
of mailer into its five primal elements,

33 Tliat wind which lives in the vital
pus called Praha and Apana occurring
vfllhin this compound of the five primal ele*
ments, rushes upwards from a situation of
distress, leaving the embodied creature
V- 33 It IS thus thaf the wind leaves the
body, ihen is seen breathlessness, llie
man then becomes destitute of heat, of
breath, of beauty, and of consciousness
24 Deserted by Brahma, the person is
said to be dead By those canals through*
which he perceives all sensuous objeas,
die bearer of the bbdy no longer perceives
them

23 The Individual Soul creates >n the
hrwby t, 'hnsjc 'uuiaJs.'bPv *01=11.
by the food =-

26 The dements gathered togeiher be*
coirein certain parts firmly united Know
that those pans are called the viials of the
body U IS said so in the bhastraSk ’

27 When those vital parts are cut, the
Individual Soul, rising up enters the heart
of the living creature and restrains the
principle o( animation forthwith,

''’28 Ihe creature then, though still
possessed of consciousness fails to know
anytliing The vital parts being all worked
up, the tlie knowldge of the 1 ving creature
becomes overwhelmed by darkness.


29—30 1 he tndividuil Soul then, who

lias been deprived of evervtlung upon which
to stay, IS then agitated by the wind Ue
then, deeply breathing a long and painful
breath, goes out speedily, making the m-
animate body (0 tremble Separated from
the body, the Individual Soul, however, >J
surrounded by Ins deeds.

3 t “34 He becomes equipped on all
sides with all Ins kuspicious deeds of merit
and with all Ins sms Bralnnanas gifted with
knowledge and equipped with the certain
conclusions of the scriptures, know Inin,
from marks, as to whether he is possessed
of merit or with its demerit Even as men
baying eyessee the fire fly appearing and
disappearing in the midst of darkness men
having the eye of knowledge and crowned
with success of penances, see, with spiritual
Vision, the Individual Soul as be leaves the
body, as he is re born, and as he enters tlie
womb It fs seen that Ihe Individul Soul
has three regions assigned to him eternally.

35 This world where creatures live is
called the field of action. Performing
acts, good or bad, all embodied creatures
attain 10 the fruits thereof.

I ^6 On acenunt of their own deeds,

' creatures acquire even here superior or in-
inferior enjoyments 0>ers of evil deeds
here, on account of those deeds of llietrs,
attain to Hell,

37 This condition of sinking With head
downwards' in which "creatures ark boiled
IS one of gieat misery It is such that a
rescue therefront is highly diflicult Indeed,
one should iry hard for saving himself from
this misery

38 Those j-egions where creatures live
when they ascend from this world, I shall
now declare truly. Oo you listen to me
attentively ^ j

39—40 By listening to what 1 say, you
will acquire firmness of understanding and
a clear apprehension of deeds Know that
even those are the regions of all creatures
of righteous deeds via , the stellar worlds
that shine in tlie sky, the lunar disc and
the solar di 4 c as well that ^shines in the
universe m its own light

4 >. Upon the termination, again, of
their merits, they fall away from lliose re-
gions repeatedly Tliere is dislincUon of
inferior, superior and intddling happiness
even in the celestial region.

43 There is discontent at sight of pros*
penty more burning than one s own even
tn the celestial region Pven these are the'
goals which I have mentioned in full,


ASUVVAMEDHA PATlVA-


21


43. I sliall, afier Hus describe W jou
W e atlainmenl by U e Individual Soul of
rhe condition of residence m ibe womb.

44 Do \ou bear me wilb rapt altenlion,
0 twice born one, as 1 speak lo you.


CHAPTER XVIII. ,

(ANUGIFA PARVA.)—
Contmtjtd,

Tlift Brahmana said —

I T he acts, good and bad, that Ibe
Individual Soul, does are not fubiect to
destruction Upon aliammenl of body alter
body, those deeds yield fruits corresponding
with them.

3 As a fruit bearing tree, when ibe
season for production comes, fields a large
t}umtuy of fruit, merit, achieved with a
pure heart, likewise )ields a large measure

ol I appiness

3 Similacly, sin, committed with * |

ful heart, produces a large quantity of
inisety I he Individual Soul, placing the
tn lid a head performs action '

4 Hear then haw tlii IndividuaT Soul,
«V’Pl with all hti deeds and overwiielmea
with lust and anger, enters the womb

5 The vital seed, muted with blood,
enters the womb of females and beetles
lie held (of the Individual Soul), good or
bad born of (his) deeds

6 Oo account of his subtlety and the
condition of being unmanilest, the InOivi* i
dual Soul does not become aliachcd to
anything even after coming by a^bony.
Tl erefore he is called Eternal Brahma

7—3 That {via , Jiva or Brahma) is the

I seed of all creatures It is on account
Him that living creatures live. That the
Individual Soul entering all thelimbs oKne
feetus part by part, accepting the attribute
ol mind and living within all the
that belong to vital air, supports (hie), wo
account ol this, the foetus becoming po**
Uessed of mind, begins to move its limbs,

9 As liquified iron, poured (iota a
mould), takes the form of tl « mould s
» 11 e entrance 6t the Individual Soul idto
tl e talus

to As fire entering a mass of iro"
heats It Bceally. so is the mam
e Individual boul m the feetus,


. to As fire entering a mass of •«
beats It ereatly. so is the manifestation
tie Individual boul m the feetus.

“vers (alt il ,nKS wilhm n)

m I'd discover the difleretil limbs 0

body


I* Whatever deeds good or bad Uie
[Individual Soul does in a
have certainly tp be ei»j >yed or endured by

I liim H

By such enjoyment and \

former deeds are exhausted, |

deeds again, accumulate »'ll l ‘
Soul succeed m acquiring a 5

the dunes included in that conlempUlion j
winch leads to Liberation , i
, ,4 Regarding this, 1 fehall tell yo^
deeds by which the Individual Soul, O best
ol men; while passing through a repeated
round of re birllis, becomes happy

ic— 18 Gifts, observances of austerity,

b«r,ns .OT.d.nE to ll,=

otdin.iu», laid dawn, S ol

quillily. mtrey Tor all crialiiros
passilMis, abstention lroiTV-Ct«e*iy
from appropmtmg^olhc^roperlies re

framing iroM^oing even mMially all

I that are false and injurious to living
creitureson the Earth.

motherjand^allur, lonormgjhe

ariaguests, adoration of preceptors, pity,
purityr^oMtant control of all and

?ausme of all good deeds are s4id to form
the conduct el the gw d From
of such conducbionginaio -viriue which
protects all creatures eternally. r ‘

to Such cendodl one would »>«ys *'®
among good persons Indeed such con
drt l?vKer?for good That course of
Sices which prisons of tranquil soulk
follow, indicates Virtue
f 90 Among them is thrown
ofVaciices which forms ,,

who Vould follow, virtue wuld hever have

loeomeby a miserable end

21 II IS by the conduct of {he good that
thrworld IS restrainfedin 'h® P^'^s o^^Virtue

siiould f 1 ^ ;- i

A hvioe creature thus always rneels

his pnaiVne deeds All J' 1*'^!
Trm the cause in consequence of wh eh he
S."' “».»,™'ld I . ,.U1. d,fl.r.n.
from I » true form ,

»« There is a doubt m the world about
u*^#...Miion By whal was the acceptance
(by ?he Individual Soul) ol a body first

drtermmed < , ‘

«e H aving first formed a body of his

lie Grandfather ol all it e worlds tie .

mahman . tl «■' created the three worlds, oi
mobile and immobile cieatures


MAllABIIARATA.


3t5 Having Rret liimself ta}<fn 'a body,
l)« then created Pradhana. Hiat Pradhana
is the material cause of all embodied crea>
tures, by whom is all this covered, and
whom all came la know as the greatest.

37 This whici) IS seen is said to be det*
tsuctible, white the other is immortal and
indestructible this which (is seen) is said
to be Kshara (the destructible), that, how*
ever, which is the other is the Immortal (as
bI<o) Akshara (the Indestructible). Of each
Purusha taken separately, the whole is dua*
lity among these three.

38 Seen Rest (to appear In an embodied
form), Prajapati (then) created all the pri-
mal elements and all immobile creatures
*1 his IS the ancient Shruti

39. Of that (acceptance of body), the
Grandfather put down a limit about time,
and migrations among various creatures
and return or re>birth,

30. All that 1 say is proper and correct,
as a person who has inielligence and wlio
has seen his Soul, would say on tins subject
of previous births.

3t'-3S. That person who considers plea-
sure and pam as inconsunt, which, indeed.
IS the correct view who regards (he body
as ari unholy collection, and destruction as
ordained in action, and who remembers
that what little of pleasure there is, is really
all pain will succeed in crossing (his ternble
ocean of worldly migration which is so diffi-
cult to cross.

33. Though attacked by decrepitude and
death and disease, he who understands
Pradhana sees with an equal eye that Con-
sciousness which lives in all beings gifted
wuh Consciousness.

34 Seeking the supreme seat, he then
becomes utterly ind fferent to all (other)
tilings O best of men, I shall now deliver
instruction to you, according to truth, con-
cerning this.

35 Do you, O learned Grahmana, un-
derstand in (uU what form the excellent
knowledge, as 1 declare it, of that indes-
trucuble seat.


’ CHAPTER XIX. , ,

(ANUGITA PARVA)—
Confi^utdt

The Brahmana said *—

t He who becomes immerged in the
one receptacle (of alt things), freeing him-
self from even the thought of bis own
identity with all things, — indeed, ceasing


to think of even hts own eStislence «•
gradually renouncing (one after another,
will slicceed m crossingllus bonds.

3. That man whols the friend of all, who
endures all, who is attached to tranquillity,
who has conquered all liis senses, who is
shorn of fear and anger, and who is of con-
trolled soul, succeeds m liberating himself.

*3. He who treats all creatures as his
owntelf, who is restrained, pure, free from
vanity, and shorn of egoism, is considered
as liberated from everything.

4. He also is liberated who considers
in the tame light life and death, pteasure
and pain, gam and toss, agreeable and
disagreeable.

5. He IS in every way liberated who
does not covet others’ properties, who never
disregards any body, who is above all pairs
of opposites, and whose soul is shorn of
attadiments.

6. He is liberated who has no enemy,
no kinsman, and no child, who has cast of!
religion, riches and pleasure, and who IS
freM from desire or cupidity.

7. He becomes liberated who acquires
neUher merit nor dement, who casts of!
the merits and demerits accumulated in
pristine births, who wastes the elements of
his body for attaining to a tranquillised
soul and who . gets over all pairs] of
opposites.

8—9. He who abstains from all deeds,
who IS free from desire or cupidiiy, who
considrrs the universe as unenduring or as
like an Ashwattha tree, ever gilted with
birth, death, and decrepitude, whose un-
derstanding IS fixed on renunciation, and
whose eyes are always directed towards his
own faults soon succeeds in freeing him-
self from tJie fetters that bind him.

10 He who 'sees his soul void of smell,
ol taste and touch, of sound, of belong-
ings, of vision, and unknowable, becomes
liberated.

It. .He, who sees lus soul shorn of the
atliibules of the five elements, to be with-
out lorin and cause, to be really destitute
of attributes though enjoying them, be-
rimes liberated.' - ^

, 13.; Abandoning, with the help of the
nnderstandfng, all purposes relat ng to
body and mind, one gradually attains to
cessation of separate existence, like a fire
unfed With fuel.

*3 One who is freed from all impres-
sions, who IS above all pairs of opposites,
who IS destitute of all belongings vand who
uses ail his senses under the guidance io
penances, becomes liberated.


<< (Uvine become freed Item

n'r>- .1..- .0 SZr'i'nS

te After thu I sf a'! descftbc tbe science

dra\.-:V'""r'

MI,, >« Iht P«l«t soul.

,6 1 sliall common, cle

( „tal ,1 duly Do you I'*™, w'lS”
daors by wbJch directing *pfl>ioot

it>e body one sees that wbteh .!i «nno«»
I beginning and end

1 33 1' 5"’™“

\ 11 at concenlralion o! mmd wUkIi k
Liberition.

18 Ob!«y»nl ol pudirra und


ASIT^vaMCdHA PARVA

M. mmiirt

-Id" "« 'TVZ d3crn?

an creatures falling Jied,— can

Wlien all crealtrres are anncieo,

newbeam-ciedbyanyone.

-1. A I A.twf and cificd with a

r,?rd?Ss''"e(;=c« d »«='-”«- -o

il=ssS”S

SSr»S?25S

»natni to UI'V^oiw B eoloyiuit --0 ®ove-
P'«“»;'„.'vo8. lB.,o«., ooo ‘-““''I

(viien

-■'•'■'-''''‘•“"'tj talr one. Iiobimo.

^7^’ if’iS extloiive modiiaiiop, loC-
tiog loiTrteli 10 Y Totoh'og ol
ooo* - tdiicl. I..■ >'>?


should observe the precepva wo*

ol Yoga, seeing t»ie souf m the body
tg lithe good man *’-'“**,
eentralmg the mi id on t1 e soo ■
used to exclusire mednatrtn. lees me
Supreme Soul m hi* o*" M'*"

30 SeH.conlfoBed and

trated, and with all hts sensei «*m^«‘e^ i ^ ,nat„,„g to


imd, succeeds m seeing the sou I not o«t*'d«. but '« J"),j,ppeh to lire.

31. As a person seemg ««« ^tace .r» rSi'lid should

mdividial III a dream recognises h|m. »»y |,ivmg within lh*t P» ‘^ inward

ing-lba « «’e.-wh... ,Uew.

wiUing, similarly the good man (operation*) ^ ^ Unrc when,

. seen thisupreme.^ulinlht ^P winch '"*y '^aled. o-ie

! plalion ol Samadln tecog*»i>e* rt P* having _ il,e Sou) of I'm Uni*

waking fiom Samadlii AH rroihnig exirrnal to

miooimg 11 Irora o Hod. ol »■' .5“4 "m U,riioB=« ‘ .,lh

mm j;»o,o, .o Iho Vogm ..os H-o Soul. |,„g oil too "J in

.oliocl.oB U ltoo. lit. body. 1,00. ooB. ooo „adn.-d.l»t. _oB

■ — called the


3r„''g!,!r;ypL;r.£',:“Svog. .
n When tl 0 be. re. ol _■ ^dy


from OOB. aod -'**- '* M'gd‘’,Ti-drtote - .
m«d 6«d -“'trS otBd. 1,B body,

tho All both “"-f ',"?,, ,1,0 ,0.1b III?

Ooo •'7,''“,o™o., tho ll.ro.l tlB

' 3 *ooid also ro.dd.>s «" •>"

KToilS^ 80"”"


t.i7.oo,",i o'sool ,V V«» IB The Zninams. saiJ -

o.; 1 = mono, him. Co, "0 -h"' I ...„„od by

lord of three worlds

35 -He succeeds m ■V.'t.'l'I ’" 1 urnmg
bodies according lie neither

away deerepiliide and deali t
grievts nor exults.


~ ^ Sus addressed by thU mt^e^t-

!“• SI

iraied I.', Yoga cn c«at® ^Renouncing I
11 e godsliip ol the very g®***


maiiaBiiarata.


40 How does It nourish the flesh, the
marrow, the sinews, the bones? How da
aft these limbs of embodied creature! ({rowt
41. How does the strength grow of the
growing man 7 How takes place the escape
of all such elements as are not nutritive,
and of all impurities separately?

4a How does this one inliale and Again,
rkiale? Staying upon what particular
part does the Soul live in the body 7

43 How does the Individual Soul, ever*
ting himselF, bearthe body 7 Of what colour
and of what kind is the body in whicli he
lives aga n 1

^44 O holy one, you should tell me all
this eccuiatiity, O sinless one I Thus was I
accosted by that learned Brahmsna, O
Madhava? i

45—46. 1 replied to him, O 70u of
mighty arms, as I myself had) heard. O
chastiser o{ nil enemies I As one placing
some precious object in his iStore tooiti,
should keep hts mind on it, so placing |l e
mind within one’s own body, one should
then, controlling all the senses, seek after
the Soul, avoiding all carelessness.

47 One would, becoming always assidii*
eiis m this way and pleased with fits own
self, within a very short ti oe, attain to that
Bral ma by seeing which one would become
conversant with P/adhana.

48. He Is not capable of being appre*
bended by the eyei nor even by ail the
senses. U is only with (I e lamp of the
mi id that ihe great Soul can be seen.

49 He has hands and feet on all sides j
he has ears on all sides, he lives, pervading
bU things in this world

50 The Individ lal Soiit beholds the Soul
BS extracted from the body , rhen renouncing
Erahma «s invested w th form, by holding
the mind in the body he sees Brahma as
freed from all q lalities

5t He sees the Soul with bis mind,
smiling as it were at the time iDepending
upon (hat frahma, Ae (Aen afCanrs <0 £,i6e*
ration in me. ^ s

52 O foremost of twice born /ines all
this mystery has now been declared by me
I ask your permission, for l^hall leave this
place Via you (also) gb wbereVer yoU like*

53 Thus addressed by me, O KrisI na,

on that occasion that disciple of mine g ft*
ed with austere penances, that Brahmana
of rig d vows, went away according 10 his
pleasure. ’ ‘ Ji

Vasudevasaid — i

54 O son of fritha, having said these
words to me, on that occasion, about the


Religionof Emancipition,thitbest of Brail*,
nunas disappeared then and there.

55 -Have you heard this discourse O ^
son of Pritha, with mind directed solely to-
wards It 7 This you did hear on that occs*
alon while you were on your car.

I think, O son of Pritha, that this is j
difnciilt of being comprehbi rtfed.' fcyTme-who'*'^.,
tmderstanding is confused *or*Xvho Has ac^
quired no wisdom by study, or who eSI^'fcwtf,''
not suited to his body, or whose Soul is not.
purided.

S7. O chief of BHarata's race, this Is a
great mystery among the celestials that has
been declarea. At no time or place, O
son of Pritha, has this been heard by man
m this world. ^ ,

5S O sinless one save yourself no other
man IS worthy of hearing It It Is not, At
this time, capable of being easily understood^
by one whose inner soul is confused.

59 The world of the celestlafs Is filled,

O soh of Kiiuli, With those who follow ihe
religion of actions The cessation of the
body IS not liked by the celestials ^ ,

60 That goal, O son of Pritha is Ihe
highest which is formed by eternal Brah*
man where one, renouncing the body,
attains to immortality and becomes always
happy,

6i. 'By following this religiorr, even they
who are of sinful birth, such as women and
Vaishyas and Shudra9,come by the highest
goal, r

62 <\Vhat need be said then, O son of
PriifiA, vt Brnhmanas arid Kshatrlyas en>
duedwith great learning, always devoted
to the duties of their own orders' and who
are intent on the region of Brahma ?

63 This has been laid down with the
reasons t and also the means for Its acq ii-
silron, and its complete attainment aiid
fruit, vta , Liberation aud the ascertainment
of the truth about pam.

® 4“^3 O chief of Bharata's race, there is
nothing efse which yields happiness greater
than this That mortal, O son of Pandu,
who, gifted with intell gence, and faith and
pronmss, renounces as unsubstantial whac <s^
considered as substaniial by the world, sue*
ceeds within a short time in Obtaining the
Supreme by these means.

66 This IS all that is to be said —there
IS nothihg else which is higher than this
He, O son of Pritha, who devotes himself
to IIS constant practice far a period of six
months, succeeds in attaining to Yoga.


asuwamedHA parva


CHAPTER XX.


(ANUGtlA PARVA.)—

CoiiUnued,

Vasudeva said*—

, Regarding ii .» c.ied U-e o!d narrauve,

O son ol Pfivlia, of the discourse tliat look
place between » married couple.

2_3. A ceriam Brahtnana’a wife, seeing

Ihe BrahmatM. her

complete master « I every Ki ,

and wisdom, seated m sec us-on. said^lo
him— Into whai region „ho

pending on (rLfitous)

are seated, having cast of! * t .j,
acts, who are harsh m your conduct towards
me, aud who are so undisceriimg i
4 We have heard that a wife
those regions wtnWi are acquired by
husband What, mv

sliall attain, having obtained you for my
husband. ,

5 Thus questioned, that
tranquil soul then said to
blessed dame. I am not oRended wuU
words of yours, O sinless one.

6 Wli.Kvsr .CIS
.do.l,d «ilh th. h.lp of olh«!.

„tn, .tid «luch .r. lioo,

by men devoted to acts.

7 . Those persons who are
knowledge, only store be

freedom from acts, again, cannot
tnomentanly attamcd in this won .

8 From bT.lti' to Iho 5

different form, action g'”*'* soeech,
accomplished by deeds, mind, or p
exists III all beings.

9 those paths (of aclloii)

characterised by visible objects %

Soma juice and clarified butter fo

being ^destroyed by Rakshasas. lum.ng^
away from them 1 have perceive
(of Ihe soul) that is in the body, with »•«
help of the soul.

to There lives Brahma

all pairs of opposites , there »

Agnij and there the mover of «"
standing, (tfia. Vayu) always moves, up
holding all creatures.

II. It IS lor that o,«eot?a"cd

father Brahman and uctible U w

in Yoga, adore the “n,ng and e*-

for that seal that men of 1 rn K

celUilvows. of tranqul soids.an

completely controlled. sW''®

.. ,Tu...o..o5P.:;'//;,s'br.s

by the sense of nuell , ^


or loucliJ J by If" O'ean' of !«“*■

“w by'.!;. m.od .1..' tl... .. .lUnrod,

,3 „

rn’e It'?”'’”™

loim as attributes.

It It lh»t Iroio 't'”'’’ J’',°t“t'.lt

ibe'* »r,ll otd.m.d “'"""J , dltd

.p,.it winch It ifrprmlt j

Frnc. Apnim. S*"’*" ' , \ winch they
no. Iron, rt, p,n„. .nd

“4‘';:.'n;rbct'^e.nS._m.n..ndVy.n..

I ,6 When ”;VJ"'’L“rn®A”ana
„ tlroco, Pr.o. .od

frcS,t*o£g«

mg breath IS so called Udana.

Henco. my^ril iS

praciit. P''”,'’“‘|,j ijidst of all tbot= "".1
their goal one another and

wir. which »"'*"** “P j ghine, forth

"■“'r ”«ll'td Va.ihwanata made op of
tfe fire tjelled v 't (on.uertho

..«eu * „s,ei, oomber. the

e>e, the :_j ,k, undersWndmg,—

'ftlih. the ^^iJngueiofthatyelsh-

these ''^'M.aiVu.hissmelt that

«„,wr*’s fl-mc drunk that

wbreh ,s “ that wh oil 1"

whwh I* touched, „,ounhtot and that
leard. that which the ee.eo

when .. “"derelood --thete , p,,,

a„,„ nl met ,<,h teei, that which

that which nurnb^r^^g ^

”'“S,iSe.Varethe fi"*! ”®"*-

wUrth IS „hich IS touclied. as

which Is S®*”.,*!!, i,eard. lh.dt which is

1 also that which understood,

thought of, and ^hal^ qv,,, wombs

Wnd. £'he,j. anS uS3e,;

(of all things) Ml «he ai
orm it ® ° l lTof ttie fire .

„e atlribuic that IS h be-

and I avmg lived wn respective wombs.
lt>me reborn in ge leraies

there ***'’ ," '^main absorbed during the

,j'iST.‘rS.d,..nln..nnfa....


a6


MAllABliAilATA.


37—28. From lliat 'rt produced smeH,
from that is produced (aste, from that n
produced color, and from that is produced
touch , from that » produced sound , from
that originates doubt ; and from that ispro*
duce a resolution. Thus is what is known
as the sevenfold creation.

; 29 It is thus that all this was compre*
heiided by tlw ancients. By the »three full
and final libations, tl>e full become full
>vith light.


CHAPTER XXI.

(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continutdt

The Brahmana said

j. Regarding it is cited the following
ancient story. Do you understand, of what
kind the institution is of the ten Hotfb
(sacriRcing priests).

a. ‘Die ear, the skin, the two eyes, the
tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two
hands, the genital organ, the lower duct,
and speech,— these, O beautiful one. are the
ten sacrificing priests. ^

3 Sound, toueli, color, taste, scent,
speech, action, motion, and the discharge
o( vital seed, of urine, and of excreta, are
Ihe ten libations.

4 The poTnts of the compass, wind.
Sun, Moon, earth, fire, Vnlinu, Indra,
Prajapati, and Mura,— these, O beautiful
one, are the ten (sacrificial) fires.

5—6. The ten organs (of knowledge and
action) are the sacnRcing pcMsls. The
libations, O beautiful one, are ten. The
objects of the senses are the fuel that are
thrown into these ten Rees, as also the
1 mind, which >s the ladle, and the wealth
<vtt , the good and bad acts of the sacri*
ficer.) What remains is the pure, highest
knowledge. We have heard that all this
' uinvecse was well diHerenlialed (from know*
ledge)

7 All ob}ects of knowledge are Mind

Knowledge only perceives it. Tho Indivt*
dual Soul, encased in subtle form, lives wnh*
in the gross body that is produced by the
vital seed . f

8 1 he bearer of the body is the Ga'rha*
naiya Rre From that is produced another
Mind IS the Aliavantya fire. Into *l »s.
poured the oblation.

9. From that was produced the Veda
nr Word) (then was born Mind), Mind
(deiiious of creation) sets Inself on the ,


Veda (or the Word ) Then arises form of
color) undistinguished by particular colors.
It runs towards the Mind,

The Brahmana’s wife said

10. Why did Word first arise and l»hy
did Mind arise afterwards, seeing that
Word comes into being after having been
thought upon by Mind 7

If. Upon what authority can it be said
that Matt (Prana) takes refuge in Mind.
Why, again, m dreamless sleep, though
separated from Mind, does not Prana ap«
prehnid {^11 objects) 7 What is that which
controls it then 7

The Brahmana said : —

12. Ihe Apana air, becoming (he lord,
on account of such lordship over it, makes
It at one with rtseU. That restrained
motion of the Prana air has been said to
be the motion of the mind. Hence the
imnd depends upon Prana.

13 But since you ask me a question
about word and mmd, I shall, therefore^
describe to you a discourse between them.

14 Both Word and Mfnd, repairing (0
the Soul of matter, aSked him,— Do you
say who amongst us is superior. Do you,
O powerfu) one, remove osr doubt.

15 Oil that occasion, the holy one made
Ihn answer,— The mind undoubtedly (n
superior)^— to him Word said,— I grant
-you the fruition of al) your desires.

The Brahmana eaid ,

16 Know that 1 have two minds, im>
movable and movable. That which is im*
movable 15, indeed, with me, the movable
IS in your dominion.

ty That mind h indeed called movable
which, ini the Torm of Mantra, letter, or
voice, IS refernble to your dominion. Hence,
you are superior.

i8. But since, comii^ of your own
accord, O beautiful one, you enter into the
engagement, therefore, filling myself with
breath, I utter you.

19 The goddess Word used always to
live between Prana and Apana, But. O
blessed one, sinking into Apana. though
urged upwards, on account of becoming
dissociated from Prana, she ran to Prijapati
and said,— Be pleased with me, O holy

ao Then Prana appeared, once more
fostering Word. Hence, Word, encounter-
mg deep exhalation, never utters anything.

2(. Word always comes as cn&ued with
utterance or unendued with it. Amongst


ASnWMlEDllA PAUVA


^7


lliMC two, Word wUliout utterance is
sepenor to Word with utterance.

sj. Like a cow having nulk, she v«Ws
various kinds of meaning This one always
give* the Eternal (vie , Emaoctpationy,
speaking of Brahma,-*

*3 O you of beautiful smiles, Word is
a cow. on account of tier power wtuch is
both divine and not divine See the dis*
ttciction of these two subtle forms of Word
that flow.

The Bramana’g wife said i —

24 What did the goddess of Word
then say, formerly when, ttiough moved by
the wish to speak, speech could not come
cull

The Brahmana said

25. The Word that is made in the body
by Prana, then attains to Apana from
Prana Then changed into Udana and
roffimg out of the body, it cover* all the
quarters, with Vyana,

26 . After that, she lives in Samana.
Even thus did Word formerly speak,
fience Mmd, on account of being tm*
movable, IS distinguiihed, and the goddess
Word, on account of being movable, is
wo distinguished,


CHAPTER XXU.
fANUGlTA PARVA.)-
Conttnuid,

The Brahmana said *—

*• Regarding It » cited the ancient
1. f ' P blessed one of what the instltbuon
” of the seven sacrificing priests.

,*• The nose, the eye, the tongue, the
^'"1 and the ear numbering the fifth, the
mmd, and the midersiAndiHg —these are
‘he seven sacrificing priests stand ng dis*
one another.

3 faving m subtle space, they do not
perceive one another. Do you, O beautiful
*ne, know tliese sacrificing priests that are
•<ven by their nature.

The Brahmaua’fl wife said *—

4 How IS It that living m subtle space,

these do not perceive one another T What

•re iheie (respective) natures, O holy on* *
you tell me this, O lord.


The Brahmana «aid

5 Not knomng the qualities is igno*
'»nce, While knowdedgc of thequahUesb


I knowledge. These seven never succeed tn
apprehending or knowing the qualities of
one another.

<S The tongue, the eye, the ear too, the
skin, the mind, and the understanding, do
not succeed in apprehending smells It is
the nose alone which appreliends them.

7. The nose, the eye, the car too, the
skin, tfie mind, and the understanding.
never succeed in apprehending tastes, The
tongue alone apprehends them.

8 The nose, the tongue, the ear also,
the skin, the mind, and the understanding,
never succeed in apprehending colors It
IS the eye alone which apprehends them. '
9 The nose, the tongue, the eye loo,
the ear. the understanding, and the mind,
never succeed in apprehending sensations
of touch, ft IS the skin alone that appre*
bends them. ,

IP, The nose, the tongue, the eye, the
skin, the mind, and the understanding,
never succeed in apprehending sounds ft
IS the ear alone whn^ apprehends them
2(. The nose, the tongue, (he eye, (he
skin, the ear. and the understanding, never
succeed in appreheng doubt. It is tlia
mind which apprehends il.

12. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the
skin, the ear, and the mmd, never succeed
in apprehending determinttion. It is the
understanding alone which apprehends it.

13 Regarding it is eited, O beautiful
lady, this sflcrent discourse between the
senses and the mmd.

The Mmd said ’

14 — 15 The nose does not smell with-
out me (Without me) the tongue does
not apprehend taste. The eye does' not
perceive Color, the skin does not feel toiich^
the ear does not apprehend sound, when
deprived of me I am the eternal and
foremost one among all the elements.

I 16 ft always occurs (hat without my-
! self, the senses never shine, like iMbita.
lions empty of mmilei or fires whose dimes
have been quenched.

ty. Without me, all creatures cannot
apprehend qualities and objscts, with even
she senses exerting themselves, as fuel that
ts wet and dry cannot catch fire.

iff {fearing these words, the Senses
uiJ.-'^Tbis what you think would be (rue.
t(. you could enjoy pleasures without either
oOrseWet or ourobjecl*.

19—20 ff, when we are no more, there
be gratification and support of life, and a
continuation of your enjoyments, then what
jou think would t>e (rue , or, if, wfitti we


28


mahabiiaraj^


«re absorbed and objects are extsiing, yoa |
^ean't have >our enjoyments by your desire I
'alone, as truly as you have them with our)
help.

21. If, again, you consider your power '
over our objects to be always complete, do '
you then seize color by the rose, and taste
by the eye.

22 Do you also take smells by the ear,
and sensations of touch by ttie tongue Do
you also take sounds by the skin, and like-
wise touch by the understanding,

23 The powetful do not acknowtedge
the control ol any rules Rules exist only
for the weak Do you seize enjoyments
unenjoyed before , you should not enjoy
what has been tasted before (by others)

-24 — 25 As a disciple goes to a preceptor
Ipr the sake of the Shrutis, and then, having
acquired the bhrutis, lives on their meaning,
so do you regard as yours those objects
which are shown by us past or future, in
sleep or in wakefulness

26 Of creatures, again, who have little

uiteilgence^ w) en their mind becomes
distracted end cheerless, life 1$ seen to be
upheld upon our objects discharging their
functions ,

27 It IS seen also that a creature after
Iiavi g made many purposes and indulged
in dreams, when afflicted by the desire
to enjoy, runs to objects of sense atone

28 One entering upon enjoyments
depending on purposes alone and uncon
necied with actual objects of sense always
meets with death upon the exhaustion of
the vital airs like an enkindled fire upon ,
the exhaustion of fuel

39 True It IS that we have connections
With our respective attributes , true it ts.
we have no knowledge of one anothe rs
attributes But without us you can have
no perception. Without us no tiappiness
Can come to yon.


CHAPTER XXIII

(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Conltnued.

The Srahmana said ~

t. Regarding it, O blessed lady, is Cited
the ancient story of what kind the instltutlbn
IS of the five sacrificing priests.

2 The learned know this to be a great
principle that Prana and Apana and (/dsna
and Samana and Vyana are the live sacti«‘
licing priests.


The Brahmana’s wife said

3 1 naturally believed (hat there are

seven sacrificing priests Let the great
principle be declared to me as to how,
indeed, the number is five of the saenfici ig
priests

The Brahmana said

4 The wind nursed by Prana afterwards
takes birth in Apana. The wind nursed in
Apana then becomes developed into Vyana

5 Nursed by Vyana the wind is then
developed into Udana Nursed m Udana,
the wind IS then generated as Samana

6 Those good beings formerly asked
the first-born Grandfather, saying, — Do
you say who amongst us is the foremost.
He alone will be our chief.

— Brahman said *—

7 He upon whose extinction all the
Vital airs become extinct in the bodies of
living creatures, he upon whose moving
they move, is, indeed, the foremost. Do
you go where you like.

—Prana said —

8 Upon my extinction all the vital airs
become extinct in the bodies of living
creatures Upon my moving they once
more move. 1 am the foremost. See, I go
into extinction.

, The Brahmana said

p— 10 Prana then became extinct and
once more moved about Then Samana
and Udana also, O blessed one, said these
words,— You do not live here, pervading
all this, as we do You are not the fore-
most amongst us, O Prana ! (Only) Apana
IS under your dominion I— Prana then
moved about, and to him Apana spoke.

—Apana said —

II, When I become extinct, aV the
vital airs become eximct in the bodies of
living creatures When I move about,
they again move about I am, itierefore,
the foremost See, I go into extinction.

The Brahmana said —

iz lo Apana who said so both Vyana
and Udana said — O Apana, you are not
ll e foremost (Only) Prana is under your
dominion ^

13 Then Apana began to move about.

Vyana once more addressed him, saying,—
I am the foremost of alb Listen, for what
reason *

14 When I become extinct, all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies ot


asiuvaMeu*’* pabv^


29


c, floras WWn 1 J),'.?,


CHARIER XMV.


The Braimana said —


(ANUGirA PARVA.}—

Conittiutd


11 , an" Vy.nn
aaloacannnabaB.n >0 ,?d

Ihn, Prana and Apana and U^na
Samana addressed him, s^I'^Kq Vvana ‘
nei Ihe foremost among


fOnfV' SaSr IS under jour Devamata said

■■ .ban bacan .0 ™»' ,?Xam:,l , VVI»., ."da'


;ThaB»l.mana™d^

lcn:;.,''rS 'Nlrada and d.a

Devamata


Vvana then began to move
Is. 'a"d .5 IVm-1 ™
alyonall' L.sian. lor «hat
1 become eximct, all the vi a creatures
.aunt. ,n .ha bnd... ol h-ing
When I begin to move abou , they »
more move about. Hence, I am
See, I become cximct.


r."?;;ni,orT;r,a‘:'s.:;^n. . vy.,,.,


Udanat
Marada said -

1 Devamata sa.a -

By whom IS a «;.,r 1,11


,8 Then Samana began to mov^^u^ I
To him Udana said -Iain the
all the vital airs Listen, for what reason.

10 When 1 become 1 *'*• — . . creature prooucv^ •

a rfbecomc extinct in the bodies oMivmg ^ BV A eom« firstT tell

creatures When 1 move about they w * of ,he vit*! airs,

more move about Hence. I am U.e ior« \ ihe pairs are 01


more move aoout oenw, . ••

most Behold 1 become extinct.


,0 Than Ud.na, .It.a h.v'dB
extinct began to once more m^ . y„ana
Prana and Apana ?ind Samana an y
..d .» lnn,-0 Ud»n.,
foremost one among us. (Only) >
u ider^our dominion


downwards


The Bratmana said:—

Oi To them assembled ‘ogelh^. Je
Lord of creatures Brahman said— v« a*
all foremost and not foremost
Rilted with the attributes 0! one anotne .


S” Vh« .«an.hUd

logeit er


aj Thara .a ona Ih.t •>
ana .1... 1 * tnoviiig On ^ My

.."’ona "ThM ana .aann.al.>'»
into many forms


a, n„.n,.ae *I..'.adly
• nd pleasing one another, , .1’ -nolhcT.
Dla.ung, .0 ,a, do ja up t aid aaa .no.n


6 r.an, jyd'dj;-

f.,, "p 7 „. no». Ap.".

’"rnt"“oa,g.a.;a..™^;h....an

/rh^',a,';jiss/.rud'r


,he union of jhe pair that con.

by Samana and vy . enters moving

s^is Of »’:•"* •"‘‘.JPerds Vyana and

• p”'

Sr. altraf

inielhgenee ' ,

I ^om'' that P^r'm" »' '

^U..aa «P«.u.d^ aanaara... .-..h

Ih.t S."."* *"d ' I*"*


30


MAll\QIURAT^.


are frnm ihe qualil} of Goodness Prana
and Apana are portions o( itie oblation
fof daufied butler) Between them » the
Fire

12 That 18 the excellent form (cr seal)
of Udana as the Brahmanas know Listen
as 1 say winch is distinct from the pairs

t3 Day and Night form a pair Be*
tween them is tl e Fire That is \he
excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas
know

14 The existent and the non existent
form a pair Between them is the F>re
That IS the excellent seat o! Udana as
the Brahmanas know

15 First IS Samana Then Vyana The
latter's function is managed through it
(vie , Samana) Then, secondly, Samana,
once more Comes to work.

16 Only Vyana exists for tranquillity
Tranquillity is eternal Brahma I his is
the excellent seat of Udana as the Brah*
tnanas know.


CHAPTER XXV,

(ANUGITA PARVA )—
Continued,

The Brahmana Jiaid :

I. Regarding it is recited the ancient
story of what the institution is of the
Chaiurhotra (sacrifice).

3 The ordinances are now being duly
declared in full Listen to me, O fair lady,
as 1 describe this wonderful mystery
3 The insirument, the action, the agent
and liberation —these, O beautiful lady,
are the (our sacrificing priests by whom
the uritverse is covered

4<— 7 Hear fully ol causes The noise,
the tongue, the eye the skin, the ear for
the Rfth the mind and the undersianding—
these seven should be understood as the
causes oi qualities. Smell taste, color,
sound, touch, numbering the fifth, the ob*
jects o( the mind, and the objects of the
understanding —these are the seven ciuses
of action He who smells, he who cals he
who sees, he who speaks, he who hears,
numbering tl e filth, he who thinks, and he
who understands.— these seven should be
‘ known as the causes of action. Endued
with qualities, these enjoy their own quali*
ties, agreeable or disagreeable.

8-*q As regards the soul that ts des*
tilute ol qual ties. These seven are the
causes el Liberation. With them srho are


learned and gifted with sudi.ient under*
standing, the q lalities, which are in the
position of «:elesiials eat the oblations each
in us proper place, and accord ng to what
has been ordained The person who is
shorn of learning, eating various ki ids of
food, becomes seized with the sense of
egoism.

lo. Digesting food for himself, he be*
comes mined through the sense of egoism
Ihe eating of food that should not be eaten
and the drinking of wine, rum him

It He destroys the food (he takes), and
liaviitg destroyed that food he becomes
destroyed himself. Ihe learned man, how*
ever, gifted with power, destroys his food
for reproducing it, '

12—14 The muiutest sin does not arise
in him from the food he takes Whatever
IS thought of by the mind, whatever is
uttered by words, whatever is heard by the
ear, whatever is seen by the eye, whatever
IS touched by touch, whatever is smelt by
the nose, form oblations of clarified butler
which should alt. after Controlling the
senses with the mind numbefing the sixth,
be poured into that fire of high merits
which burns wiihm the body, vtt , the Soul,

15 The sacrifices formed by Yoga is
going on as regards mysell the spring
whence that sacrtfice proceeds ts that whieli
gnies the fire o( knowledge. The upward
vital air Prana IS the Siotra of that saeri*
fice. The downward vital air Apana is its
Shastra The renunciation of everything
IS the excellent present ol that sacrifice.

16 Consciousness, Mind, and Under*
standing, which are all Brahma, are its
llotri Adhwaryyu, and UJgatri. The
Prashasiri, his Shastra, is truth Cessation
of separate existence (or Emancipation) is
the Honorarium

17 People conversant with Narayana,
reciie some Richs on this subject Former*

Iv animals were offered to the divine
Narayana.

I 18 Then are sung some Samans There
IS an authority on tl is subject " O t mid
one, know that the divine Narayana is tbs
Sold of all.


CHAPTER XXVI.
(ANUGITA PARVIA.)-

Confinur^.

The Brahmana eaid : — ^

t There is one Ruler There is no
second beside him He who is Kultr fives


ASllWAMEDilA PARVA,


3'


Ih iht h=arl. I shall SpsaU »' “J;
Msvsd by Him, I movt as diccclsd l.M
water along an inclined plane.

2. There h one Preceptor.
second but him. He lives m the

clhm I shall now speaJt. Instrurted by

that preceptor, all snakes In the

always possessed ol feelings of enmi y.

3. Fherc is one kinsman.

second except him. *!''** ,‘", * ',.d bv
of him 1 shall now speak. Ins'^noWd by
him, kinsmen become possessed ol kins
men, and the seven Rishis, O
PiUha, shine m the sky.

4. There IS one dispelier. There « no
second but him. He Uvea In the

Of him I shall now speak. Having h«d
with that instructor, under the prope
cl living with an instructor. S lakra gaineo
the sovereignty of all the worlds. «

5. There Is ^ne enemy. ,Th*« '»
second hut him He lives in the he
him 1 shall • •


By acting auspiciously In the world. It is he
who becomes a person ol auspicious deeds.

le It IS he who becomes «j

confrolled conduct by becoming addicted
10 the pleasures of Sense, moved desire^
It IS he who becomes a Brahmacharln
by always devoting himself to the control
of his senses.

^ ■*

log himself the wlule with Brahma, he
becomes i Brahmacharln
^ Brahma is h.« furl I
Kr^t Brahma IS his origin I Brahma n '"S
Brahma Is his preceptor j he is im-
mc^ed in Brabmi.’

,8 Brahmscharyya Is even so subtle,
as understood by the wiSe Having under
stood It. they followed it, instructed by
Kshetrajna. ^


He lives in me

Him I Shall now apeak liwiructed by that
preceptor all snakes m the world are al y
possessed of feelings of enmity.

6 Regarding it is cted the *u 7.
ef the instruction of the snakes, the ce
Hals, and the Rishis by the Lord of en
creaiurcs. , ‘

7—8 The celestials and the Rishis. the ,
snakes and the Asuras, seated around the
Lord of all creatures, asked him. »*?'"«•

Let that which is highly
be said — I o them who enquired about what
» highly beneficial, the holy one
only the word Om. which is Brahma in one
syllable Hearing this, they ran away
Various directions.


9 Amon,., I'h.m '"V '‘h"’
directions from rlesire of self m i^_-
I the tendency for biimg first arose m snanw
to. Ihc tendency

first arose in the Asuras. 1 1 ® -r»at
beiook themselves to gilts, and the great
Rishis to self-control.

II, Havin, gone by

having been instructed (tennea} ^ .

...d, Ihnn.li.. Ita 10

and the Danavas, all beiook themselves
various different dispositions.

tj It IS that one who rt 'duly

when speaking, and understand ^

O ice: again, is that heard f”*™

, bespeaks There is no second preceptor

13 U is in obedience to his
acUon afterwards O'lBUjat'* -nd lh«

l«r, Ih. .ppieh.ndir,
entmy, ,re pl.ced mlh'"

'<• "By 1ICI.I.B ’'"'“"y p'j'.S'd.ld’
he .ho bteomes a pe'sdh


CHAPTER XXVII,

(ANUGITA PARVA )—

Continuti.

lor Its *" H heat heedlesstiMS for

Brahma) ^

'rfve™*^ 'wha*i“'iw''mountains ahd

b^lsT How far IS that forest 7 ,

‘r'li ■■i'hrrs.:;Th.f;.''“

Siiicd ton ll Thoio I. nolhing mom

oBlioimg IS nolhing •'"“""’J,'’* Vmm
Thom M nolhini hogor Ilian ^

„ nolh.ng m.noior ih.n ihal. 1 horn is no

bappiooss Ihal can r.somblo il

A Twice born persons, entering into if,
* ce pet over boih Joy and sorrow.
•X r.hVnl never stand in fear of iny
o'J;lmm!^ ~c Boos any cm.lnm Hand in
lear of them.


32


MA1IABIl\R4TA.


7 In that forest are set en Urge trees,
seven fruits, and seven guests. There are
seven i ermitages seven (forms of) Yoga
concentration, and seven (forms) o( inttia*
lion. 1 his IS a description of that forest

8 Tlie trees which stand filhig that
forest, yield exceliem Dowers and fruits of
five colors.

9 The trees which stand there filling
that forest yield flowers aiid fruits which
are of excellent colors and which are,
besides, of two kinds.

to The trees which stand fhere filling
that forest, yield fragrant flowers and fruits
of l<^o colors •

11 It e trees which stand there filling
tliat forest, yield fragrant flowers and fiuits
of one cotur.

12 The two trees which stand filling
that forest, produce many flowers and fruits
vhteh Are of unmanl/est eotofs

13 There is one fire here, possessed of
a good mind That is connected with
Brahman I he five senses are the fuel
here The seven forms of Liberation ore
ciiiating from them are the seven forms of
Inituuon Ihe quahues are the fruits,
and the guests eat those fruits

t4 There, m various places (he great
tlishis accept hospitality When (hey,
having been adored become annihilated,
then another forest shines forth.

15 In that forest, Intelht’ence is the
tree. Liberation is the fruit) Tranquillity,
is the shade of which it is possessed It
has knowledge fOr its resting house, con«
tentmeni for its water, and the KShetrajna
lor Its sun. "" ►

t6 Its end cannot be determined up»
wards downwards, 6r horisonlallyr *' t

17 Seven females always live there,
wiih faces downwards, endued with cffuU
gence and the cause of generation Tliey
take up all the diRerenC tastes from all
creatures, even as msconstaiicy suchsup
truth,

18 In that Itself live, and from that
emerge, the seven Rishts who are crowned
with ascetic success, having Vasliialitha
tor their foremost

19 Glory, eflulgence, greatness, en«

1 ghtenment victory, pcileciion, and
energy ~>these seven always follow Uits
same like rays following the sun,

20 Hills and mouniains also exist
there, in a body, and rivers and steams
carrying waters in their course, waters
(hat are borncf Brahma.


2t. And there is a confluence also of
rivers in the secluded spot for sadriflee,
f hei ce those who are contented with their
owi| souls proceed to the Grandfather

22 I hey whose wishes have been re«
duced, whose wishes I ave been directed
(o excellent vows, and jvhose iins fiave
heeii consumed by penances merging
themselves in tl eir souls, Succeed m attain*
to Bralima

23 Tranquillity is lauded by those who
are conversk it with the loresi of know*
led^e Keeping tl at forest in view, they
takebiith so as not lo lose courage.

>4 Such IS that sacred forest that is
understood by Br.ihmanas'' and under*
sUiiduif. It, they live as directed by the
K^hetrajna, I


CHAPIKR XKVIU.
(ANUGITA PARVA)—
Co?i{inued,

The Brahmana said —

1 I do not smell scents I do not get
tastes* I do rtot see-colors I do not like*
wise hear the various sounds Nor do ! en«
tertein purposes of any kind.

2 It IS Nature which desires such ob*
Jects as are liked ; it is Nature winch hales
such objects as are disliked Desire and
hatred originate* from Nature hke (he
bpward and the downward vital airs when
soOIs have entered animate bodies

3 Separated from ihem are others $ m
them are eternal dispositions, Yogins
would sed m (hd body the soul of all
ereaii/res Living in that, I am never
attached to anything through desire and
ai ger, and decrepitude and death.

4 Not having any desire for any object
of desire and not having any hatred for
auy evd, there IS no taint on nfy natures,
ax (here is no taint ol a drop ol water on
(he lotus

5—6 Of this fixed (principle) which
looks upon Various natures they are fickle
possessions niou,(ti actions are per*
formed jet the collecliort of enjijmenis
does not attach itself to them, as t> e coffee*
(•oil of rays of liie sun does not attach
the sky Regarding it is recited an ancient
discourse between an Adhwaryu and a
Y^ti, Do you Jiear ft, O ylonoas lady.

1 Seeing an animal sprinkled with
water at a sacrifice, a Van said to (I e
Adhwaryu sealed there tl ese words Irt
censure,— Tilts u destruction of life.


AShWAMEDIK parVa


33


« To Wifl the Adh»tt! u ''P'!"'''"''''",

Po^l Will not be destrojed. 'e * ,

meet* with cre.t Kood tl tbe Vedic de-
claration on this subj-cl be U ic.

9 That part of tins animal ** ®

earth will RO to earth fliat part of this
one winch IS of water, will enter into water

10. Hi. eye will e"tee the eoo h” “t
Will enter the various points of the »

hi, vital airs will enter the sky. 1 «ht>
lullow the scriptures commit no sin.

The Yati said’—

it U you see such good to the *'*
tl i» dissociation with (hisl vital ?*''*• ,

this sacrifice is for the goat. What rteea
have you (or it?

IJ. Let the brother, father, mother, and

friend Eive yo<l 1^‘eir approval tn thw
Tajing him (to lliem) do you co isult them
This goal IS especially dependent.

13 You ehouM eee them «ho e.tt «i«'
then coiieent m thie Mtee he.rmB >»«<
content, the metten will become a worthy
topic for eonsiderdiion.

14 The vUsl atrs of this goat have been
made to return to their respective softrces

Oily the manimate body remains behind

Ihis IS what 1 t'linlc. ■

15 Of those who wish to e..|.y

by means of the liianimaK' J*'***',' f t 1
animal) which can be conpared '««*• ‘"7,
the fuel (of sacrifice) is after all the ammat
limisell.

16 Absieniwn from cruelty is the fotv-
motl ot all duties 1 his i» the t’’®' ' ® n
the elders We know that no cruel action
Should be done.

17 rills IS the prop isiimn.

drsifuciion (of living creatures — n »
nijlhini; flint er, then various ®

f" ihy actions aie capable of being done
by


2t You do not th-n abs a.n from Uking

'ft ‘'rn’‘.:e' no w" hmu'' de^:

t iictw Or, what do you thiiilt, O twice-

The Yati said — , . r,

22 The Indestruclilde and the Des-
tructible form the twofold ^7'
of the soul Of these th- Inde.truciiU s
ekistent Oie Destructible is said to be
exceedingly non-existent
1 ,--24 The vital alf. the tongue, the

c:.".«..d.ng., no Icuc cot. I.»» »»/
source.

The Adh-Waryn eaid t— ‘

,c. O (orcmo.t o( mtclhucnl "C"'

, ?p:”i'r,:': 5 .;;»n 5 rni.hr:.*h

23. O il'u.trpou* one I come to you.


Ltorn? ;o;:‘';o I'c . «od. .od i .^yi

Mantras

The BrnhmanA Bald —

« W.th ihis eiH'cl'Hion, the Yali re

7.’‘''itrBr,hm.n.. u.|dc...-d

„on. winch .. .’"“..mod U.

of ih,. 5, .need hy ilo


.. A.wn,, •h...m.nc Irom
all cieatuies is what '• i^ ' •
*»ublidi ll IS from win
trpiil.le hVc do not '

)oiid direct peicepiion.


. M

I, directly Par-
tly on wl at •» *''*


The Adhwiryu said


You ei }oy
belong l<
lasies wh'cl


'\L Ym.

belong t» ’**'*[,


19-2,

•m.ll wi

dtnk tl

>ou See colors ‘'■’■''IT.,,, mm .w-

Udie, Yi u touch the r ^P« ,«inclt
ciiKiii&te liom wind, >0“ You think
wlKh oiiiinaie Uom .«iitieS.

tlous.his wlih the r
leu held, have life*


! lasies toliimrnou’

.r"'!.,' ."^,c Sc.i.c.


CHAP I EH N'O''.

(/vNUGirA PMIVA )-

Cenfi«»r(

The Brahmana said —

'rd. f mm.:

o'oCd. t'. huw, the E..M
".t.i.dn A t“ ‘h*


34


MAtlABl}\RATA


1 \V« hive henfd that, once nn n lime.

s» be wa« walktiif* cn the shores of the •»,
preiid of fits p.oHer, lie showered htindrcds
of aiiiws on that last receptacle of v aters.

4. riie Ocetn, bovvii>c down to him,
•aid, wtili ]Qmed hands —Do i>ot, O Itero,
discharged }oiir arrows (at me] ! Say, wImI
shall 1 do to }Oii.

5. With these strong arrows shot hy yoii
those creatures which have taken shelter tit
me are beirij^ killed, O foremost of kings *
Do you, O lard, grant them security.

Arjnna said

6 If any holder of the how exists that
tseqiitlio me m bailie, and that would
*taii<l against me in the field, do you name

The Ocean said

7 It jon have heard, O hintj, of the
great Hishi Jamadagni, his son is compelenl
to duly receive you as a guest.

8 Tlien that king proceeded, becoming
highly irate. Arrived at (hat hermitage, he
found Rama himseli.

g With his kinsmen lie began to do
many deeds while were liostde to Rama,
and caused much trouble to that gieat hero
to I lien the energy, winch was im«
n^easurable, of Ranis shone (nrih, burning
the troops of the enemy, O loins eyed one,
II. laking up Ins batile.axe, Rama
suddenly displayed his power, and hacked
(hat tti<iii«and>aimed ^ero, like a tree of
many breuciies.

la Seeing him killed and lauMow on
the earl'i, all Ina kinsmen, cnifreted in a
i>o<lt. Mild (akint: np their ilarls (nshed at
Kain I, wtto was then sealed, from nil sides

13 Rama aim taking nphisbneand
qilt-Kly (.rtui’g 0" his car, dischareed
& .uwrrs of arrows and punished the aimy
of ii e king.

14 Him, some of the Kshatnyss,
stricken wi li (lie (error id JainsrUg is
roil, eiiierrrt monnlain Usliiessc>, like deer
sQiKied by (he hun

15 Of Ihein dial were nnat le, ihronO'
feni of H,<ioa. lo perform (he rlulies

*<1 I r lieir older, the piojr.ry became
Vrish-<Us owing to iheir liMbiiitytO find


16 Ihiisthe Draviilrs and Abhiras and
I’ 111 Iras lojittlier wiin the C>i>av4<as, l>e*


begot'en by the Rrtlimanat upon Kshatri)A
women who had lostifeir heroic childreh,
were repealeJly destroyed by Jsni,ida}>ni’s

18— ig 1 hr deslniction pro-eefed one
and twents tunes At its coiiclii'i<n a
hoililrss voic*. sweet and loming fron (he
ce!es(i.4) ret.'10'i, and w nch was ) eard
by all people, apokr lo Rrma.— O R«ma,
O Kama, stop ' What merit do ton ser,
O 500, jfl fhiis de»iroy>»>g rcpratcdJy ihese
inferior Ksliatrlyas?

70 Thus, O birssrd dame, his gfand*
sires, headed by Uiclnka. adilressed that
great one, say ing, — Do yon, dr sist. i

at. Rama, fiowever. unable to forgite
the destructKiii of his father, replied to iliose
Rishts, saying, you shonld not toibid me,
ij. Ihe departed mines then said,—
O foremost of all victorious men, yon
should not kill these in'erior Kshsinyas !

It IS not proper that your self being »

I Uralimann, should kill these kings.


ciJAnr.R XXX.

PARVA )—
. Cortf ifixed.

The Pitris said r—


I. Kegsrdiiig it is cued this old, history.
Having lieard it you sironid asi acemd-
nig to tt, O foremost of all twice born


\I-r.ks gifed with the riiileresi ni pmances.
He knew ail dulirs was n iithfui in «p»ec'i.

of liigh vml, Hfnl escecdin^lv Rnn m hiV,
VII w, Hsvuiij woli his ho XV, cm q lei ed the
whole C rlt txieinliiie 10 U'c hmi and
ihtreby p->f>rin'i « liiel'lv itiffiuUit feat, he
set Ills iniod on tliat vxlncli is siiblle

4 While Sunni' at ll'e root of a tree,
his llioirictits, O xon of great mli-()ii«ence,
ahandonini; all those great deeds, liiiiied
towards t1 at which is suhlle '

AlArkaoaid —

5 My mini has herome strong.
Having c'"qi'*'el the mild ones con-
quest b-c lines p-rminent llioit^h sxrr-
nnin led by enemies, I shill (henc'forth)
diskharge my arroxvs at other objects

6 Smceon acc-* 1 U of us imies hn»s<,
n sets .all inictils tip-r mn icts^ls'iall
shoot very sliarp pomteJ arroVj' at tui


j^SHWAMEDHA parva


The fflittd Slid:-
t\ .mi^K ^ 1
b-ing pi«'«


u sliaU


B 1;-'. ",r.:

SjiiJ a* {gJloAS-


Ahika said


J anker* siier tlien* o ')
a,ol.,rj= =r.o«* >t lh= ■I"'-

being pierceJ, you
D. >.u

»>iicb to H«*lroy m« ^ „,<!

word* and ll.inkit.g upit' 0>«n'.
a* io'le«*-


AUrkasaid:— ,

12. Mil* one 1 jlialt

hankers atter (hem only. ‘''’"‘‘e
diKhsrge whetted arrows at the longue. ^

Ihe tongue sJLld - |

13 ® .A. „„tv pierce

being piercnl, j iu stiall die.
u D. i..

which to kill *,

-id Ihinking upju them/


*9 Ihev y"'

pwthroiiRH me. p,,,,

„w,, vital py ,o/;i„llri.e,

to Onyont"'’ Heao

op.,.

foil IW*.

AUrknooid-- ,y,l,n..

"’ll'"", 1

„ n.e*e airo**

*’'”‘.IwnviM part* 'rml>. and your vital
J^rwticmg^I, ! etf„r arrow*

»3 1,11 ,nc*— Heanne these

■■n-c„..n op.„

as follows.

understanding.

The nnderotanding
1 jff. lliese arrows w'l • i.'.y ^»,li pierce

p>“ p;'»


1 b‘i« ■■■


follows.

Alarka said'— ’ L..ri* !

,5 ih. .u„„ ..»c>„"c ""r'fMlU

of .loucU. hankfis alter them ’ *r,ow» I
1 ihall tear ofl the skin with v»''»“»
tqnipi wall the feathers of the K-"k»'

The skin said :— * ^ ai,,Ua. 1

16 n,r*e arrow, wiH

17 Do you look for olh' *ords

which to kill me'— l‘«*rin«

and thinking on them, he

Alarka said »ij,e «ar)
.8 1 si»"

I ankers alter l'’'"’ /il’ vhe car.
Citchar^e whellcd shalls a


,H?.. o'.' i,-;

„,„<1 well f,"’, ,*,ce born on'S
Ihen, Ohesl iniellieenl men. lia't 4

tlMl lime, could not obtain

thoueht for a SeiimSf ''it

•■'/•I’'"' '


*K"K*° . JI„1.,|T.

„ Girted with ''',*?*wth'’Vin«

ed all the soul and thereby

’'■ ,tan t'n"B llS ^


3(3


r.JA»ABirARA7A.


jr. AU«, Jliat we stiould have, gifted
tlie thff't lor enjojmerti, coiiited
<iovfiret|.<ity before now I I have learnt this
afierwarJs ' there is no happiness- that is
higher than Yoga

32 Do you fenow ll O Rama ^ Cease
Id kill the Kshalriyast Dj you practise
Iteausierest of penances’ You will then
dliaiii to what is good

33 I lius addressed b)» his grandUthers
Jamadagin’s son performed the austerest
penances and'havirig practised them that
iiiglh blessed one acquired that success
V»' ich is difii,u 5 i to icacii.


CilAPlER XXXl I

<anugiia;parva) —

Conlmuet,

Tlifl Brahmana said —

I 1 here are three enemies in the world
Tley are said to be nmefolt, according
to thetr qualities Exultation, satisfaction
and ] ly,— these three qualities belong to
Goodness I

3 Cupidity, anger and haired, these
thiee qualities re said to belong Dirkoess.
Lassitude, procrasiiiMtion and deluxon,
these lliree qnalmes belong to Ignorance

3 CiiUing these with showers of ariows,
the iiilelligent man free from idleness
possessed of a tranquil soul, and with his
senses under control, ventures to defeat
others

4 About It, persons conversant with
ancie it cycles recite soin" verses which were
sui n formerly by king Ainvarisha who Iwid
sequi'ed a tranq iil soul

5 Wlien various kinds of faults were
reigning supreme and when ihe righteous
were afTlicted, the illustrious Ainvarisha
put forth Ins strength for assuming sov*
ercij^nly,

6. Subduing hrs own faults and adoring
t\ e nchleous, tie acquired great success and
SSI B lh*se verses.

7 1 have conirollsd many faults I have
sl-nn all eiieiues L 3 ui there is one, Ihe
greatest, vice which deserves to be des
iroyed but which has not been destroyed
by me

8 Urged by that fault, this individual
^ ul fails 10 attain to frerdo'lT from desire

1' ssi-ssed b) desiie, one runs into ditches
will 0.1 kll.AlllJ. It

o Ur^ed bv lint Liifi ore irsdulges in


forbidden deeds D»ym» cut off, ciH off,
that cupidity with slurp edged swoids
to Fium cupidity originates desire.
From desire originates anxiety Ihe man
who yields 10 rfesire acq iires many qirihues
which belong to Darkness.

11 When these have been acquired he
gets many qusliiies which belong to Ig-
norance

12 On account of the qualities, he re-
peatedly lakes birth, with the fetters of
body united and it moveil to action Upm
ilie expiraiiim of life, with b,>dy bee iming
separated arts! scattered he once iTV*ets with
de-iili v/*,ich Ik due to birth itself.

IJ ’* f ihitv understaiidiig this, and
g •verf>ir>g’ cnpi i ty by tnielligr-nce, one
shixikl ilesiie for sovereignty irv his son)
Ibis «s ^tiue) sovrreigiuy Ihere is n»
other sovereignty here, I lie soul properly
•indersiood, It the king

14 Even these were the verses song by
the illustrious king Ainvarisha on the sub-
, )eci of sovereignty wliicli he kept before
* iin — that ki ig who had severed the one
loreiiiost fault vtg , cupidity.


CHAPTEll XKXH.

(ANUGIPA PARVA)—

* ConiiHuei

The Brahmana said —

I. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between a Ekahinaiia ^and (kiog)
Janakn

* f^'ng Jsnak* (on a certain occasion},

desirous of punishing him said to a Brah-
mana who had bec>me guilty of some
offence — You shall not live within my
doimniony v

3 Thus addressed, llie Brahmans re-
plied to that best of kings saying,— Tell
me, O king, wbat the limits are of R’C
territories subject to jon

4 1 wish, O lord, to live wrthin the

damniions of another king Indeed, I wish
to obey your command, O king, according
to (lie seuptiires .

5 Thus addressed by that celebrated
Brahmana the king, hearing repealed and
hot subs, said not a word in reply.

6 Like the planet (Itahii) po-ssessing

the Sin, a cliudedness 0/ understanding
suddenly cvcrwhelmed that king of in-
comparable energy as lie sal plunged m
thou,,ht. *


ashwamediia parva


37


/, When that doudedncss ot
r'iiiding departed and the king hecame
comfortld. he spoke after a short lime
these words to that Brahmana.

Janaka said : —

8 Altliough a (large) inhah.led dom.-
nion IS subject to me within tV is ancestral
kingdom of mine. ye. 1 fail
dominion, searching through the whole
Eirih

o When 1 could not find it w the
Earth, 1 then searched ^'‘1“'* , ^

When I could not find it m Muhila. I then
searched for it among my own children.

to. When I could not find it even there,
a cloudedness of understanding
me After that cloudedness of understand- ,
ing departed, intelligence came back to me
II Then I thought that I have no
dominion, or that everything is rny domi-
mon lliis body is not mine, or the whole

Earth IS mine.

t2. At the same time, O best of
born persons, I think that that i* •*
mine as it is ol others Do you.
live (here) as long as jouf choice leaos
you and do you enjoy as long as you
please '


Thfl Brahmana said

13 When there is a Inhabited

tract in your ancestral kingdom, ten me,
depending upon what understanding, n
the idea ol mineness been got rid of by
jou

14 \Vh« alM u lli»t

depending upon winch you have come
the; conclusion that everything forms you
dntmnion? Wliar, indeed, is the notion
through which you have no dominion, or^
everything is your dominion 1

Jtvnaka said —

15 Alt conditions here in all o***"*'

I u.derstand, are liable to come “>»" *"® |
Hence. I could not find that which should
be called mine,

16 (ConMi.r.-c) »l.o« i' 'J". '

Ol the Vedictext about an>ho l/« pmpfr^

1 CouH not. thereloie, fi"*!' i,atletll

unrtersianding, what should be (

17. Dcp.nJ...S upm '''’""“'S'.'.r
Thl ol the idea of mmeness ” ' . j
wh»i that notion is depending '’P jann-

•fn,.d . 1 II.. ...itluJ.oii Ih.i 1 M"
nioo everywhere.

18 I ,1. n.t -1.1.

Smells which arc even m rny no


fore, the earth, subjsgated by me, is always
under me

19 I da not wish for my own self those
tastes which exist m Jeontact with even my
tongue llierefore, water, subjugated by
me, IS always under me.

M 1 do not wish for my7own set* the
color or light which belongs to eye.
llerefore, light subjugated by rre. is al-
always under me.

21. I do not wish for rt/ own self those
sensations of touch which are in contact
with even my skin therefore, the wind,
subjugated by me, is always under me.

22 1 do not wish (or own self those
sounds, which are m contact with even my
ear. llierefore, sounds, suujogated by me,
are always under me.

23 1 do not wish (or my own self the
mind that IS always in my mind. There-
fore the mind, subjugated by me, is under
me.

24 All these acts of mine are for the
sake of ihe celestials, the departed manes,
the Bhultas, together with guests.

2C The Bfshmsna then, smiling, once
n,.?. ,aid 10 J4..k.-Ki>5«' ih*' I
Dharma. who come here to day for eXamm*
mg you

26 You are indeed the one person for
setting this wheel in mouon.-this wheeJ
that has the quality G*'^"®** Ij
circumference. Brahma for its
The understanding for its spokes, and which
never turns back I


CHAPTER XXXIII.
fANUGlTA PARVA.)—
Conftnued.

Tho Brahmana said —

I I do not. O timid one. move in this
world m the manner vd.ich you according
^ your own under, landing, censure l am
, O^hmana endued wilh Ved.C knowledge.
I am hheraied I am a hermit, f follow the
dut^ of » householder. I observe vows
« lam not what ynu see me in good
,„d bad deeds I pervaded everything
that exists m this nniverie.

1 am the destroyer of all creatures
ihat exist m the world, mobile or immobile.
SI fire destroys all kinds of wood •

. Sovereignly oeer the whole Esrlh or
«ver Ihe Heaven can be compared with ihw
fc^wtedge ol tny oneness with ihe uni-
«fse) *^rhis knowledge is my wtalllu


MAItAilHAr \JK.


3»


J. T>iK }« p»'h hf nr»*imini» J

b) «1 i<Ii III*-) »li9 ti 1 1 i( pikKr'd

III I l» , f f »1 j 'I » li* llv*" I i>f

fr*i‘'‘iwe wiili jiicirw'*! 4 HJ •<
c-iiilt i

fl \V * I- 1 ti»fn M ttnrcn'iKfd txinl K,
cl .. r... ..I if. )«.{«.. I

» 11. V«.I| 4ll irct.« .( t. (

• t'll'Mi IrtiiUiyaalUitiOiltlltvIft*

• 11 jiifiM »; ll »• P) «-ii» '

7 linjm'i f*i» b» ifii • J ti il.f

I 'i|i ( f ll>« VI J.| la III ii4* ■•lilt n It o( I •*

li.fl Avdl It liiV* liit'i 1 'r inin^ 40 1
ri il, 4 lit I* Iij it Ii4« atti I It l^•t Mt

8 O I liilir, >>*»

liaur I <J Irit al (1 ill* *0il i t > r I ni. W i It

^iiur l>f-.iii iiittni II, < I I', ipat lO jt {, tt

u injr taui i il<j « ic<i )>'ti m'i c nt I


c»i\rtr.'\ NXNtv.

(ANUGIJA fAKVA)-

CilniiNUpi.

The Brfthra\n%’a T7ifc a-xid i—

t, lint caniiiat lx undaitioiul liv • trctk*
miiitlrd fie iuit «t alte iiy one wU >tr tout
list not been njiirird. .Vt)’ intrlii^piice it
%Ci) IiiiIp atiu (niili4Ci<j, ai«i cinlii«*d
a tell me (ii« m'ant by mlucb tlie
bn iMledise may be «tf| hkiI 1 wlt’i in l'4«n
frum you die toutce lium tiliiwli Utit know
ledtie fiomei.

The Brahmaiia’s saidi-*

3. Know iliat tiiicllicence ab Hit Br»lim»
it (tie lower Aram , ilie prrcepior it (he*
upper Aram ; penancei •»() convertance
wicti die tcripluret ere wliat m-tka attrition.
Fiom lint It orii-iiiaied die fire «( know,
ledge.

The Brahiunna’s wife said;—

4 ALiout lint «> inbnl ol Urelima, wHlch
it detignat'd ittlieuajna, wlirte, iniiccil.
IS H {{.•cupiion of It by wliicb il it capable
of being tcized 7

The Brahmana said : —

5 He It without syinbolt, and witliout
qualitiet. Notluii)* exisis that may be con.
tiJered at hit cante 1 sli4ti. fiowevrr,
tall you die means by whicti be can be
apprehended or noli

6. A gnod means may be found , wlnCb
Is perceived as by bees. 1 hat means consists
of .an understanding puri8i.d by aciioit


Tbyte M> i»e un fr'i'l'l li»v» n)t
»» I tyiit'lrr |l'»t mills, tin mgU

t' *ir •>« > igii it-p at I'lirpt'p'l wi(1l the
p..>*«»tn L I i.Ul.'p a I i fd e't.

; Il •• icr III I ,!>« t tint |hi* t’lt i1 i
I**- dc'. Ml I iti dll* t c.l I •• n II? <1 m* in

llvtu.* i »r •f]»rii; t, I •! «n ‘’itte

ti *t 1 1 « I. . k • I tl. 14 ' -f lh- t » il

ti 4.1 It «t in II m 4 • » »"* an I Icart.

8 O m t* > r i ii I {titit'i I et intny pirlf.

u Htrn ‘.tt *•« 5 lilt 'I'et* li» I ‘I • !«<• ft anl

li. •> t tt At (.lie i> ciptble of comple*

ici.l .< iere.

y tn f«'4. rne sbsu'l cn-nprebrnl

V 4 <i (It < ■ celt 1 1 <*ti • It tl^i I**! 4 <ii.i«i. a id

Ah . J jl nf it .a preiici lb*’*

w Jr . 1 ' boiipi'v .r i <41 nbjve wIkii
i> l> > V rti'tt

llie holy e;se aiid i—

10 J I r.i 111 ' m 11 i «f ibtt n'tbmtne'*
tt le.i p-*nthr detiiocilm of d " Kt'ieii»Jna,
I'temeti.Al tth.fli It b'sjnd fCtlicnajnt,
on at«-u It of Ills krunieige ol Itt’isUa.

Arjaiia SMd

It Whrrr, iMdred. is lliat n'alintina't
sale. O Kadi la. an I wWtr it liial fire*
tn iti > f lii t> m<n>t. by lioili of ithntn wai
siKh sue rtt arqoMr J. I ell me about ibeot)
O ) m ol II ■iUi.»)i>i4 v1 iry

The hlenod nni holy one eaid

I) My mm l It ihe lira’ m Ilia and tbit
m» M" l•■••^alId i»4 It llie nrtlim ina's wife.
II* who hat breii spoken ofat Ittheirjjna
ts 1 myself, O Uhaiiaujsya.


CHAPIER XXXV.

(ANUCIFA PARVA).—
ConfiKurd.

Arjuna said

I. Y«i should explain Brahma to me.^
llat which is the liirflieet object of know*
le Igr Ibioiigh your ftvuir my inmJ i»
delighted with tliese subtle rinq initioiif

VasnJeVR said ■ —

2 ReRording it is recilrJ iheolddis*
course between a preceptor and Ins dis*
ciple on the subject of Bialmia.

3 Once on a time, O destroyer 6f
enemies, an inlelhg'nt ,ditciple questioned
w certain Brahinana of rigid vows who was
preceptor, as he was seated, ca)iu2»*“
Wiiat, indeed, is the highest good!


40


MAHABHARATA.


Rislits, B»t(ed with humility, asked him this
grave question about tbe hiy;hest (rood

Jo How should a good msn act? How
would one be freed from sin? What p^ths
are auspici <us for us ? What is trulh| and
what IS sin 7

Ji By what action are the two paths. |
northern and snithern, obtained 7 Wnat
IS destruction 7 Wliat, Liberation 7 Wnat
is birth and what death of all existent
objects 7

ji I shall tell you O disciple what th«
Grandfather, thus addressed said to them,
according to the scriptures De you listen

—Brahman said —

JJ It IS from Truth that all creatures,
mobile and im nobite have been horn
Ihcy live by penance (or action) U ider-
stand this, O ye of excellent vows' On
accoiini ol their own aett ns they live,
transcending their own origin
■34 For Truth when united with quali*
ties becomes always possessed of five
marks Brahman is I ruth, Fenance 1$
truth Prajapati is truth
33—37 It is from Truth that all crea»
lures have originated Iruth is the urn*
verse of being It is for tins that Bra
hmaiias who are always devoted to Yoga,
who have gat over anger and sorrow, and
who always eonsider Urligion as the cause*
way, take refuge in truth I shall nuw
speak of those Brahmans who are con.
trolled by one another and endued with
knowledge of the orders and of those who
belo ig to the four modes of life

J8 The wise eay that Religion or duty
IS one, having four quarters Ye twice
bom ones I stiall speaU to you now ol iHat '
path winch is auspicious and yields good

39 i hat path has constantly been trod
over by wise men 111 order to acquire an
identity with Brahina 1 shall speikntw
of that path which (s the highest a >d which
fs h/^ hly d fRc ift of beff tg tf iderstood

40 D > sou understand, in all its full >ess
ye highly blessed ones wliat is the highest
seat the f\'U step hts been sewt tube
the mode uf life that belongs to Brahina*
charms

41 Tie second step is domestic ty.
Alter this IS the residence in the forest
After that it should be known is the highest
step VIS , that belongs to Adhyalma

4a Light ether, sun wind, Indra, and
PrajApaii —me sees thea> as long as one
does not acquire Adhyatma.

43—44 I shall declare the means Da
ye hist undccs'and U cm. lliefocest mode


of life tliat IS fullowed by ascetics iivlrtg td
I the forest and subsisting upon fruits and
' roots and ,<ir is laid down for the three
twice born classes I he dom Stic mode of
life ts ord lined for all the orders

45 The wise say that Religion or duty
has Faith for us characteristic mark Thus
have I declared to you the paths leading to
the celestials they are adopted by the
gold and wise by iheir acts Those paths
are the causeways of piety.

46 'Hiat person of rigid vows who follows
any one of these msdes separately, always
succeeds in time to Understand the produc*
lion and destruction of all creatures

47 I shall now declare, accurately and
with reasons the elements which live 111
parts in all objects.

48—49 The great sopi, the unmanifest,
exotsm the eleven organs (of knowledge
and action), the Rve greit elements, the
characteristics of the Rve elements — chesa
form Hie eternal creation The nu nber of
elements has been said to be twenty four,
and one (more).

30. That wise person who understands
the production and destiuction of all tlieiO
elements that man among all creatures,
never meets with delusion

3t He who understands the elements
accurately, all (he q lahties all the celestials,
succeeds in purifying himself of all am.
Freed from all fetters, such a man sue*
ceeds in enjoyiiig all regions ol spotless
purity.


CHAPIER XXXVI.
(ANUGITA PARVA,)— I
Continued

— Bfaliman said —

I I hat which is unmanifest winch Is
indisiinct all prevadiiig, everlasting, irn*
m iWitile should be known to lecime tli0
city of nil e portals, p>issessed ol three
qualities and caiisistmg of five in,;re.

a Encompassed by eleven including
Mind which distingiiisties (oljrcts) and
having Understanding for (he ruler, this rs
an aggregate of eleven.

3 The ll ree duets that are m ft, support
It always 1 1 ese are the three Nadit.
Ih«y run continually, and liave I iC three
qualities for their essence.


ASHW nMCOIIA PARVA.


4 *


4. l^nftrAnce, Dsfltncse, and Goodness,
he<5 ire called the (three) qualiiies ] hese
ire connected with one another. 1 hey extat
lepending on one another.

5 Ihey lalte refuge in one another, and
ohflw one another. I hey are also joined
viih one another. The five (principal) ele-
nentsare marked by (the«e) llirce qua*
ities.

<5. Goodness is afso the match of (gno.
ance Of Goodness the match is flarkness
}oo<ini*ss IS also the match of Darkness,
ind of Goodness the match is Ignorance

7 There wiiere Ignorance is restrained,
)arkness is seen to flow fhere where
darkness is restrained, Goodness is seen to
ov,.

8 Darkness should be known to have the
light for Us essence. It has three marks,
nd IS (otherwise) called Delusion It hassm
holer Us mark, and it i« alwajs present in
ii iinful deeds This is the nature of Ig-
lorance and it appears also as confined with
th*rs

9 Darkness is said to have activity for
s essence U is the cause of successive
leeds When it predominates, its mark,
mongalJ beings, is production,

to Splendour, lightness, and faith.—
‘lese are the form, that is light, of Goodness
mong all creatures, as considered by all
ODD men, ,

It. rile true nature of their marks will
aw be declared by me, with reasons t hese
lali be staled til aggregation and separa*
on. Do ye understand them.

J2 — 18 Complete delusion. Ignorance,
liberality, mdecisiqn about aclion, sleep,
oifihlmess, fear, cupidity, grief, censure of
ood deeds, loss of memory, unripeness of
‘dgment, absence of failh, violation of all
lies of conduct, want of discrimination,
indiiess, vileiiess of conditci, boastful as.
riions of performaiici* when there has been
“ performance, presumption of kDowledge

i ‘ 'inorance unfriendliness tor liosiiitty),
•'Illness of disposuion, absence of faith,
hjpid reasonii g crookedness, incapacity
t association, sinful aciioii, senselessness
I *'6hd(iy lassuucfe. absence of self control
I '^'Sradation — all ihese <j Jaliiles are known
belonj,|i,^ to Ignorance Whatever other

states of mind, con lected with delusion,
•rist in Hie wo.id all be! mg to fisnorance,
t 'rqitent ill speaking of other peaple. ten-
Silting tl ecelesUals and the Brahmanas.iHi
berality vaniiv, delusion anger unlorgive*

( h'ss, lio^tjiny towards all creatures are
so'isiderecl as the c' aractercslics of Igno
‘Slice

6


»Jf. Whatever firtdertaWrtes eXisl ithicft
are unmentonoits, what gifts there are
which are unmentorious, vam eaung,—
these also belong to Ignorance,

20, indulgence in calumny, imforgive*
ness, animosity, vanity, and absence of
faith are also said to be characteristics of
Ignorance.

2t. Whatever men there are in this
world, who are characterised by these anfd
other faults of a similar kind, and who
break through the restraints are all con*
stdered as belonging M the quality o
Ignorance.

22. I shall now declare the wombs where
these men, stho are always of sinful deeds,
have to take their birth. Ordained to go
to hell, they sink m the order of being.
Indeed, they sink into the hell of the brute
creation.

23—24 They become immobile entities,
or animals, or beasts of burden , or carni-
vorous creatures, or snakes, or worms,
oisecrs and birds , or creatures of tbs
oviparous order, or quadrupeds of various
species, or lunatics, or deaf nr dumb liuman
beings, or men who are afll cted by dread-
ful maladies and considered as unclean.

2$. These men of evil conduct, always
show the marks of their deeds, sink m
fgnoranc*. Their course is always down-
wards. Celongmg to (he quality of Ignor-
ance, they sink in ignorance.

' s 6 . I shall, after this, declare what the

means are of iheir Improvement and ascent ,
indeed, by what means they succeed in
acquiring the regions which exist for men
of pious deeds.

27— j 8 Those men who lake birth in
orders other than human beings, by grow-
ing up 10 view of the relntious ceremonies
of Bralimanas ijevoled to the duties of
their own caste and desirou* of rJofng gond
to all creatures succeed ihrough the help ,
of sin.h purificatory rites, in ascending up-
wards. Indeed, struggling, they at face
attain to U« same regions With tliese pious
Brahmanat indeed they go to the ceiesoal
region llusistlie Vedic Shruti.

29 Bnrn in orders other liian humanity
and growing old In their respective drrdi,
even thus they become human beings (hat
are, of course, ordained to return

Coming to smfuJ births and
becoming Chandalas or humsn beings that
are deaf or who lisp indistinctly they aliam
to higher and higlier castes, one »Uer
anoOer m proper turn, getting above (he
S» wrfra order and oilier toonsequ-nces r>q
quitilies which belong to ignurai ce and


43


MAtlABIIARATA.


who ab'tJe in u in course of migrations in
this world. *’

32 AUaclimenl lo ehjecls of drt»re «

cons dered as d'-lusion. Ilcr» lli«his

and iMuu s anil ctlestiaU become detudetl,
desirous ol ple.^sure. '

33 lgnoranc“, delusion, Ihe great delii

Sion, the gfe 1 obsctiriiy c^red anger, and
death, that blinding obscurity. As regards
anger, that is ibe preal obscurity. ’

*34. Wilii respect’ tiien to its color, its
ciiaraclenstids, and 1is source, f have, ye
teamed Br.ihmai)as, declared to you, ac-
curately and m due order, everytbmg, about
Ignorance,

33. Who is there that truly gels over
it? Who IS tliere who truly sees it ? 1 hat,

indeed, is the characteristic of Ignorance,
vie, the seeing of reality Tn what is not
real,

36. The q lalities of 1 Ignorance have
been declared to you in various ways Dulv
lias Ignorance, in us higlier and lower
fotms been described to you. That man
who always bears in mmd the quahiies
mentioned here will surely succeed m be-
coming freed irom all marks winch belong
to Ignorance.


CHAPTER XXXVII.
(ANUGITA PARVAO— .
Conitnut^,

Brahman said

I, Ye best of beings, 1 shall now declare
lo you accurately what (the quality of)
Darkness is. Ye highly blessed ones do
you understand what those qualities are
that belong to Darkness.

2 — 14 Injuring (others), beauty, toil
pleasure and pain cold and heat, lordship
(or power), war, peace, argument, dissalis-
lATJjnn-. ejwbirAnrjs., qawar..,
anger, rxeriun, quarrel (or collision)
jealousy, desire, laatice, battle, the sense o(
mmenes^, proteclion (of others) destruction
fetters and afUIction, buying and selling,
lopping off ciiiting, piercing, and cutting
of! the coat of mail that another has worn,
fierceness, cruelty, vilifying, pointing out
the lauhs of others, thoughts entirely
devoted to wordly affairs, anxiety, ani-
mosity, viliRcaliOn of others, false speech,
false or vain gifts hesitancy and doubt,
boastfulness of speech dispra se and praise,
laudation, prowess, defiance, attendance,
obedienc*, service or ntmistrations, har-
bsunug ol Durst or desire, cleverness or


dexterity of conduct, policy, caretessrtesS,
contumely, possessions, and various tieco-
rx'ioiis which prevail in the world among
men, wuinrn, aniMiils, inanimate things,
louses, grief, incrednlousness, vows and re-
gulations, actions with expectailsn (of good
results) virions acts of public cti rity, ihe
riles of Swalia, •ahiialions, rues of Swadha
and Vashac, offivialing at the sacrifices of
others, imparting of instrucit m, perfor-
mance of sacrifices, study, making of gifts,
acceptance of gifts, rues of expiation,
auspicious acts, the wish to have tins and
llfst, affection caused by the mertts of the
object (or whtcfi or whom it is felt, treachery
deception, disrespect and respect, theft,
killing, desire of concealment, vexation,
wakefulness, ostentatioh, pride, attachment,
devotion, contentment, exultation, gam*
bhng, indulgence in scandal, all relations
arising out of women attachment to dan-
cing, instrumental music, and songs,— all
these qualities, ye learned Brahmanas,
have been said to belong to Uajss or
Oarkn-ss.

i 15. Those men on Earth who meditate
on the post, present, and the future, who are

I devoted 10 the threefold lobjects of
ttt , Religion, Profit, and Pleasure, who,
acting from the impulse of desire, exult on
acquiring nches in respect of every desire,
are.sstd to be covered by Darkness- These
men have downward courses,

I). Repeatedly reborn irt thik world,
they addict themselves 10 pleasure. They
covet what belongs 10 this world as also all
those fruits of the world lo come T hey make
gifts, accept gifts offer oblations 10 Ihe
departed mane^, and pour libations on Ihe
sacrificial fire,

18 The q lalities of Darkness have
(thus) been declared to ^oii in tlieir mam-
told aspects Die course of conduct also to
which It leads has been properly described
10 you Ihemaowlio always understands
these q lafities, succeeds in always libera-
ling hinisell from all of them which belong
lo Darkness.


CHAPTER XXXVMI.

(ANUGITA PARVA )—

, Continutd. *"

Brahman spidc—

I. 1 shall, after this, describe (o yod
that excellent qiality which is the third.
It IS beneficial to all creatures in the worfd,
and unblamable, and forms the coi(duct of
the good.


ASUWAMEDIIA parva.


43


Joy. s.lUf«t 5 on. ‘I*’.:

leomcat, and t.appmess. of *«» R

n«s. absence of fear. conientme.U, disp
non for fatUi. e ^/ouj^biluy.

tion from miurmir any creatur « . ^

.,„.h, =U.. 6 l.irorw.rd»=.s

anger, absence of malice, p’lr y. /'.oj.

prowess, belong to ibe quali y

ness. , ,

4. H. »h<. .. d,vo..d .0 th- ddly .1
Yoja. con.id.ring kno«l<dBe to be vem
conduct to be vain, service to be .
mode o( Ide to be vain, attains to what
I igliesi in Uic next world.

S Freedom from egoism,

expectations, looking on a I imparii V*

freedom from desire,— ibese form Uie eier
nal religion of ibe good.

6 -g Confidence, modesty, ^“/R*''*"®***
teninciation. piniy, absence °| J*f‘
absence of cruelty, absence
tnetcy to all creatures, absence of lUe c s
position to calumniate, exultation, salts
f-etioii, rapture, liumiluy, good coi^^dJCt.
puiity m in acts bavmg for
the attainment of tranquiluv. f'S .
tindersiendmg, liberation. '

baey, complete renunciation
Ills idea cf mineness. freedom from ex(KC*
lations, unbroken observance of virtue,
belief iliat gilts are vain, sacrifices
study IS sain vow* are vain accepts t
gifts IS vain, observance of duties is v .
and penances are van
to Those Bralimanas in Ih'S world.

whose conduct is marked by these virtues
who follow virtue, who abide in the V « ,

aie said to be wise and possessed ol correci*
ness of Msion.

Tt. Freed from sins and grief. lbos«
Wise men attain to the celestiil region and
create various bodies ifor themselves)

12 The power of governing everything.
Self-control miiiuieness, these great^ones
make by operniions of their own rmru nar*
Ihe gods themselves living m the celestial

13. Such men are said to have their
courses directed upwards Tliey

title gods capable ol modifying sH inints

AUammg to the cele«t'al reguo. tney
modify all ihiiigs by their very nature.

14 They get whatever objects they
desire and enjoy tl em Th is f'av® ^ ^
lo emost ol twice-born ones, descnbeil p

Joii what lint conduct is which belongs to

the qiahty ol goodness. Understanding
I'eYe dnly. one acquires whatever objects
0«e desires

tS ^le qualities which b-long to good-
tiess have been declared particularly, ll»e


conduct »h.ch ll«« tbo

lieeii oropefly described. In

SJays m^Ivst.nds lb«» ’,"b'o?E

,n on,o,.ng lb. qoalm.s "“boot b.inB
attached to them.


CHAPTER XXXIX. 1

(ANUGITA PARVA )— ‘

Conlmued.

Brahman said:—

, The qo.litic, are inc.p.ble of beinff

d.Kr.bod as comr'.'.'y Md

anotUr. Ua.kn.s. ."d
lyoor.nco ar= s.en ox slu'd "■ »
unisono

■» Thev are attached to one another.
lb*ey depend on one another. J

one Another for their support. They like
wise follow one another.

3 As long as goodness "'’‘s- .'‘’"f

does Darkness exist. ^ msj

,his As long a» Goodness

exist. $0 long does Darkness exist.

4 11..y irav.l loB.lbtr. in

r: p>*«

will now be described

where Ignorance exists in an

„ ..lere wnere i, creatures

'*T''Tli«t. -b-r. Drakes.

■ r.u a” .”!'.rT'-lsur“i G“d“S

in n still sin»ller quantity.

8 Tbor. wb.r. G-odo.s. P"*”'”;;”

,n creatures of upwari e

O Go.do.ss IS th.sprioe.li.b

•”= a,r.”.oS ■t,i'rnrr:“N: da-

SSi ll'd tou .ba'i,.b,4b.r.ba„0.od.

"To. Tbry.boaW.,o;Gr,d;.S^pr.-

ceed up«»ff» T *Udie. Hey who
"btde”^’^Ignoranie being charaeteris-d by

,o.t.» Ibat ar. 1»'-.


44


MA!IABI1\RA1.A


tl. Ij'norance i!i tn the SJnidra , Daik-
ntss H) tlie Kshalnya, and G>odiiess,
wtiidi IS tlie lii),hesl, tn tl>e Bralimaiia.
'itie three qudhiies exist thus in the three
castes.

12 From a distance, the three qialities
ol Goodness, Oailciiess and t)>iiorance,
are seen to exist i» a stale of unioit and
more collectively. 1 hey are never seen m
a state of separation. “

13 Seeing the Sun rising, men of evil
deeds become blled wub fear. Iravcllets
on their way become afflicted with heat, and
suffer distress,

14. I he Sun is Goodness developed;
men of evil deeds represent Ignorance ,
tlie heat which travellers on their way led,
IS said to be a quality of Dachness

15. 1 he Sun representing light is Good
ness, the heat IS the quality of Daikness,
the shadiuii (o'" echpsel of the Sim on
Parvan days, should be known to represem
]l,narance

t6 liius, the three qualities exist m ..11
Itimineus bodies they act by turns in
various placed tn various ways.

17 Among immobile objects, the q lalny
ol Ignorai ce predominates Ihe qiMlities
belonging; la Darkness ar^* ttiose pro*
perties of tlieirs wl ich suffer constant
clMiiges 1 heir oleaginous q lalities belong
lu Goodness

tS lie T)ay should be understood as
threefold, llie Night has been ordsned
to be threefold oo also are fortnights,

, months, years, seasons, and c<}'i|unciions

19 'Ihe t,ihs are threefold Ihreef Id
IS sseiifice 1 lirecfohl are the worlds,
ll reefold the celestials, threefold is know-
ledge , and Vhrect dd ttie path or end

20 1 hi. Past tl e Present, and the In
lure, Ilelij,ion Profit and Pleasure Prnm,
Apaiia, and UdaiiH, these aUu are per-
meated by (1 e tl lee qualities

21. Whatever ohjict exists m ll is uorlti,

1 cvciyOiing III It, IS irau-.hl with the three
i q lahiies I he three q lahties ict ly tains
j in all things and in all circumstances
1 22 III feed the llirre q mIiiics always

act in an ii»nianift$t funn 1 he creation
u> those ihiee, tie. Goodness, Djikness
and Ignorance is eternal.

23~J1. The unmaiiifest, consisting ol
the itnev q lahties, ts said to be daikness,
uii( eii-eiie I. t oh , cnnstaiil, unborn, womb,
cteiiiil Natiirr, change or mociikcaiion,
ilrviriiriion, Pr.idh<iis, production and
ahsr.it HI.* undeveloped, not stnatl (» * , '
V..S1). imvlMking iniinotable, fixed, exist- 1
tut ai d 1 uo existent.


25 All these names should be known
by those who meditate on matters about
the ^oul

26 That person who accurately knows
all the names of the unmamfesl, and the
qiwlme®, as also the pure actions, well con-
versant with the truth about all distinctions
and Ifeed from the body, becomes eman-
cipated from alt the q lahlies and enjoys
absolute happiness.


CHARIER XL.

I (ANUGIIA-PARVA )—

Conitn tied,

I Bralimati said

t From the unmanifest first originated *
the Gre.rt Soul, gifted .villi g'reat iiUeTIi-
gencc 'he source of ull the qualities I hat
■s said (0 be the first creation

2—3 I he G'Sat Soul has these synony*
mous worrls -^he Great Soul, Intelligence,
Vishmi. Jishiiu Sl)4inbhu of great valour,
the U iderstanding, the means of acqui*
ring kn iwledee, llie means of perceptiiiii as
also lame courage, and memory. Know* 1
I g this, a learned Drahmana has never to
•iieet «ith delusion. ,

4 it has bands and feet on every side, a
^ It has ears on every side It pervades every '

thing 10 the universe.

5 Of great power, that Being is stai on-
ed in the heirt of all Minuteness Lig'^t*
nesv and Affluence, are Ins. He is the
I rd of aif. and at one with effulgence, and
knows not decay.

6 — -7 in Him are all those who com*
prehei d the nature of the understanding, <
ul| those who are devoted to goodness of
dispos't* «». all those who practise mediU- s
tion who are always devoted to Voga, svlio ,
are firm in irutl , who have governed their ''
senses 'O.o are gilied with knowledge,
who are freed from cupidity, who have
conq lered anger, who .ire of chetflul
hearts, wiio are gdied witli wisdom, who
are hherale 1 from ideas of mine and thiuc. *
and who arc devOid of'cgoljffl

8 All Ihese7 shorn df'all atUchmentst
atiaiii to the sCdtus of Gicaliiess. Ilia,

I erson who undersisnds that hoi) and I igh
Koal, VIS , the Great boul, becomes freed
from delusion,

g Ihe self create Vishnu becomes the f
l-ord t« the ptnrury creations. He who f
thus knows the Lor.i I) mg III llie csv{ tho |
duj icme. Aiiucnl Dcuig, of universal form, 1


ASnWAMEDtlA PARVA.


45


ihe Kol<Jed onPi llie highest goal of all
ptfsofu Ri/ted wiilt understanding, — (hat
inielligent tnan lives, transcending the
undeisianding.


CfJAPJER XU.

(ANUGIfA PAUVA.)—

Conitrtued,

Brahman said : —

( 1 . That Maliat or principle of great-
ness who Was first produced is called
Egoism. When, it originated as 1, it came
to be called as the second creation.

,*• That Egoism is said (o he the source
Cl all creatures, for these have original^
Irom Its modificstions It is pure e^idgence
‘ Sod IS the supporter of consciousness. It
; « Prajapati


3 It IS a deity, the creator of deities,
■Mo! mind. It IS that which creates the
hree worlds ft is said to be that which

lMt»— / e»i t,ii tii,f


iki. ^ IS the eternal world emitting for
X'y* sages who are Coiueiiied with Uno'v-
"“Re ahoui ilie sou), wtio have meditated
Vr* ■"'1 "''i® *’*''« acquired success
hy Vcdic study and sacrifices
Ik? catiscioosness of soul one enioys
I, /l*^'*'** that source o( aU creatures,
1 , ^ f'eaier of all creatures, creates thus
iLl* 1'*.* ■'•’ich Clines all changes Ins
ij/® * Clauses all beings to move. By
Ilk l>j;his up the universe


CHAPTFR XLfl.
(ANJJGITA PARVA.)—

Conf«'«iifJ’.~* **

Brihmun said

- 1 fom P^aism nfrr, indeed, hyrn th’’
I * R'e-t elcmenis Tlir) ore earth, air,
*<<er, and ti^,hl nuTibering the fifth
■ to llicse /i»e greet elemeij!*, I » lt>r
^*Uer o! the Opcr*iiiin ol sound, touch,
< l' d smell, all creature* become


.,3 'Vhen at ttie cl'i'c ol lie deslrocnon
,, *"« gre»t eJernenM, Ihe dufntumn cf
*s iiniirei^e cornes, O wisenien, a great fear
all creatures.


solution takes place In an order that is the
reverie of that in which creation occitrs.
Indeed, as regards birth, they are born
Irom one another.

5 I hen, when all existent objects,
mobile and immobile, become dissolved,
wise men possessed of a powerful memory
never dissolve,

6 Sound, touch, colour, taste, and smell
numbering the filth, are effects they are,
however, inconstant, and Called by the
name of delusion.

7 — 9 Generated by the production of
Cupidity, not different from one another,
Without reality, connected wnh flesh and
blood, and depending upon one another,
existing auttide the soul, these are all help-
less and powetle«S Prana and Apana, and
(Jdana and Samana and Vyaiia — liiese five
: Vital airs aie always cl'isely attached to the
soul, logrther with speech, mind, and
undemanding, they form Die universe of
eight ingredients*

tie whose skin, nos* ear, eyes,
tongii*, and speecli are controlled, ivhose
mind IS fire, and whs'i, undersell ilmg
deVMtes not ffroin (he tti.lt path), and
whose mind is never burnt by those eight
fires, succeeds in acquiring that auspicious
Brahma (ban which nuihmg superior exists,

I 17 I *l>a1l now, O iwice-born ones,,
mention 'particularly, (hose which tiavef
been Ctlled tie elg veri_ organs and winefi/
have Originated fiom'ngoisin~‘ •

i3^'ni»7'ofe"il'>e%ar, the skm the two
eyes, (he tongue, (he nose h>r the fifth, the
two feet, the lower duct, the orKXn of
eeneraiion, (he^wo Tiands, and speech
lorming the teritli.

14. Tliese leim the group of organs, wiih
mmil numbering as ihe'" cTevenlM One
should first suhdiie this group. Ihen will
Oral ma shine forth (mi liim).

15 Five emongst these are Called organ*
of knowledge, and five, organ* of action,
IKe five, heginning with the car are con.
nreted with knowledge.

16 lie rest, however, which arecon.
fircied with action, ate without ihstmctien. i
Ihe m,rds**oold I.e eonsidrred as belonging \
lolwlh Die undetsianding is the tweUih '
In the lop.

jy. Thus Inve been enumerated live

eleien organs in doe order I -arned men,

harmg undristomJ these, (hmW they hive
done everjt* mg.

iS 1 shall, afierthi*. enumerate all the
sariatt* «rg« n* (or Lihrr) tt the J

fMl. As em.riectrJ *ii‘! tie «m,I, it is (
called t( c tar. ^ i


MAilAbllARATA.


19 As connected with objects it «
sound I he pre<idin^ deity fof this) is the
qinriers 1 he Wind is ttie second As
‘ connecttd with the soul, it is hnown as the

Siiin.

art. As connected with objects, it is
known as objects of touch, and the pre-
sulm^; deity there is touch I he third
is said to be Li,>lit As cxinnected with the
soul. It ts known as the eye. .

( *1. As connected with objects it«ct»lor,

I and the sun is its deity 'Ihe fourth shou'd
/ be known as.Water.’ As connected with the
^ soul. It IS ‘aid to be ihe tongue.

- 33. As connected with objects, it is taste,

and the presiding dcitjr there is Soma
Tlie fifth IS Earth. As connected with the
soul. It IS said to be the nose.

33 As connected wuh objects it is scent ,

' and the presiding deity there is the wind

, Tiius has the manner been described of
how the five entities are«dtvided into sets
^ of three

34 After (his I sliall describe every
thing about tlie various (other) organs
Dralnun^s knowing the Iriith say that

I the two feet are mentioned as connected
with t> e soul

35 At conneced with objects, tt ts
I tnaiion j and Vishnu 11 there the presiding
I deity Ihe Apsna air, wlicse motion is
1 down esrd. as connected i/ith the soul, is
' called ll c lower duct

•6 As connected wiih olijects, tt is the
cscreta thai ts ejected, and the presid
deny there is Miira As connected with
» the soul, the organ of generation »s men>
tioiied, the producer of all beings.

37 As connected wi h ohj.'Cts. it is the
t vital seed, and il>e presiding deny is

2 riajspdti I'he two hands are mentioned
« as c'ninecied with the siut b) persons know,
lilt* (he relaiions of (he soul

3S. As connected wuh objects, it is

actions, and lie presid ng deity there is
Indra Ne'ct, connected with the soul IS |
^ Speech which relates to all (he celestials. |

39 As ronnecied w th objects, tt is

, whrit IS spoken, 1 1 e presiding deity there
c ts AgnU As connected wuh the sru), tlie
j' mild ti mentioiird, which moves withm the
soul of the five elements.

I 30 As connected wi h ot jects, it is the

( menial nperation , and the presiding driiv
IS the moon As connecied with tlie soul
is fc-a'itin, which IS the causeof the entire
Course oi worldly hie.

j 31 As connected wuh objects, it N

/ consciouintss of self| and the prysid ng


deity there Is Rudra. As connected with
the soul IS the understanding, winch moves
the SIX senses

32 As connected with objects, it is
that which is to be understood, and (he
presitiint^ deitj tliere is Brahmin. Three
are tlie seats of all existent objects A
fourth IS not possible.

33 These arc land, water, and ether.
Tlie birth IS fourfold Some are born of
eggs , some ate born of genm which spring
upwards, passing through t)ie earth , some
are born of frith , and some are born of
fleshy balls m wombs.

34 Thus the birlli of all living creatures
IS of four kinds Now, there are other jn*
tenor beings and likewise those which
range the skj

35 These should be known to be boro

of also those which crawl on their

breasts tnsects arc said to be born of
Tltli as also olher creatures of a like des*

This IS said to be file second
mode of birth and is inferior. Those livt ig
creatures wlii.h tak- birth after the lapse
of sometime bursting ttiroiigh the earth,
are said to be germ born bei igs, O foremost
of twiccborn persons* Creatures of iwo
feel or of many feet, and those which move
crookedly, are the beings born o1 wombs.
Among (hem are some winch are deformed,
ye best of men! Ihe eienial womb of
brahma should be known to'be of two kinds.
fit,, penance and mentor u it acts Snell
IS the doctrine of the learned Action
should b: understood to be of various kinds,
such 3s sacrifice, gills imde at sacrifices,
and Oie meritorious duty of study for every
one that IS bom, 5 icfi 11 the lerclmig of
Ihe ancients Me »lio duly understands
(Ins. cumet to be considered as poisessed
of Yoga, je chief of twice burn persons

41. isiiow also thai such a man b-comes
I freed too from all bis sms. 1 have thus drs*

. cnbed to you duly the docrtriiie of spiritual
science.

4» Yc Rishis knowing all duties, ft
knowfrdge of tins is gam'd by thore who
are conMctired as p'-r»i>iis of knowledge.
Uniting all these together, vie , (ha se ses,
the fobjetts of the sensei, and the five great
elements, one should keep them m the
mind.

43 When eierjlhing i« immersed in

(lie mind vne no |pn,.er regards I ighty H.o

pleasures of 111* Lt irned msu, w ime uw*
d«e‘tanJin7s arc fum shed wiih knowledge,
consider t* st as true happiness

44 I shall, afier i*tt, tell you of re-
nunciation about all emlliSS by means gentle


crtplion.


ASHWAMEDrt' PARVA


47


tpi liara. produces '

Subtle topics and wliicb is Irang
suspiciousness.

45 1 -hal conduct ftl'tch -cansrslS
tuig the qiialmes as not qualiU'‘S ,

shorn cf aitadiment, svliicli IS Iivu'm !

Jt.cb does root recognise distinctions. a«J
wheh Is (u’l of Bral.ma. IS iWe root t>i »»
happiness .

46 llie learned man «lio .S

desres into liimseU Irani all sides .
tortoise willidrawing all “» from

devoid ol passion, and wlio is free
tyeryihing, becomes always happy*

47. Controlling all desires

kllmg Ins thirst, concentrated m meaita

tion, and becoming the /riend of good
towards all creatures he succeeds m oc-
coming fit for assimilation with Braum .

48 Through suppression of all the
senses »hicli always hanker after their
objects, and abandonment of m ‘
places, the spiritual fire blares fo«h »n the
man of contemplation.

49 As a fire, fed with Ne’i **' 1 ®!!]”
btiRht on account of;tlie burning names
itjpuis forth, I so, on account o‘/''e repre

sianof the senses, llie great soul puts fort

ns (ffulRence,

50 When one with a tranquil soul sees

till eniiiiBS m his own heart, tien,
by Ins own effulgence, one attains to tuat
winch IS subtler (hail the subtle and which
» peeiless in excellence


SI-53 It IS settled that the body has
fire for color, water for blood and fother
liquids, wind for sense of touch, eart
the lideous holder ol mmd . R«jh and
bones, etc.), space {or ether) lor sound { that

U IS pervaded hy disease and sorrow . ihnl
k'is overwhelmed by five currents , that it

11 m»de up ol tlie tive elements, that "
has nine doors and two deities, that it 1
full Ol passion, that it » unfit to be
*«n , that It made op ol three qualities ,
that It has three elements t’**'.*
hile, and phlegm) , that 11 is «f«bnh«««,
•itaclimeius cf every hind , that it »
delusion,

5, It .. d.llitult ol bt.ns mov.1 i"
rtS.i »nd . 1 »"

Steiid ng as its slay 1 hat body ' *

'rorlu. the wheel of lime that is continually
(evolving,

a ^ Th., ,b,d„, "

bnlalhomable ocean and 11 calte

It, IS tha body which Strecches forth,

irects.anrlawatens the universe wiW
immortals.


S6 By conlrolling the senses, one re»
noTiiices Inst anger, fear. copiJ“y-
and falsehood which are eternal and. there
fore, liiahly difficult to renounce.

n.. «,!,« has C01 trolled these m this

inclinations ‘or P j control

delusion ‘nr ®

both lust and anger.

Such a man. Ireed from allifaul *,

.h*" sees the Highest, concentrating the
lid wuhin the "mind and seeing self m

IS *■

rtoiifme lo™ I'"" """ “

6 I.. V”^'r "“■"I'J’m

"t* t.*i

A* He IS the Creator and the ordaintr J

birds. lUkvhasas, goblins.


CHAPTER XLin.
(ANUGHA PAKVA.)-

Cenlinaed.

there IS no doubt in this that in t n.

^,A \he Nyagrodha. the J«mvu. the

«o,td. ' ‘Vnalmail. the bhni.n-pa. the

p.ppaU. I'le iihaj n a.e the

S:


riAIIABIIARATA.


Malyavat, — these are the foremast of moun<
Uitis Likewise tlie Maiuts are tl>e foremost
of the Ganas

6 Ihe SuD IS the lord of all tt>e planets,
and ilie Moon of all the coiisleliations
Yama» the lord of the departed manes |
Ocean is the lord of all rivers,

7. Varuna vs the king of the waters
India IS said to be the king of the Maruts
Atka IS ilie king of all hot bodies, and
liidra of all luminous bodies.

8, Agni IS the eternal lord of the
elements, and Vrihaspati of the Brahma*
anas Soma is the lord herbs, and Vishnu ,
IS the foremost of all that are gilted with
might.

9 Tashtn is the kmg of Rudras, and
Shiva ol all creatures Sacrifice is the fore-
most of all initiatory rites, and Magliavat
of the celestials.

10. 'Ihe North is the lord of all the
points of the compass , the energetic Soma
IS the lord of all learned Urahmanas
Kuiera is the lord of all preciousrgems,
diid Purandara ol all the celestials.

11. Such IS the highest creation among
all entitles. Prajepati is the lufd of ail
creatures. Ol all entities whatever, I, who
ant full ol Brahma, am (he foremost.

13 . Ihere is no entity that is higher
than niyselt or Vishnu. Ihe great Vishnu,
who IS full of Brahma, is the ling of kings
over all Know him to be the king, the
creator, ilie uncreated Han.

13 He IS the ruler ol men and Km*
naras and Yakshas and Gendharvas, and
snakes and Uakshasas, and celestials and
Dsiiavas and Nagas.

14 Among those that are followed by
persons lull of desire is the great goddess
Maheswari having beautiful eyes

15 bhe IS otherwise called by the name

ol Parvaii. Know that Ifie goddess Uma
IS the foremost and the must auspicious
of wumen. Among women wAo are a 1
souice of pleasure, the foitinost are the '
Apsaras who are endued with great ,
splendour. I

ID. Kings are desirous of acquiiing I
piety, and Brahmanss are causeways ol I
pie'y. i hcrefure, the king should always
^tdve to protect the twice born.ones.

17 Ihose kings in wfiose kingdoms
good men laiiguisit are considered as bereft
of the virtues oi tl eir order. Ilcrealter
they have to go into wrong paths.

t8. 'Those kings In whose lerritorMS
good men are protecud, lejoice tn tins
WQilii aud et py Iwppniess in the next.


19 Indeed, those great ones altain to
the highest seat. Understand tins, ye fore*
most of twice born ones' 1 shall after this
describe the eternal charactenslics of duties.

' 20 Abstention from injury is the highest

duty. Injury 13 a maik of sin. Splendour
IS the mark of the deities. Men have acts
for their characteristics.

21 Ether (or space) has sound for its
characteristic. Wind has touch for its
characteristic. The characteristic of lumi-
nous bodies IS color, and water has taste for
Its characteristic

22. Earth, which holds all entities, has
smell fur Its characteristic. Speech has
words for its characteristic, refined into
vowels and consonants.

23 Mind lias thought for it* cliarac*
ttiisuc. Ihouglit has, again, been said to
be (he characteristic of the understanding.
Ihe things thought of by the mind are
determined with accuracy by the under*
standing.

24. There is no doubt fn this, vis > that
the understanding, by perseverance, per-
ceives all things, the charaelenstic of mind
IS meditation The characterulie of (ho
good man is that he does not allow his acta
to be noticed.

25. Devotion has acts for iia charae-
tensMC Knowledge is the characteristic of
renunciation. Iherefore, keeping know-
ledge before his view, tfie man ol under-
standing should practise renunciation.

26. The man who follows renunciation
and who is endued with knowledge, who Is

above alt paws of opposites, as also dark-
ness, dexth, and decrepitude, attains to the
highest goal.

27. 1 have thus described to you duty
whxt the characteristics are of duty. 1
sfiaU. after this tell you ol the comprehen-
sion of qualities

28 Smell, which belongs to earth, is I
setred !>/ Bit jOAjie wAiirJi dwells^

in the nose is likewise appointed (as an
agent) in the perception of smell

2g lasteis the essence of water. That j
IS perceived by the tongue. Soma, who ,
lives in (he tongue, IS appointed likewise in |
the peicepiion of taste.

30. Ihe quality of a hghied body is s
eo'or. lliat 11 apprehended by ihe eye. |
Adttya who always lives tn (lie eye '»* \
been appointed in tlie perception of color.

31. Touch always belongs to the wind 1
(as Its qualiiy). Inatis perceived by tie i|
skin, the wind that always liven in the [
skin has been appointed in appro hendmg )
touch.


dSllWArtcnHi PARVA


5, Th. oi » " ,’”“1;

iliat is seired by llie ear. AH *'’e S .

Mnd. live in ibe e>r. have been appoml
111 apprehendiiiR sound

« The qialiiy o5 ihc mind Is
1 St IS seized by the ^,1

nphoMer of consciousness. ‘■''“’S *

Wart, has been appouUed ,n apprehending

ihe mind

34 Tl. >md.rst»..iinE

lie form of ifeiermitlafioii Ho teftll'iAo*
ptmcple of Greoloen ,o ihe form of ko»»-
Wte lleuop.eee.ved (N .imO |

,1 .eevidenl, ofpoioied lor .lie i"'*-'' »> "
IhiiiRs after certitude. I here is no doubt
in this

35 The Kshelraina which is eternal and
IS siOMi oi diialuiss about US
sneapsble of being seiied bv^
lienee, the chsr.iclcrislic of ihe l\shetfaj •*.
wl ich IS without 8) mbols. ii

ledge

3-5 The immanifest hves ‘I'f ]
ealit.l Ksl etra, and is that in wWch the
qiiililiFS are produced and *hiothrd 1
alWfiys see. know, and hear it tthobgli) ti j
li hidden.

37 Pnnisha knows it, therefore is he I
called Kslietf-iiia I he Ksheira}rta
Ceives also itie actions of the qualtue* and
absence of their actions.

33 llie qualities which are created re*
Pr-.edly. do^ not know themselvS heme
111 nueUigeuc, as ri>tiu»s to be create
tilled wiOi a bc^.ll 1 nlll^,, middle, a«d end.

30 Nn one tls^, but ihi* Khsetrajna.
Cones by Uial wlnth iS «'ic hn.hcsC

k-eai an I wl ,J, is above the q
U use eimiiis wl ic'i are b irn of ii e q »»


CHAPTER XLIV.

X ANUOITA PARVA.)—

Ccntfiiu^.

Brahmana said —

that winch I’f* characiens-

^ apprehension.

„,a » blirJvaili lor lhtli-

Winter) for their first.

1 lions df lo"ch ,

I ikewise of sound the , u


so Henc-. one wl o understands dities,

n- lounc 1 i. q laliiies dinl Ihe ilnderstandint.

ami Imviiiu 1.1S sms dustrtyed, and «r-«

C" 1.1^ tie qualities, ente‘9 the Ksh
41 Oip «ho is free f*''’"’,

rjpHiie? \vi,o never ben is his he-* >

r' I vvlo IS .inesie.l of S*"*’”* !

1 loiHivahle, an \ I oineleas.lS Itwi IvSln-lral''

lie IS t le 'Supreme Lord.


. I iKewise oi oi eie-

I'-IS

iXcll I. liV.> .Pd 1". .1.11

hi,.. r„. r".! pi •"

!l:'...^h.rpn.-.p;.8. pr.i,p.ui>t"i«'“

» ” 'Ih.“y'i»n. 0.1 'L*' p™'

Blo,.,ph,.r.."e.< ,llp,.lr.,.

, \h, h.,.1. ‘.'■'./lirpi”."'’,;'''"''

0 ( sacrificFS «h" Qf alt repl'le'

I ''

.Hral of all the cycles .

l,n Gold IS tie fii*‘


Parley


< rlie


.. I t)l ‘

Wate


Ipjnid snWanccs to be dr.i.

Of ail immo' lie o' J'r

. riaksb"* 1* '* “

'ev« ho'j I I'tahoirn.

,, Of all «'oPrp,>rsH

,« r . di'u't fi ‘lb


50


MAHADHARATA.


13 Of all the mountama the Rteat
Meru H said to be the first-borii OI all
the cardinal and subsidiary poinls oI the
horiean the easteni is said to be the fore-
most and first-born

14 Ganga having three courses is said
Ip be first born of all nyers Likewise, of
afl wells and reservoirs of vyatera, the oc^an
IS said to be the first born.

15 Islnvara rs the Supreme Lord of all
tfie celestials and Danavas and ghosts and
Pishachas and snakes and Rakshasas, and '
human beings and Kinnaras and Yakslias.

t6 Tfie great Vishnu, who ts full of
Brahma, than whom there is no higher
hetng 111 the tliree worlds) is the first of
the universe

17 ~ Of all the modes of life, that of the
householder is the first. Of this there is no
doubt the UnmaniFest is the source of all
the worlds as well as is tlie end of every
thing.

( 18 Days end with the tun's setting and
Nights with the sun's rising the end ol
pleasure is always sorrow, and the end of
sorrow IS aVways pleasure.

19 All collections have expenditure for
their end and all ascents have (alls for their
end All associations have dissociations
(dr their end, and life has death for its
end. ^

30 All action ends in destruction, and
all that IS born is certai 1 to meet with
death Every mobile and immobile thing
III this world IS fickle.

21 bacTifice, gift perrances stud), vows,
observances these have dettriretion ro'

iheirend. Of Knowledge, (here is • o end

32 Hence, one who lies a tranquil soul
who has subjiig-ited Ins senses, who is freed
from the sense of mineness, w>>o is devoid ol
ei,orsm IS freed from all sins by pure
knowledge.


CHARIER NLV.

(ANUGITA PARVA )—
Conttrufd

Brahman said ~

i. the wheel of life moves on. It lias
the iHidersiatiding for iis strength , the mind
for tvie pole , the group' ol senses for >t»
fetters the {five) greet elements for its nave,
and iMine (or its circu nfcicnce.


2. It K possessed by decrepitude trrj
sorrow and it lias diseases and calamities
(or Its progeny, that wheel relates m ttme
and place. It has toil and exercise for its
noise.

3 Day and Night are the rotations
of that wheel It is encircled by I eat and
cold Pleasure and pain are its )oinis, and
hunger and tbwst ate the naris fTitd inw

It.

4 Sun-shme and shade are the ruts.
U ts capable of being moved during even
such a short space of iinre as is taken up
by the opening and the closing of tfie eye-
lid. It IS covered with the dreadful waters
of delusion It is ever revolving and void
of consciousness

5 It IS measured by months and half-
months.. It IS not uniform (being ever-
changiitg)i and moves through all the
worlds penance and vows are its mud,
Passion's force is its mover.

6 It IS lighted up by the great egoism,
and IS sustained by the qualities Vexa^
tions are the fastenings that bind it around,
ft revolves in the n»dst el grief and

I destruction

7 It has actions and the instruments
of action It IS large and is extended by
aitachmeHts. It is rendered unsteady by
cupidity and desire It is produced by
variegated fgnorarxe.

& IS fuH of fear and delusion, and
. IS the cause of the delusion of all bemge.

ft moves towards juy and pleasure, and has
I desire and anger lor its possession.

I 9’ ft IS made up of principles begin-
ning wnb greatness and ending with the
gross elements It is marked by produc-
tion and destruction going on ceaselessly.
Its speed is like that of the mnd, and it
has the mind (or iiS’limu

10 Tljis wheAlnt b/.e wb.vth.«,s.cftrMj«trd
with pairs o( opposites and devoid of con-
sciousness, the universe with the very im-
mortals should cast awa), abridge, and'

11 That man who ever understands
correctly the motion and sh ppaye of this
wt eel of life, is never Seen to be deluded,
among creatures.

13 breed from all impressions, diverted
ol all pairs of opposites, freed from all sins,
lie attains to tl>e highest goal

13. The householder, |lie OrahmachariT
the hermit and the mendicant, •h^hesefoor
modes ut life have alf been sat I tu'iive
the liouselioldci'a mode for ilieir root.


ASIIWAMEDHA PARVA.


u The observance of every system

rut« U prescribed m this world. Such ob-
servance has always been highly spoken ol.

1C He who has been first parlfied by I
ceremoines. who has duly observed vows, 1
who belongs by birth to a family of higb .
n lahficati >ns. and who iindersunds the
Vtd«. shtuld return (from his preceptor s 1
house).

IS Alo.ys devoted to l»i lo.rtie.l wile.
•CHOC t.k. a BooJ man, w.tli lit. Sen.ei
under conltol and tell ol l.itl., ouo st.outd
III tins woild peiform the five sacrifices.

18—17 He who eats the residue after

feeding celesuats and guests, who w piven
to the observance of Vedic riles, who du y
celebrates, according to 1 is means, sacri-
fices and Bills, who is unduly acuve with
Its hands and fe.t. who is unduly active
with his eye, who is devoted to penances,
who IS not unduly active with his w«>ra*
and hioils, comes under the category o
Slnsta 0( tile good.

19 0 «e should alwais bear the I

thiead, wear white (clean) clothes, ®'**'^^*
pure vows,, and should always mie wi
good m»n, making gifts md practising sett-

coniiol.

M One sliniild govern hiS lust and
llomach nr.rciis« universal compasswn,
and he characterised by good conduct U«e
should bear a bamboo stick, and a water-
pot filled with water,

ai Having slit lied one should
1Uewi«e shovihl celehraie saciifice* hiio e
and oPi late at tlie s.*ciificea of others,
should also make gifts made t»

Indeed, one's conduct should be matheo y
these SIX deeds.

11 Know that three of „*V’

should form the livelihood ol the »rah-
manas, ri» . leachiug (pupiU),
at the sacrifices of others, xnd lheaccep
tance ol gilts from a person who IS pure-

*3 As to n e other duties which
numberme three, vis, making of ir»>‘ j
study, nml sacrifice, tt>ese are accompante
by nietn.

34 Observant of penances, self c^-
trelltd, nrncusing universal mercy
•orRiNenets, and looking upon »U

unpariialty, the men who is «•"''”* ,i,oie
duuM should never be careless abowt^l
three acts.

, ts n.c n™''"*” jl-fi”

I*..,. 11,. •'""".‘“iriwrf

•"J praeiijc} rigid vows, tlius dev


5‘


1 Unis performing all duties to l’'®

Mils power, succeeds m conquering the
I celealial region.


CHAPIEII XLVI.

(ANUGITA PARVA)—

Conintatd.

Braliman said:—

Propeity studving thus to the best
..f l.is oower. in the way described above,

!,d ikewiso living as a Uralimachatin, one

dv.,., ol 1 ,.. .™ «;d«;.

SSSi-SgS

Wo.r.».'rx ."d

(as directed). -

. He should pour hbaltons on the nre

' 5 Tl,.r»,m.nl.ol tl« •-'"•'i"';

shfutd be hnen, or of coHon, or deer skin,

» •ri....

of Monja. glass 1 j perform his

' Sutrs Sy ■ 11*

■"“"•..houid.i.o .....ly

with obUlions '^Sueh a Drahma-

8 l'«■‘dr..0W^,ndJm>

concentrated, one cclestMl region.

i.'.-r.h.v.-o-i"""-

o Cfea"'* J by *1’ ''I'o, "u’lJ

„.?,o8 ''«v< ° ;,r..

(all aUiChments).

did in animal skins or bar s o
. he slouM perforrn h'»

trees. ' ' . „„]ng Al«a)» hv"'«

ThT'lorcsl. » e should ncvtf islum to an
inhaViitd rf»«'


5 ^


MAtlABAlIXATA.


Ti llonoVii'^ wlien Uiry come,

lie stioiild (:i\e tliem slitlier, end Inmfelf
live 14] >n Iniit4 end Selves and coininoit
loots, and blijamaUa

12, He slioiild, vviihmtl hemt; idle, live
on snc)i MAicr as lie ^'eis and iir, i»d all
forest pro Inas He should live upon these,

III due Older, accordiiiji la tlie re,„uUti>JiiS
of Ins luitiaiion

13 He slioul 1 lionnr ihe RWesl tliil
comes to Inin with *itiiis of f'liiis -«iid roots
He shoiill then wiihont idteness, Mways
yive ivli never oilier food he miy tuve.

14 Coiilfolliiij speech ihe wlnl-* lie
should e>it after S4tisf)livi; celeslitls and
guests His nund should he slum of
envy. He should eat little, and depend
ciUvn^s on the celestMls,

15. Self controlled, pnci'smtj universal
mercy, and endued tvilh forgivenass, he
‘hiuKI weur both hearil and hair. C'lcV,»«
ting sacrifices and devi'ing Inrrsself to the
study of the senptnrrs, |i,> sh.mid be 'icody
in the observ<ince u( thedui> oi tioili

16 With body alwsjs lu a sl*t*» of
purity, gifted nith cleverness, ever livnt)'
in the forest, with concentrated ininj, an I
senses in suhteclicn, a tiernuc thus drvOting
liimseH, would conquer ilie celcsiul region

17 A lionsrl otder.-or Br ditnach^nn. or
forest retli/se wlio would wisii toniqiiire
Liberaiinn, shiuld litve re<>u<se to iiiat
which l> 4 s been called the best Course of
conduct. *

iS Having granted 10 all creattirrs the
pledge of utter abstention fiom iMrm, he
shout i renounce all action He should
contribute Co the iMppmess of all crealures.'*'
practise 11 iiversal ti lenJluiess, govern ail
Ins senses, and be an asteiit..

l.ivine upon food got wiilmitt ask
ing and witlioui trouble, and th-ri li rs come
to him spoiitaiicorisly, he should ■ii.tke a
file He should go for alms to a pUce
whence smoee has ceased to cu'l up and
where all the iiiliabiUiils have already
eaten.

30 . The person who is conversant with
the conduct llial leads to Liberation should
seek for alms after the vessels (used in
cooking) have been washed He should
never re] ice wlieii he gets anydiing, aiul
never lose heaii it lie gets nothing

3 1. Seeki ig jiist what is necessary for
su|>poiling 1 te, lie should, with concentra-
ted mind, ^o abo It for alms, waning for
the prop’ r time He should* not wish for
earnniKs in c minoii With Others, iior eal
vilicii honouci, 1.


22 The mendicant shnithf conceal him-
self for avoiding gifts with honour. Wnne
eating, lie should not eat the residue of
another's dish, nor sncii food as is biller,
or astringent, or pungent.

2j He should not also eat such kinds
of lood dS > ave a siveet taste He should
tat only go iiiucI) as is iiieessary to keep
him alive.

24 — 26 riiB person conversant with
Liher.iCion shniild obl,«in I livelihood
witlioiil tibstMicliiig any creuliire In I is
rounds of inendicaiicy he slioul 1 never
fi how anoifier He should nrver show
his piety , he slu uid move about in as oh-
taiy pHcr, freed from passion Ae sliould,
resort to either an eiiipl) house, or a forest,

, or the foot of some tree, or a river, or a
moiiiita»t-cave lor shelter. In sunnner he
sh. uU pass only one night >n uii in!i,<biied
pi ice , in the rainy sedSuii he nia> live nt
oii« pUce

27 He should move about ll’e world
like a worm, tiaving his path pointed out
ly tfie Sun Fioin nirrcy fur ciealurrs,
he should \v.>tk on tlie Curlli with Ills e>cS
directed towards it.

23 He should never amass nchei and
should avoid living with friends H>«
■neii knonmg Liberuiitai should every day
do .all his dels with pure water,

29—30 Such a man should nlwa)S p»r*
(orni his ablutions with water that has been
idkcu (from the river nr tank) Absiention
lr< in h irm. celibacy, irii h, simphtuy, free*
doin, fioin anger, freedom from deciting
otheis self control and hdbitiMl Ireedmn
horn back biting , with senses coiUrolteJ,
h« should steudily puisne these eight vows.

31. fie ^lould rtlvvays practise a sinless^
mode of coiuluct, which is not deceptive nr
crooked Shorn of altricliinents he shoii'd
alwiys make one wlin conies as a guest eat
(at least) a morse) of fbod.

32. He should eat Just enough for live*
liliood the inamlenance of life. Ilesfiould
cat only sncfi food as has been gnt by fair
means, and should not pursue the dictates
of desire.

33. fie should never accept any other
thing than food and clothing only. H«
should, again, accept only as much as lie
can eat and noiliing more.

34 He should not be induced to accept
gitl> from others, nor vhonIJ lie make ffdls
to Olliers Owing to the helplessness of
creatures tlie wise man should ahvays share
wltli oiiiers (

35. He should not misappropiiate olliefs
btlongings, nor should he take anyiliing


ftSIlWAMEDIlA PARVA.


bnne »«

lavtue tiipied aoyltui'C. become »o
ed to u atio«ek for it o..ce more.

,6 On. Wk*
p.ObIt., I«v<i n .«! n. »nd
n.t o....d by any body, aj U.oy como,
vihen one wishes to do any act

One sl.oul f not live by the occupa-
„o”«l an aru.an, nor .bonld •• ="7'^
One should not hate, nor U-cIi , nor should
one have any beloncmgs.

eg One should eat only what
cr^fed by faith. One should

vers.es One should follow he

course Of condoct One should “

attached to anythin}*, and *

enter into reUiions of intimacy with any

creature.

•»n One should not perform, nc ca««
to perform, any such deed
expectation of fruit or destruction of life
Of the hoarding of riches or arltcles.

v.?y bill., 0.1. .boiild.mo.. oy“V<'”"a,
U.1I purraiai! an .qu.l eonJnel toaiacd)
all creatures inobiU and tmmouite.

• 41. On. .b. Hid b'.er "nnoy ."Odier
bemi* , nor should one be
aneiter. He who is tfU'‘ed by »H
lures IS considered as the foremost of those
persons who understand Liberation.


53


all eieaiu,..,

succeed in escaping death

vldT a« ,ae„ii«.. aer lb. ..4™. (“<

synbol), .boiiM

ihe truths of piety* ^

conformable to I''®,, .-,r(i»B piety hSe

ri'S 1.

without


S’ ''^i'r,;J'.d'':f.i3ari'''^S
rwaThl P'.'IS'"*"”''""'’""

«h...loal»a>.il')'.8»"'''im

S,_5, ll.al .t'’’,.’’.!.'; to.mall


4, On. .bm.ld aol ibmb o' 'S' P^
no 7 I«1 anaioa. .b.oi lb. 'o' '
should disregard the present, hi (.
with fixed mind

43 Oa. ;.b<.HM 0.7.

S '.Miibi'^' t .,...8, opoo'y ->■ ■”

secret

44 Withdrawing his 'j.ouid

loiioise withdrawiiig us nmns ^

Rovrrn his senses and mind. J

thoroughly peaceful undersiandmg.

setk to master every 8ul']“Ci

45 Freed from aU ®(., **a^t!im»

never bending Ins head m u„pr»nce

SsMSisss

not and protect what one tia* • ^ «f

46 Fr.c Irom .’'P"'*"°;j,„l?i.!' on.
qualities, endued with ‘ and

). nnid b, '7™ 7" Aitacbad 1. n".’.
n.“ ..i?lS.d n,?d.r..a"d‘»8*"

beconyes, forsooth, liberated.

47—49 Those who P®r^'‘t*arci b*®**'
which is^wilhoul hands and feet


.''r‘ :"d i®

SUCH a * objects of the

sense*, the thvej « „n,rtauileil.

undrrsiamlmg, ekO - these

PuiiislM al»®* eoirect inFereuces.

duly I'l'e^C leslial reeion released

oie aliams to t' e -onversanl «“!* ‘be
from all ‘'"'’’dmu hcrarthe li ne of tl e

truth, i^fe should me htate. cx-

lermiMlion of hi* ^ Ihen. de-

elusively one acq ures Liheralinn-

pending o” *} ,,,--i,me >is M'e th" " '

r.eed iroin a a «c ..p means ex-

O'""'.'


CH\PlCf^ XLVn.
(ANUGITA PAFVAVr

Brahman «a'a - „

I fbe anc Remmcialion is

■pSfor o—

S«l"j??.b.b,sb Diabm.^


54


MAHAnilARATA.


3 . U very far n(T, and ll« attain*

tnrnt depends upon a ki<owI<Klt;e of tli6
Vedas. It is free from all pairs of npposhfts,
it IS shorn of all qualiiies; it is eternal ;
it IS gifted with unthiiikaljle qualities , it
is supreme.

3. It IS by knowledge and penance that
tiiose Rifted witli wisdom see that which is
tile liigliest. Indeed, tliey who are of un«
sullied minds, who are purged of every siu,
and who have transcended all passion and
darkness (succeed in seeing it.)

4. They wlio are always given to re*
nunciaiion, and who are conversant with
the Vedas, succeed in attamnii: to the
supreme Lord wlio is at one with the path
of happiness and peace, by the help of
penance.

5. Penance, it has lieen said, is light.
Conduct leads to piety. Knowledge is said
to be the highest. Renunciation is the best
penance. •

6 He who understands self threugli
accurate determinatian of all subjects, un*
disturbed, which is at one with Knowledge,
and winch lives in all principles, succeeds
In going everywhere.

7. That learned mnn who seesassoeia*
lion and dissociation, and unity in diversity,
IS freed from misery.

8. lie who never desires for anything,
who despises notliiug, becomes cligiUe,
even when living in this world, for assintila*
lion v^li Brahma.

9. He who is conversant wiili the truths
about qualities of Greatness, and under*
stands the Pradliana as existing iii all
principles, who is free from inmeiiess and
egoism/ forsooth, becomes liberated.

to. He who IS freed from all pairs of
opposites, who does not bend his head to
any body, who lias got over the riles of
Swaha, succeeds by the help of iranqiiiliiy
alone in aitaiiiing to that winch is free from
pairs of opposites, winch is eternal, and
which IS shorn of qualities,

II. Renouncing all action, good or bad,
developed from qualiiies, and casting oK
both tiuth and lalsehood, a Cfeature, for-
sooth, becomes liberated.

12 — 15.^ Having the unmamfest for the
seed or Its origin, with the understanding
for Its trunk, with the great principle of
egoism for Us collection of houglis, with
the senses for the cavities of us little sprouts,
with the (five) great elements for its large
branches, the objects of the senses for its
smaller brandies, with leaves that are ever
piesent, with dowers that always embellish


it, and with fruits boili agreeable and dis*
agree.ibifl always produced, is tht eternal
tree of Urahma whi^li forms the support of
atl creatures. Cutdng and pirreing (hat
tree with knowledgi* of truth as the sword,
the wise man, ahandonmg the fellers which
are made of attachm'-ni and winch causa
birth, decrepitude, and dead), and freeing
himself from inineiiess and egoism, fursoolii,
bscomet liber tied.

16 These are tiie two bird*, which are
immutable, which are friend*, and which
should be known as uniniellieenl. lhat
Mlier who 1* different from these two is
called the Intelligent.

17. When the inner self, which it shorn
of knowledge of future, winch 1* (as 11 wcie)
unintelligent, becomes conversant with (hat
which >s above naiurr, then, understanding
llie KslietrA. and Rifted with an intelliRence
that IS above all qualities and apprehends
evcrytliing, becomes released from all *ins>


CHAPTER XLVHI.

( ANUCllA PARVA.)-
CenliHUtiit
Brahman said

I. Some consider Brahma as a tree.
Some consider Brahma as a great forett.
Some consider Bralima as unm-nufest.
Some consider Has transcendani and freed
from every disliess,

a — 5- They think that all this is pro-
duced from and absorbed into ti>e immani*
fesU He wh >, even for ilie short sp ice of
time covered by a single breath, when Ins
end conies, become* equable, altaiinng to
the self, fits himself for immortality Con*
trolling the sell in the sell, even for the
space of a wink one goes, tl rough t^ie tra i-
qiiility of the s*lf, to di^c whicli funns the
endless acquisition of those that are endued
with knowledge Kestraming the vital airs
again and again by comrolliiig Kiem accor-
ding to the ineihod called Prmayaina (siip-
piession oi vital airs), by the ten or the
twelve, he attains to that which 1$ be>ond the
four ar»d twenty. 1 hus having first acquired
a tranquil soul, one aliauis 10 (he fruition
o( all bis desires.

6. When the quality of G>odne*s pre-
dominates 111 what onginuies irom ihe
UnmaDifest, it becomes He for immorulify.
Ihey Vvfio are cuiiversant with Goodness
speak htgly of it, saying that there 1^ nothin g
aapefior to Goodness.


ASIIWAMEdMa'' parva.


53


«. By in!etene« «« Uiio« lliat Bi« '’“"“'"i

t„c. boti. ll n iinpnniblt 10 alwin
IQ Pufu»l>% by any other means.

8. Forgiveness, coitrage,
from tiling, ect'iabilily. f'lt**.

kn.ivledje.gifl, nnc* renuHcwtion.

to be the marks of tfmi e«iirse of conduct

which arises out of Goodness.

9 ll IS by Hits

believe m the oneness 6f Punisha and Good*
ness 1 here is no doubt in llns*

10 Sorts leartisd men Ibat .rs

10 lrtOv.le.lgs hold lirtt Kshstsajo. a..d
N.lure SIC ons. IbO. howsssf. ■« ”«>
correct.

U. U It IS said that r^alire Is different

from puriidu, that also t»iH indicate a want
oi consideration.

«. Distinction and assoaation should
be truly known. Unity
likewise hid down I l.«l n the ^ocuine of
the learned Even both unity and diversity
are seen in the gnat and Udumvafa.

13. Ai a fish m water is
to li the relation of the two

and Nature) Indeed, their relation is like
that of water drops oit the leaf of the l®tu

The preceptor said i— . « ^

14. Urns addressed, those learned Brah-
nanas. who wero the foremost of men, ie«»
some doubts and it(ierefote) lliey «''« t"*'®
questioned the Grandfather.


CHAPIER XLlX.


(ANUGllA PARVA.)--
Centutui 1.

The Uishis said — .

I Wlncli among the duties is considered

to be the most wormy of being
'Ihe various modes ol doty, wc see,
tradictory. ,

Sort. ..y 1I..1 '1 “'™™«

doubtful Uiliers Have no doubts

some that ll exisis not. ,» »s

one form, or twofold, and otb*
niued.

Scm.

Brthrt. •'.d f„“"i,„„ci,

silier It to be one Olhers. lhal J •
and others again that it is manifold.


5. Somesayltm both ^"n

exfsti others, that « .5 *10150

go entirely naked. * ...

6. Sort, .bii.rt ..tirely I'drt

a, Id ,ort. .1. Irt a..d

“o'la'ir.aTir.rtrt.l »"<•

eified with picceptiensof irutli.

:S,ot' 01.!”.' .p".K i'.iWy

“rtrt. -PPi."- HP.!..!-

«a..od. Mil! »' Cfii.y"'""-

9. 'land'

Sort. ar. 6^..d .0 =,'*,^,3":;
r./:z:rs'ort. •■'^E'or,.

simrr.’rdr.”.i.d’ «

„ Olh.r I.."'''! 8r.""’*""V,r,‘rVl

SKV. ihctody .1
.3 . Sort. ..y u..>

ot::r7^,

being thus a,e deluded and

lions of various kinds, we a e

„n,Ule Uo'

: ,..l.atdutyas

l*'-r"i,.ereforoOur

Kefore O best of ah beings, f

know what is good

.„d N.rt.e by" Ibov.

**• * .1. illiibtcioMS creator ol the

.Brehmanas. 0 at .niehiHencc and

worlds, endu* soul, desCi (bed U


50


MAttABlIARATA.


CHAPTER L.'

(ANUGI TA PARVA.)—

Coiittntied,

Brahman said;—

I. Well tlien, \ shall desdnbe to yoa
what you ash. Learn what was tnld by a
preceptor to a disciple who came to him.

3 Hearing (t all, da you settle properly
(what It should be). Abstention Irom iii>
juring any creature is considered as the
foremost of all duties.

3 that IS the highest seat, shorn of
anxiety and (oriniug a m >rfc of holiness
ills ancients who had seen the certain
truth, have said that knowledge is the
higliest iMppiiiess,

4 — 6 Hence, one becomes freed of alt
sms by pure knowledge they who are
engaged in desiruction and harm, they who
are models in conduct, have to go to Hell
on account of theif being gifted with cupi-
dity and delusion. Those who, wfthout
idleness, perform acts moved tliereto by
expectation, become repeatedly born tn this
world and sport In happiness 1 hose men
who gifted with learning and wi«dom, per-
form acts with faith, free from expectations,
and poesessed of concentration ot mind, are
iaid to perceive clearly,

7»S I shall, after this, describe how the
association and H e disassocMiion takes
place of Soul and Nature Ye best of men.
iisteii Ihe rrMciori here IS said to be that
between the object and the subject
9 Purtisha IS always the subject} and
Nature the object It has beeu ex-
plained, by vrhal has been said mi a pre
vious part of ihe discourse where it has
been pointed out, that they exist after the
manner of the gnat and the Udumvara

10. An object of enjnyment as it is, |
Nature IS utitnielligent and knows nothing I
He, however, who enjoys it, is said to know I
It, bout being en^oyer. Nature is enjoyed. I

ti. The wise have said that Nature is
always made up of pairs of opposites Soul
IS, on the other hand desliliite of pairs of
opposites, devoid of parts, eternal, and free,
about ils essence, from qusJilies.

13 He lives in everything alike, and
walks with knowledge He always enjoys
Nature as a Ifltus leaf (enjoys) water.

13. Endued with knowledge, he is never
tainted even if brought into contact with
all the qualities,

. 14 Forsooth, Pumsha is unattached like
the unsteady d'op of «.-ater ontte fotus-


leaf. This is the certain conclilsloit that
Niture Is the properly of Paruslia.

15 — ifl The relation between these twd
{tie , Puritsha and Nature) is lAe that
exitling between matter and Us maker. As
one goes into a dark place carrying a light
with liim, so those who wish for tlie
Supreme, proceed with tlie light of Nature.
As lung as matter and quality exist, so long
Uie light shines.

17. The flame, however, becomes put
out when matter and qudity (or oil and
wick) are exhausted. 1 luis Nature is mani-
fest} while PurushA is said to be un-
maaifest.

t8 Understand this, ye learned Rrah*
manas' Well I shall now tell you some*
thing more With even a thousand (ex-
planatfans), one who has A bad imdersCaii-
ding succeeds not in acq iinng knowledge.

tp One, however, who is gifted with
tiUrlhgence succeeds in acquiring happiness,
through only a fourth share (of explana-
tloits) 1 Inis should the accomplishment of
duty be understood as dependent on means.

S<3 Per fhe infelligenf man, having know-
ledge of means, succeeds m acquiring
supreme happiness.

31. As sonte man travelling along a road
without provisions of his journey, proceeds
with great uneasiness and may even mret
with de*trueiioi1 before he reaches the end
of his journey, so slionid it be known that nl
deeds there may or may not be fruits.

22 — 34 The examination of what fs
agreeable and what disagreeable in one's
own self, } lelds benefit 1 he progress in life
of a man who is devoid of the percepii m
of* Irnth IS like that of a niah wlio rashly
jiurneys on a bog road unseen before,
the prepress, hoWever, of lliose vvlio are
gifted With intelligence is like that of men
who |«»urfiey along the same road, riding
on a car to which are yoked (fleet)
horses and which moves wiili swiftness.
Having ascended to the top of a mountain,
one should not cast Ins eyes on ihesurlace
of the earth

33 Seeing a man, everr thaugli travel-
ling on a car, afflicted and rendered insen-
sible by pain, the inielhi'Cnt ntan journeys
on a car as long as there is a car-path.

26 The learned man, when he sees tha
car-path end, abandons Ins car for going
on. Ihui does the intelligent man who
knows the ordinances about truth and Yoga,
proceed.

*7. Knowing the qualities, stJeh^a mao,
proneds, comprehending what is next and

next.


58


MAtlABIIAAATA.


57 One v,ho kne«s «liick u superior
nnd iiiferitr among existent crentures, wlio
IS conversant willi the ordinances about
all deeds, and wlio forms hiin«el[ itie
soul oi all creatures, attains to ttie Uufadmg
Sojl«


CHAPTER LI.

(ANUGITA PARVA)-
CcHltmud,

Brahmana said —

I. Since llie mind is Uiq ruler of tbese
five elements, fur conirolling and bttii|^ing
tliem loilli the mmd, tharcfare, is tlie soul
ol the elements.

3. Ilia mind always presides over tbe
great elements ll>e undetstanding pro
cUnn:^ power, and is called tlie boul

3 Tlie mind yokes tlie senses as a
clianoleer yokes go^ horses, fhe senses,
tbe mmd, and the understanding are always
foitied to the Soul.

4 lie individual soul, mounting the
chariot to wtncli big horses are yoked *and
which has the underttanding for the tents,
drives about on all sides.

3 With all tliej tenses 'attached^ to ii
(lor steeds), with the mmd for (he chario*
teer, and tlie undersiandnif! lor the eternal
icins, exists the great Dialima car.

6 Indeed, that man gifted with learning
and wisdom who always undersiands the
Brahma car in this way, is never possessed
by delusion tn the midst of all entities

T~~g Tins forest of Brahma begins
with the uiimanifesl and ends with gross
objects It includes mohile and tm.nohile
objects, and gels light frum the radiance
uf the sun and the nioon^and u decorated
with pl.neis and csnstellations It is I
deck'd, again, on all sides with nets ol
rivers and tnou lUms It is always era
belhshcd luewise by various knids of |
waters It IS the means of liveliliood for
nil creatures. It u, again, tlie end of alt
living creatures 1» that forest the KshC'
irajia always moves about.

10. Whatever exist tn this world mobile
and immobile, are the very first to be dis*
solved away After this (are dissolved)
Ihos' qu .titles which compose all entities, ^

11—13. After the qualities (are ds-
solved) the five elements Such is the
gr4d4tion ^ of entities. Cele.uals. meti.


Gandliarvnf, Pisliacfiss, Asuras, (and)
Raksii'isae have all originated from Nature,
and not from actions, nor from a cause
Ihe Braiimanas, who are* creators of the
tiiiiverse, are born litre ag-nii and again

13 Aff that originates from them drs>
solves, when (he lime comes in those very
live great elements iiKe billows in tlie
ocean .

14 AI1>the great elements are beyond
those elemenis which form the universe,
lie who IS released from those five elemenis
goes to the.higl esi goal

15 The’ powerful Prajspait createrl
•II this by the mind only Similarly Risl is
attained to Ihe status of celestials by the
help of pensnee

16 Likewise, llwse who have acquired
' perfection, who were capable of the con*

ceniration of Yoga, and who live on {runs
and roots, likewise perceive the Irijde world
by penance. .

tj. Medicines and herbs and all the
various sciences are ’aeq iired by means of
penance alme, for all acgmsilion has
penance for ns root. „

s8 Whatever is difBcuIt of acguisilieii,
difRciiU to learn, diflii. ilt to defeat, difik-iill
to pass through, can »T) be acquired by
penance, lor penance is irresistible.

tp. One who drinks aleohohe tgnors,
nne who bills a Brahmans, one who siealt,
one who destroys • focus, one who VKiUies,
one’s precepior's bed, becomes cleansed of j
such sin by penance well performed

30~-3l. Hunan beings, departed manes,
dentes, (sacrilicial) animals, beasts .and
birds, and all other creatures mobile and
immobile, by always devoting themselves
in penances, bicome successful by penance
alo .e S'm tally the celestials gifted with
great powers of illusion, have attained to
(lie celestial region.

33 Those who without idleness perform
deeds with expectations, being full of
egoism, approacli the presence | of
Prajapsti.

33 Those great ones. I owever, who are
devoid of mineness and (reed from egoism
ihrough the pure coniemplation of Yoga,

i acrpiire the great and highest regions.

34 Tliose who understand best the
: self, having acq nred Voga cootemplati m
i and having their minds always d eerf il.

enter mto the unmanifest acvumulalioii of
happiness 1

35 Those persons who are freed Iron
egoism and who are re born after having


AMIWAMKDHA pahva.


39


to l*»e fulneii o* Yog*
pUuon, «»ler ...to U.« lug».*»l
Ufved tor tl.e great. «'* . *'>« U‘>ma"«fe*^

s6-.,7 B.mfrom Il.«l

l«t (ptmcip'e) *iiil *tl»iii'"^ *“ ' njik*
crce n.ore. freed from ti.eq mIiI-cs o Da k-
,„„„d ■"■1

tlie qtalily ofGiodnes*, o"® „
freecTliom ever) tin and createt all
Snell a one should be known to be K*he


*ucc«Mivedevelapmci’i*.

Tfc. i« the end of Oio**

a( conduct.

U ..p.M.


^ch a° one should be known to be Kshe- | Tl„s jo tu creaiui

,..1 ,. ,,, p.,i.=„o„ 11. »i» IP'.- x:. .u.S.<.


knows the Veda. ^ .

l3 Aitaining to pure knp»^edrfe frow
(.estraining) the mind. Ihe ascetic shouU
sit stH^onitolled One tiecessarily becomes
that on which one’s mwd is set. » “*» ”
BiieteinsI m)8ter)*

19 ll.stwtiich has ihe unmanifesl for
us betiniuno and jjross qualities lor
end has heen sai I lo have Ne , ’

Us matk Ihil do )ou unieisUitd Vial
whose nature is shorn of qiiahnes.

3h Of iwasjlUhlesia
el lh.ee sjHaWe is ihe eimial Hrahms
Mineiess is death, and Uie «ppJ»'ie <-«
Kiiiisncss IS tl>e eiernal
31 . Soint men who ire led by bad unr|«j
SUiidtiie sneak Indldy «l aciion. I

Imwcver. wlio are unmbered among the |
fcteat ancients never speak highly at action

31 Uy action is a creMure ' born w<th
boit* which inmade up nl ihe ai*'**".
rr...) Kpo.i.jw .«.«»; /'p

Hits IS whal IS highly acceptable to ealees
ot ambrosia.

33 1 hereforc, those whose vi'm« «*'

triids to (tic Ollier end have no atuc* «
lo actions tins Por.isha, however, is loU
oi knowledge and not full ol action


3i He dies not who understands 11'
wli IS immorul. i.nnniiable. •‘‘W,"/'''*’' !
sihle, eieiiial and jndesiriKlible— I*’'"

• 1 IM Soul .nJ »1'" 1> *

atiachmeiiis

35 He who thus understands

lo wl„ch U.ere is iioihnu; prior. »hic'‘ s
nnereajed, i nmutahle. nnein q**' •

Incompiehensible even to those • t,
♦slersot neefr. certainly b.cme. I**^*'^
Wiiomprehensibld and Imnioital tWiW*
these


you act Urns immediately, you
icq lire success. - -

"‘•“"V .1.0 o bu...J ."..J.''

bV m'.' O ”

v.“ 1.11 lb... ..1.".

lus not to gr***'*' ' «

ti„t Drahmsna.

WHO. pupil. O Jni.rd.

O Krishna, and who t P liearing U.

,„d known at “•* '7"’'’ " y

»«ntdOMe. a ,n.<tion (or )«

\Zn.nh>-. > have de.Cnbsd this mv

".T " j.?,!'*” r.z,l-’zX"''-


IS mystery


you liave any *o*|j 9U the-
(hsiauipKiaus Qrahma U-an • , V 0 *s .,i...i t» is srl^ion has Uen

'Sy ■■ i ..i*” ■» r-''"'

taktt place M a dream.


6o


MAIiABItARATA.


50. rormerly» whtn th« hour baitl* i
came, t(iis very religion, O you of nuRlHy* |
arms, w«» described by me. Do yfl>J» tliest*
fore, tec jour mind on it.

51. And now, Ocluef of BJiarata’e race.
It IS lonp since lliat I saw tbe lord my
father. I wish to see him atain, whh your
leave, O Ptialguna.

Vaishampayana said:—

5a. Dhanaujaya rtphed Knfbna who
had said so —We sliall go lQ*day from this
XOAn to >\»stinapur.

53 Meeting king Yndhishlhifi 0^ Virtu-
ous soul iherp, and informing hnayo** shall
ihtn go fo your own city.


CHAPTER Ut.
lANUGtTA PARVA.)-~

ConlininJt I

Vaisbampayaiia said

' I •« Aflee tins KTrshna ordered^ R\»'*^**
saying,— 'Let my car be yoked * 'Y't> us
a very ihoi I space of time D-^ruks inlenn.
cd (his matter), laytog,— 'It been

yoked.*

3 The son ol Panda then or*^*^*** of*
hti attendants, saying — ’Prepar* your-
selves and be ready. We shall go to day to
ilastinapuc.

3 Thus addressed, O king, ike army
got themselves readyr and n formed Pntlia'a
son of nil measurable energy,

Everything isdkeady *

4 1 hen those (wo frt<r>ds *»#• Krishna
and tl e son of Pandii ascended their ear
and proceeded on the journey, engaged m»
deliglillul coinersation.

5. To Vasudeim sealed on tl'* oar, the
ViigWiy energetic CtiananjajN imt* v»<wia
said these woids, O chief of the Bhaiotas.

6 O perpetiiator of Slie VrishiU rate, the
kmi» has got victory through yiJur Rrace
All h>B enemies have been killed, and he has
recovered his kingduin nitiwut a thorn in It.

7 O Idesiroyer of Madliu, on you the
Pandavat have got a bo*effu1 profeoior
Having obtained you for our raft w* have
crossed the Kuru ocean.

S O jou who have this universe for
- )our handiwurk, salutations to you, O Soul

of the universe, O best of all ben»g» *'•
ti iivertt I kriow you in -that ijieasure in
wtiieti 1 Ain appeuved by you.


9 D destroyer of ^)adhu, the >eu) ot
every creature is always burn of your
energy. Playful spoil is youri.^ Eirtls
and sky, O lord,.^re your illusion.

to. Ihis entires universe, consisting o
tnobife and nnmohile objects, is established
OH you You create, by modification, the
four orders of Deing.

II. You] create the Earth, the Sky, and
lieaven, O Destroyer of Madhu. ! I<e
siainlest lunar light is your siflile. ,lhc
aeasons are your senses.

la. , Hie • ever*nioviHg ' wind ]•» your
breath, atidjdeatb, ex>sl|ug eietiiall} isyouc
anger. In your grace is tlie goddess of
prosperity. Indeed. Shree is always esia-
blisiied III you, O you of the highest inielli-
gcHce.

13 Vuii are tlie aport t you are their
comeiitinent , you iheir nuelligrnce, you
their forgiveness, you their iiiclinalions,
you their beauty. You are the universe
with Its mobile and Hninobae objects At
tho end ol the age, it is you, O unless one,
who are called destruction.

14 I am incapable of rreiling* all your
qiiahiies in course of even a lAig period.
You ale the Sod and the Supreme Soul 1
bow to you O you of eyes like the (petals
of the) lotus.

tj— 18 O you who are irresistible I have
leatni it from Masada and Devata and tli*
island-born (Vyasa), and the Kuru giand-
father also that »<t this (universe) rests
on you You are the one Lord of. all
creatwes Ihis, O sinless one, Ahat you
have drscribed to me oil account of
yonr favour lor myself, 1 shall duly acconi-
phsh lit hill, O Jaiiarddaiia ' Highly
wondufwl IS this whicU you have done from
desiie of dmoic wl\at is agreeable tn u<,
vts. tie destructiuu in battle of the Kau-
rava (ptinct> tie sin of DhritarasWlfo.
lhat army had been burnt by you which
I (subsequently) defeated in bailie

19—20 That Feat was achieved by you
oit account of which victory b-enno mine'
By tl « power of your intelligence was shown
the means by which was duly eSected the
destruction of Duryodliana tn battle, as
also of Karna, as of the sinful king of the
biiidliut,,aiid Bhurishravas.

at. I shall accomplish Tall that which,
O son^of Devakt, pleased with me you have
declared to myself. I do iiot.enieftain any
doubt in this. .

aa Going to king Yudinshthira at
ngbtsous soul, 1 shah, l> sinless *n«, urg*
him t* dismiss you, O you who are con-
versant with every duly.


ASHWaA^DHA rARVA.


6 i


at O t«rd. * approve ol departure fer
D«iraka You th.ll .oo« my maUrnal
uncle, 0 Jenarddana. ^

,i You alull alio ae# H.e .l!

V,Ud.v, ...d <Mh«' ch^l'ol
T»c*'’— Umt converimg wilU each other,
the two reached the city o< Haiimapur.


3^ rl..n tl.» kinit, jilKd »‘'h gr.»f


as TI.ey then. rvil!»
wilheul any anxiety, entered the
Dl niaraihira wUidi resembled the maiiswo
oi bhakra.


36-38. They then saw. J fa*

DT.ritarasht/a^and highly inieUigent V.dura,
and king Yudhishthira 5 and the ‘""''“‘j'j
Bhimajena, and the two sons ol Mam*
Pandu, and king Dhruar«htra

and the unvanquished Vuyuisu , a»d

Gsndhari ol great wisdom, *

and the beaintful Krishna,
ladies ol QhsraU'a race with Subhadra
lor the first.

33-31. They also
who used to wait upnn
•pproiching king Dhniarailiira.
ehssiiiers ol enemies announced their '*
and touched hii feet. Indeed.
ones aho touched the feet ol Gandhan and
Pntlia and king Y.idimhll.ira the jnsl.
aid Bhima. Einbf.-cing Vidura also, they
•I quired alter his well being.

31-33 In the company of att those

persons, Arjuna and Krishna
p’oached king DhriWrashira t K '
Niglit cams and tlien the mtelhgent k g
DliiiUrashtra dismissed all ttiose 1 ^'^’

lu.te.s of Kuru-s race as also J.nafddaj.a

lor retiring to their respective rooms,
milled by the king, all of them ent
their respective apatiinenls,

34-36 K., 5 l,n..l 8'“' S'.V

ceeded to ihe apartments of Dhan j X j

Adored duly and fur

object el comfort and enjoyment, J^r*^


Yndhikhtliirasaid:

V« heroes, ya foremost ones o»
vida's and Kuru’s race, it appears that
V. two are desirous of saymg somell.in| to
r. Do ve say wUat Is m your mind. I

pi

„ ii,„ .ddr....d. P 1 ..I 8 U"..


addressed. Phalguna. wen

lltese words.

Highly po««lhl V..i.d.v.


4 »


O hero, grant him petmiisiou.


Yndhisbthira said : . . i

44 - o


“.tfur'i..',' .“I

depinurs is


kfoveJ DV me i You have
net eesn my ...eternal uncle os also tha
Jtddess Devaki for a long time*


ooject el comfort ana

of great intelli#cnce p-ssed l**'

happy sleep with Dhanaiijsya as Ms com


ooaess -

M.si»rnal uncTe ana
”^'VTev."'^.l.rO giV«ro. Honors,
;o«>g to V^-dev ?' „„dom. adore


■sZiiito ho,,..-


<« . ,mgh.y-rrme^d"onera^'dVhe


Pinion.* \^»en the night ?-*»««*
morning came, the two heroes.
their mofiiing riles “"J* . *‘|®Vl’,/naUc«
perieni prnpeily. proceeded to tl R .

•I t,.,o'^Yudh;;h,h,r» ih. io«

V„4I .itai,,,. ,h. JO.I, ol S'“' ""k'''-

wilh Ills lamislers. .

37 The 'two great ones,
wsll adorned clianiber. „a»odTng

thira the just like the two Ashwins sae. g

II e duel ol il e celestial*.

38 . Meeting die J’l*,”,, of Kuru’s

race, as also that loiemos I o yudhi.i,-

sat themselves dij;np>


Ch-i!'""” "il ""f ™ ” ” ” '


„ oo ,00 ih.it E". i.k'"e 1'°;;

„„„o. k,o4. ;,"„”i'°ih.

”'J, . 1.0“ k'

,h,oo.b y.»

S^,"o*'j«"oo”'”»*y

have been killed.

sj- '‘“.ohll: 1::;

f;,. 1 no 4 " .1 h«". “"I

leply)-


9 '


MAtlABAltllATA.


VnBudeva «aid

57. O ont, alt Jewelt

f.i.d Lcm*. all tKl.es «i«d llie enure

LeloiK to jou atone Wluteier
axibt* in iny liouse, jou, O l•^u,

ere alwa)s t1>e owner t^ercoE, , .

I 53 To l.itn Yndliutnltire, the ton «(
Uh-ima. said.— »t it lo'— tnd then duly
• doted (Knstma) ttie eldest btolt.er, gdled
witli great energy, ot Gade. V*»UOtvt
tt<en proceeded to l<ii paternal aitnl (Knnti)
Duly honouiing l-er, lie cncumbulated her
body.

,54 lie wa* property accotted by her
m return, and ll>en by all itie oilier* baviMg
Viliira for tlieir firit. I be four armed
eldest brother of Gada then started fiom
Nagapura ou hit excellent ear.

53 Placing Ins sister, the lady Suhhtdra,
on ttie ear, the miRhtyanned Janarddana,
then, with tl>« perimssioii of hotii Yudliith*
tliira and (Ivunii) his paternal aoni. ttatled,
acc.nnpanied by a U»g« tram oE eiUfnt.


56 The hero who had tlie foremast of
apet on Ins banner, as also Satyajn and
the two inn of MaJraVaii. and Vid.ira
of tncomptrable mielli|,eiiee, and Bhima
I inuell wliote tread reieinlded that of a
pniiceof elephants, all followed Madhava:

57 Itntrddanaol great energ) . cautmg
allttioio ettender* o« tl'e Kmu kingdoin
and Vidjra also to reinni, addressed
Daruka.-nd Satyaki. tajnig.— * U'Be ‘he
hurses to speed '

56 Hien ihst grinder of enemies,
l.narddanaof great p. oWes*. accompanied
by baiyaki. tlie fo'reniost one Of Shnli S race,
proceeded to the cii) ul the Anartia* atter
having killed all hiS enemies, lue lU «' •
iiimdted saciificV* proceeding to the celet*
tul reaioii, ' ' '


CliAPTEIt Lfif.
f ANUGtTA PAItVA >—
C*uhmiid.

VAiahampayana said : —

I. As lie of yrisl.iii , family was gofn
• ni *^*V*^*' ‘ foi'emost prmeOs' c

Bliarata s race, it,o»c dissfisers «i


[ A Wuh great tJtfSlcolt), the sen cf
Pritha withdrew liii look ihai had fallen
I on GovinWa. I he undefeated Kiislnia
also (did llie t«me).

4 ihe marks which were displa)ed on
the occasion of that great orie's departure,
I thall now fully describe. L>o you listen to

5 The ssiud blew with great force be*
fore the car, cleartii); tlie path of sand*
grain* and dust and thornt,

6 Vasava rained pure and fragrant
thowert and celestial (Ijwers before the
liMdcr of Sliaranga.

7. At the mig>ily>armed hero went on
he came upon the desert ilhsupplied with
water. 1 here he saw that foremost of
ascetics, named Lftanka, of immeasurable
energy.

8 Tlie hero of lerge eyrt and great

energy adored that asc'tic He was then
a«lored by ilie asCeiie In return,
Vasudeva then enq nred alter his well*
being, ,

9 That foremost of Brahmtnai .rif,
Uianks, politely accosted by Madliava,
honoured Inni duly and then addrettsd
him III these words

in O Shaniin, having gone to Ihs
palaces of ihe Kuius and llie Pandavas.
have yeu Succeeded in esiablisfiing a
durable undersiamti >g between them such
a* shiitid exist between brotticrst You
•houldtell me every thing.


*- It, Do you come. O Keshtva, after
having iiniled them in peace,— them who aie
your relatives and who are ever deer to
you, O foremost one of VrishuL's race.


13 Will the five son* ol Paiidu, and
the children ol Dliritarashtra, O destroyer
of enemies, sport in the world in joy wtb
you T


"« their res^ciiVr’k./'P'^”"’*'

of the pacrficaiion of

about by you 7

>4 H,. ,i,.t .,u„. o ,<,11.

on you, bo„,.ie. 1 ™“

the iCauravas 7 ^

The bleised and holy one J ""

I '3—16. 1 In,d my b„, „ o.lVl, («' I"'"'
Kaiiraves. When I couM J

mean, esubl.sl, them 0.^0^ «. “

.that all of them. wi h reNlives ,411

'* *0

K*¥»s destiny e,j,,ryo jniellifience '


AS^^VA^^tOllA PARVA


63


n O Br.21 Uiil.l.O smUs! 'I'”
nlw canno^ be unkoown to yo -.j j ^
Ube Kauravas) d.^reearded wb.d
and Vidura gave tbem referrtng to

18 Encountenne one
became guests o? * ttf^he^Mn*

five PandaVas forin the . ^Uildren

shin, all tbeir (rtends and all ihei
having been destrojed A j

ni iitarashtra also, with their childre
kinsmen, have been killed* j

„ \Vta„ Kn,Vn. had aa.d .1 «•«»*;
U.anka, filled wnh anger, and V* th eye
expanded in rage, addressed him m these
words.

Utanki said — * _ ^

7a Since, though able. '’'Jnes

you did not rescue those fo
St Kurus race who were V;**;,;*
and. therefore dear to youi i ‘hall. »«'

[ sooth, curse you

SI Since veil dif uot fnretWy eompej
n.dho l,h,«,filhd»«h .os« d.nooi.ce
a curio on you

lully able tlo save them), you
diBereut to these foremost of „

overwhelmed by insincerity and hypoet'»y'
have all met wuh destruction.


CHAPTER LIV.

( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
CottliiiHeii-

O K..h.v, ....

IVUt lmVre«« ^

O Jansiddana 1

I Vasndeva said , „f

Ippormc. 1’”^“" ,S„ge So oH".

”..o- •.-■''.'/r.'”

ind 111 . V«... h»«. or.g.not.d from oio-


VasadsTa’said
o .CO o|

you are au ascetic i

.. M,., h.y.ng herd roy -or J-

the soyl, you may then inter y a

No man is able, by * hltl*
to put me down.

as O foremost of ascetics, 1

»..h to .>"''"‘l'”l ,na.orl "I

penances' You have a your

blazing penances You have paS«a yuu
^recoptota and seniors
si O foremost of

ko.. ih.t ,oo h.«. '™ Ido

Of Brahmacharyya from your

not, iherefote, wish ll e I ss much

your penances acquireU wn ^

pain' *


O ■ !n me arc at. creal.ire*. and in alt
„?,t„„r.do 1 e»..i,

douht arl.c 10 year mind abonl till.

Apsaras, have originated from me.

e Whatever has been called **"1®.",*
^ ««n axisieiit, whatever n mamfMt,
*"j r* m-nilesi, whatever is deairnciiblB

:;:l''ir.:.uaih ... ... '«

“« Tlio.. lemleU

Vedie

dmiCihavem. lor ...... .oal


ace. »vi«tent. whatever
j Whatever « .,;d whatever

la existent and rio .xniei t and not*

„ ,bove form Ihe universe

existent —all Oies nothing I ighet

^rh'eyonS m: «..o

uf gui^’ , Bhrizu's race,

® ^ ,P^;C Vedas beprnn.ngw.d. (the

know that all the one with me.

original syllable) „ce. that 1 arq

Know. O “’"nthe Soma (drunk

the ,1,e Ch.rn (cooUed in

•n sacrifices), I to ttie denies) , I

"^t Vihat W Performed); I "«

am the floi"* (“'** " „ pefortn for

m highly sanctified sacrificial Uavt.

I »m tne K i UJsatrl, in the great
U IS me the sound of his songs.

V”' ll'lius of e«iation. O Brahmana. H «

.u.picma. Maitira. •".*

d"t '”. lra»S.>t».>h P"" •'"r”!' P'"’”


‘4


MA1I*b1I«RAtA.


who aW tlie artiRcer, O forefttoJt o!

born ones, of the univarse,

III Uhow, O best of twice«born persons,
tliat Dliaima is my eldest born offsptinf,
oni^mated (rom (dy m>dd, O Icained Bf»h>
tnena, Whose ciseiice !t mercy for off cm*
turek,

li. Contlanlly bhartgitie ihySeff. I take
birth in variods woiHbs, O best of men. lor
Upholding that son ot mine, '•rnh the help ot
men now exitling m or departed from the
world. Indeed, 1 do this For protecting Vir*
lue and fer establhhing h.

t j In those forms that t assume for the
(lurpose, 1 am known, O son dl Bhrigu'a
face, in the three Worlds as Vishnu and
Brahman and Shakra. 1 am the origin
and I am the destruction of all things.

I ant the breatot of »ti ctisteht
Objects and 1 ant their destroyer. Know,
lug no cliaiigd myself. I am the destroy*
er of all those creatures that live m amful*
itcis.

t3 tn every ejble I luve to repair the
causeway ©1 Virtue, entering into vatsous '
kinds o( wombs from desire of dvihif good
(« my creatures.

10 When, O son of Dhrlgii't Face. I
live in the order of the eelestiali, 1 then in*
deed, act m every lespect as a celesliat.

17 When 1 live in tlie order of the
Gandharvat, 1 then, O son of Bhrigu's
race, act in every respect as a Ga^dharva
iS. When I live in the order of the
Nagas 1 then act as a Naga, SHii when t
live In the order of Yakshas or that of
ItakshaiaS, 1 act after the manner of that
order. ,

Ip Born now in the order of men^l
must act a human being I eppealed to
them (the KaUradaS) tnost piteously But
Stupefied as tliey were and deprived of their
Senses, they refused to Cake rny words

50. I frightened them, filled with anger*

reiernng to some great fear. Dift once
moie 1 shoVed themselves mt usual liuniaii
form. ^ *

51. Possessed as they were of unnglifo*
Ousness, and assailed by the virtue of lime,
all of tlietn have been righteously bifled in
battle, and have, forsooth, goife to the ccteS*
flal region.

ai Ihe Fandaras also, O best of
Brahmanas have acqiired great fame. 1
have thus told you all that you had asked
me.


CllAPTER LV.

, iaHUgita pabva.)-

CoHfiKUai.

tttanka said

1 . 1 know you, O Jariarddaria, Id be (he
creator of llie universe Forsooth, thiS
knowledge (hat I tiave It the result of yoilf
grace towards me.

i O you of Unfading gidry. rHy lieari
IS possessed of cheerful tranquillity on ac*
Cditdt of US beirtg detfoted to you Know, O
chastiser of enenfies, that my heart is nd
(dnget irtcUitcd to curse ybU.

^ If, O Janarddarta, t deserve the least
grace from you, do yoil then ilioW the encd
your supreme form.

Vaiikanipayana Said:—

4 Pleased with him, the holy prte Ihert
showed Utanka that eternal Vatshnavi
form winch Dhananjaya of great intelli*
gettce had seeh.

5 Olanka saW the ({reat Vasudeva of
universal fornf, gifted With mightr^armk.
Ihe effulgence of that form was litce Chal
of a biirnmc Are of w 'thousand Suns, tl
stood before him filling alt space. It had
fates on every side. •

0 Seeing that high and Wond*rfUf
Vaishnava form of Vwhnu, in fabt, seeing
(he SUprime Lord In (that guise) this
Brahmaiid Utanka becartii filled with

Ufeanka laid »

7 . O you whose handiwork Is the iinl*
verse, I bow to you. O soul of the Universe^
O parent of all (lungs * With joiir feet
}Od have Covered (he entire Earth, and
with your head you fill the firmament.

, 8 *1 hat which lies between the Esrth

artd (he firmament has been filled by youF
vttnna^i hft iVit ■ptrnVrt rA \Vih tpmyavs vie.
covered by yoiir arnta. O yeu^of unlading
glory, }ou are all this.

p. Do )Ou withdraw tins excellent ani^
fndestrUctible farm of yours I wish Id see
you now in your own (humarr) form which;
loo, IS elbrnal.

Vaishampayana said : —

to— ti. To him, O Janamejaya Govind^
of contented spirit said these words— Do
you ask (or some boon f lo him Uianfci,
however said, this is a suflisient boon frortl
you for the present, O you of greet splen-
dour, in that, O Krishna, I have seen tins
form of yours, O foremost of all beings {


ash\VaMedha PARVA.


(1. Itrhim., liowtUr, Hi™, ■««"
lo him, -'Do nol fc™P'' ' J

Ihnmn.t be done! A siglit ol mj lotm
cannot be fruitless !

trtankasaid:— ^ * »

13 I must accompUsli Ibat, O wr .
x,l..ih >ou il.mlc should be**""?*
to have water wi.erever my *or ‘I ^may
ante. Water rt scarce m such deaetW .

t 4 . W.lhdrawSne Ibat ‘I)!

Supreme Lord then said to Uunka-

Wnenever >oil «.» *S

ol me'' Having said so, he proceede
towards ol Dwaraka. ^

t3. Siibsequently. one day,

Uiaiika, solicitous of water and R ^

tliirsiy, wandered over the desert.
of hU wanderings he thought of Krishna
of unfading gloty.

16 The mlelligeil RubJ ‘.'""f.S.l"
Ih.t deeerl . n.Ued bunler (el 11'=

.11 beeme.ted wdb <‘i''i sunou.-

ded by a pabk of dogs. .

17 Extremely fierce-iooking. >;«
a sword and was armed "Uh bo
arrows, that foremost of

Saw copious streams of water issun g
the urinary organs of that huiiief«

18 As soon as Uiania iiad ■‘bo«|bt

of Krishna, that hunter *«;

dressed him, sajing,— O Uia*'**** ^ ^

Blingu’s race, do you accept lh>»

from me,

19. Seeing you afflicted by lhif*t 1 have
felt great mercy for you I ““j

dressed by the hunter, the ascetic $
no Inclination to accept that water.

!o. The lelelligeet 'X" M,e

lo blame Krishna ol iindecaymg B
hunter, however, again and again addressed

Hie Uiilii, saying,—' Urinkl

at— 2i The astelic refused
tiaier Unis given. On the other '
heart stricken with hunger »"d I
even became angry. Disregarded by ••e
great U.sin ihroutfli that '‘’"''‘5“® ' d's-
hunter, O king. wUli hi* dis-
appeared tliere and then, beei 8 . ^

appearance, UtanUa felt himself a

! 3 -. 7 . H. ll’™!!'" 'bt'c’S

that destroyer o* „i (he conch

him. Soon alter, the holder
and discus and mace. 8'^"*
tntelhgence. came to Dtanh^ b^r^Ad-

(along which the hunter Iiad

dressing Krishna, the Bra ,j propet

•O foremost ol hemgs .1 was hardly^P^^^.
lor you to offer water to foremost


65


nSs in the form of a hilnlet’s urifle. O
lord ♦ Utanica who said these words,
Ja^Vddana of great

iomforimg him with many e

•lhat form which 't was proper to
(or offering you water, in ‘i'»‘
water was water offered to joul
alas, you could not understand it 1 ine
holder of the thunderbolt. Purandara, w
requested fay me for your sake.

aS My words to that powerful cetesli^

Ihit a Morul .houlJ
,n. L.l sail.

tn iltaiika'— O son of Dhrigus r •

w., «.£. m.t. ir;!;

to Utanka !

The king of the celestials theti;

intelligence, nectar is to be given «> •

I It" .••“T. 11.

to liim bj any means.

sfi Having made tbi* agreement
ma Vasava appeared before you,
with me. ihee nectar.

that lum and send

You. however, did dhislrious one

in my power. r.irh., satisfied.


'""r T'«..”c’aro

desert. 1 1'®” savoury water to

“iSdCTd. IIK. .'“iH’

Sm ... 111. '»''■> •• Ui.'"“-1'“'‘’-

■js.-r. .Id, .1.-1

on and deserts.


MAIIAB1r^RATA.


«6


CHAPTER LVI.

(ANUGITA PAUVA.)-'

Cenittttud,

Janamejaya said

I 'Willi wliat penances was ((>e great
Uuiika endued so lliat lie enleriained the
wish to imprecate & curse on Vtslinu linn*
sell, who IS the source ol all power 7

Taisbaiupayana said •—

3 . O Jandine]4}a, Uianka was gifted
with austere peiiiiiices. lie was devoted
10 hir'preceplor. Gilted with yreat eneigj,
he abstained liom adoring anybody clse<

3 All the children of the Itishis, O
Uliarata, enteiiained even this desire, tie ,
that their devoiion (o preceptors should
bt M gieatas that o{ UiaMka.

4 Gautama’s fi^alificatiQn with and
aHeclion for Uisiika, among I is number*
less diseipler, were very great, O Jaiiaine*
jtja.

$. Indeed. Gautama was greatly pleased
with the self>co>urol and purity'ol conduct
that maiked out Utanka, and with his acts
of prowess and the services he did to him.

6 One after another, thousands of dts* i
siples leceived the preceptor’s peunissioii I
to return home On accouni, however, of his I
great aReciien for Uianka Gautama could
not per mil him la leave his liermirage.

7 Gradually, in couise of time, O son,
decrepHude overtook Utaiiko. that great
ascetic, ihe ascetic, however, on account
of Ins devotion to liis preceptor, was not
censciops ®l it

8 One da}, ha started. O King, for
fetching fuel fur his preceptor Soon after
Utaiika brought a heavy load of fuel

9. 'loil.woih and hungry and .ifBicled
by the load he earned on his head, O
chaserser of enemies, he threw (be load
down on the Earth, O king ^

to One of Ins mailed locks, while as
silver, had become e )lsn),ted with ilie load
Accordingly, wf eii ihe lo-id w.«s thrown
down, with H IcU oivil e eailh that mdlled
lock of hair.

II Oppressed as he fiad beeis by that
load and overcome by hunger, O Biarats,
Utanka, Seeing that sign uf old age be*
ga» to bewail aloud fioin excess of sorrow

12 — 13 Knowing every duly, the
daugl ter of Ins preceptor then, who had
c}es resemhhng lotus petals, and hips
that were full and round, at tlie com*
IU4V^ { her father,, souglit, with down-


cast face to hold Utanka’s leafs Id riei*
hands Her hands seemed to burn wiih
those tear-drops thal’she held. Unable,
accordtiiglv, to hold them longer, she
was compelled (0 tliroiv them down on tlie
Earth.

14—15 The Earth herself Was unable
to hold those tear drops of Utanka. With
A pleased heart, Gautama then said to the
twice-born Utanka,— 'Why, O son is
yOMf mind $0 afllicied willi grief to-da} T
lell me calmly and quiell), O learned
Rishi, for I wish to liear it m full.

Utanka said

16—17 Wiih mind, entirely devoted to
)On, and wholly bent upon doing what ir
agreeable to you, with my heart’s deVotum
turned to you, and witli thoughts enlirely^
living on you, (I have lived here till) decre-
pitude has overtaken me w'lihoiit my know-
ing it it all. 1 liave not again, Inioivn any
happiness Thottth 1 have lived with yovs
tor a century yet you have not granted me
permission to depart.

t8 Many dncfpJes of yours, who were
iny juniors, >>ave, however, been permitted
l>y you to return. Indeed, lundiedsand
ihoiisands of foirmost Urahinanas have,
gifted with KnoivHeiige. ^en favored with
your permission-

Gautama eaid*—

I 19 Ihroiigh my love and afleciton fo*
you, and on account of yourdntifiil services
to me, a long time has passed without iny
knowing It, O foremost of Dralimaiias
30 . If, however, O J ou of Rhrigu' race,
you desire to leave this place, do you go
vnthout defay, with my permission,

Utapka said: —

21 Wiial shall I present to my precep-
tor 7 fell me this, O best of twice-boriv
persons Having brouglit il, 1 sliali go
lienee, O Jwd, wiihyour pernnssjon.

Gautama said

33 riie good say that tlie satisfaciiorrof
the preceptor is the Bilal fee Forsoolii, O
twice burn one. I, have been highly, pleased
with your conduct.

23 — 24 Know, O perpeluaterof Bl ngu’s
race, that 1 have been liiiilily pleased wuh
your conduct Know, O perpeiiuier of
Ulitigu’s race, t! ai 1 have been very much
yiewsed with you-for this. l( you become a
young man to day of sixteen y ears, I shatt
confer on you, O twice born one, this my
own daughter for becoming your vlife No-
other vroniaii except tins cue is capable of
waitii e upon ) cur energy.


ASHWAMEDH\ PArvA


Af iJjfse wcrtJj c!

Uunka once again liecame a joiith and
accepted tlial famous maiden for Ins wife
HeCfiving tlie permission of ins preceptor,
“« Uien addressed fns preceptor's wife,
saying, — What shall 1 give jou as final lee
■or my preceptor 7 Da yon command
rte. { wish to do, with ndtes, or even
tny life, what is agreeable and beneficial
lO you ,

s; Whaiever gem, exceedingly won-
•dertul and of great value, exists in lJi«
world, Ij sfiaH bring', for for you with the
I dp of ^my penances 1 liave no doubt m
this.

Ahfiilya said

sS I atn Iiigli1y*p1eased wiili yon, O
seained Brahinana, wall >our unoeasing
drvolion.'O sinless one Tins « enough.
Ulessed be you, go wherever jlou fike.

^aiBhanipayana said

*9 Ulanfta, however. O Uin?, once
^ore said these words ~-Oo you command
jj’f. O mother It is proper that C should
^0 something ihat« agreeable to you.

•dhalya said *—

30 Blessed be you, bring for me those
**leslia{ ear rings .which are worn by the
*de of SauJasa. lhai wfuch IS due to
your preceptor will tlien be well di5>
<i)afgM

31- neplyirtg her.— ‘So be »t.‘— Utanka
*’*nt away, (j Janani<(a)a, deceronned
^Pon bringing those ear-cmgs for doing
''hat his preceptor’s wife hked.

3? That foremost of OraHmanas,,
Wvanka, proceeded forihwiili to Sandasa
■who had became a -caninhaf, tit order to
solicit the ear.Tings fron him. ^

33- Gautama meanwhile said to los
*de— ‘UianUa is not to be seen to day.
tlnis addressed, she informed turn ht>w he
bad gene for fetching the leweDed ear-riogs
(of Saudasa’s queen).

34 At tins, Gautama said —'VoM have
•not acted wisely. Cursed (hy Vaihishtha),
that king will, indeed, kill Uianka.

Alialya sftid:—

45. Without knowing this, O luify on*'
1 iiave engaged Utanka 111 this task He
shall not, however, come by any danger
through jour grace.

■6. Thu* addressed by lier, G»Mlai»a
eatd,~ ! ei It be so ’ Meanwhdr Uiaitka
«He( ky<g baudasa m * deserted forest.


CHAPTER IVJl.
4ANUGirA PARVA.J—
Cenfinutf^.

VaisliRmpayAna said ; — -

f. Seeing the king, who had become so,
of frightful apperraiice, wearing a long;
beard smeared with th^ blood of human
being*, the Bralimana Utaiika, O king,
did not become moved.

a— 3 lhat highly energetic monarch,
luspicing terror in every breast and tookmi;
like a second Vama, rising up address'd
Uunka, saying, —‘By good lock, O best of
Urahmanas, you have come (o me at the
Sixth hour of the day when ( am m scarcli
of food.

Utanka said

4. O king, , know that I have come here
in course of my wanderings for the sake of
riy preceptor. The mse have said lhae
white one IS engiged for the sake of one's
preceptor, one should not be injured.

Tfcd kmgrsaid:—

5 O best of Brahmsnac, food hat been
ordained tor me at (be sixih hour of Ifia
da.y. I am hungry. I cannof, ihereforei
allow you escape lO'day.

Uttnka said •—

6 Let It be so, O king * Lei this agree*
ment be made ivitii me^ After { (lavo
ceased to wander for my preceptor { shall
once more come and put tnjself within your
power.

7 1 have heard, O best of hin;s, that
the object 1 seek for my preceptor is under
jour control, O king, therefore, O king, I
beg you for U.

8 Vau every day give many foremost
of ttenis to superior Brahmanas Vou are
a S-iveei O king, horn whom gifts msy be
accepted Know lhat I loo am a worthy
object of eharny present before you. U
^stof kings.

9~io. Having accepted from jou in
gilt that object for my preceptor, wliiefi is
under your control, 1 shall, O king, on
account of iny egreemeiit, once mere -come
back to you and put myself under your
power, f assure you truly of ihi*. Hiere
IS no fslseliood in this Never before hav«

) spoke* any falsehood, no. not even >n jrst !
Wliat shall ( txy then of other occasions 7

Sattdaia i\id

It. it t)>e object jon seek for jour
ptcceptsr 11 capable «{ being plscod 14


60


MAHABlT^RATA.


CHAPTER LVl.

( ANUGITA PAUVA)—
CcnUttutJ.

Janamejaya said

I. 'WiUi vlut penances wai tlieRreat
Ulanka endued so that he entertained the
wish to imprecate a curse on Vishnu him*
sell, who IS the source of all power ?

Vaisbainpayana said •—

3. o' Jan<i(nt]«)a, Ulanka was Rifled
with austere penances lie was devoted
to his'precepior. Gifted viiih ^reat eneigy,
he absLamed (lom adoring anybody else.

3. All the children of the Rishis, O
llliarala, enlerUined even this rietire. ti« .
that tkeif devotion to preceptors should
be as gieat as that of Uu^ika.

4* Gautama’s KYalincation with and
ancciioii for Ulaiika, among I is number*
less diseiplee, were very great, O Janame*
3 Si a,

5 Indeed, Gauiama w-as greatly pleased
witli the se]I*coiit(ol and purity of conduct
that marked out Utauka, and with Ins acts
of prowess and the services he did to him.

6. One after another, thousands of dis*
iiples leceivcd the prcceptoi's pennissiuii
te return home On account, liowevei, of his
great affeciien for Uianka, Gautama could
not penult him to leave Ins liernntage.

7. Giddually, in course of time, O son,
detrepkude overtook Utanka, that great
ascelic, 1 he ascetic, liOHcVer, on account
of Ins devotion to Ins preceptor, was not

censcious of it.

8. One da), he started, O King, for
leiclnng fuel fu> I is preceptor Soon after
Utaiika brought a heavy load of fuel

9 1 Oil woih and hungry and rffflicied

by the load he earned oi> Ins head, O
chastiser of enemies, he threw the load
down on the ILarlh, O king. ^

10 One of his mailed locks, while as
sil\er, had become e itdiigled with liie load
Accordingly, wl e<i the iu-id w4s thrown
down, with It fell Oiv ilie ea> III that loalled
luck of hair.

It. Oppressed as he had been- by that
load and overcome by hunger, O B larate,
Utanka, beeing lliat sign uf old age, be*
gan to bewail aloud fiom excess of sorrow

12—13 Knowing every duly, the
daugliler of Ins preceptor'" then, who had
eyes resembling lotus petals, and hips
that were full- and round, at the com-
mand i her father, sojglit, with dawii-


casl facr to hold Utanka’s Iran Irt fief
hands Her hands seemed tff burn with
those lear-drnps lhat'she held Unable,
accordingly, to hold them longer, she
was compelled to throw them down on Hie
Fartli.

14—15 The Earth herself was unable
10 hold tliose tear drops of Utanka, With
a pleased heart, Gautama then said to the
twicc'born Utanka,— 'Why, O son, is
)oi»f mind so aHlicied tvilh grief to day T
lell me c«lmly and quietly, O learned
Uishi, for 1 wish to hear K in full.

Utania aaid —

16—17' With mtnd entirely devoted to
}Ou, and niiolly bent upon doing what is
agreeable to )ou» with my heart’s devotion
turned to you, and with thoughts entirely
living on >ou, (I have lived here till) decre*
pitude lias overtaken me without my know*
mg It it all. I have not, again, known any
happiness Ihough 1 have lived with yo r
for a century yrt you have not granted me
permission le depart,

18 Many di«c'ple5 of yours, who were
my ytiniors, have, however, been permitted
by you to return Indeed, 1 unureds and
iliousaiids of foiemost IJraliinanas have,
gifted with knowledge, been favored with
your permiesioii.

Gantama said •—

19 Ihrongh my love and pffeciion fo"
you, and on accoiinl of your dniifnl services
10 me, a long lime lias passed wiiliout 111/
knowing it. O foremost of Drahinaiias

1 30. If. however, O yon of fllifigu’ race,

! you desiie to leave tins place, do you gir
v-iithout delay, with my permission!

Utanka said

21 Wtiat shall I preterit to my precep*
tor? lell me IhiS, U best of tuice*bori>
persons Having brought it, 1 shall go
iicnce, O lord, wnb your permission.

Gautama said:—

22 riie good say that the satisfaction- of
the preceptor is ihe final fee. Forsooth, O
twice born one, I, have been highly ^pleased
with yuur conduct.

33— Know, O perpeluaterof Dlingu's
race, Ihdl 1 have been hiehly pleased with
your conduct Know, O perpetualer of
Ulirigu s race, tl at 1 have been very much
pieasdd withyou-for tins. If you become a
young man to day of sixteenyears, I shall
confer on you, O twice*borii one, this my
own dau,,hler for becoming your vbfe No
other woman except tins one is capable c£
wailing upon >cur energy.


ASIl'VWlEDIll PMtVA


accepted , of 1<ts preceptor.


^ce ted t..at f.mou, -“*-’1.

UeceivmgU.e perm>«to.. of Ins P«

be I ‘*vryouAsrm»l fee

s,y,ng— What shall I L y command
for lay preceptor T >. ^ven

ne. I wish to di.
lay life, what is agree-Wc ana oe

57 Whatever B'™-

dertul and of great J„h tfre

world. II Shall brings for 0^

I elp of .my penances l have no
.1 -


CHAPTER LVII.
(ANUOITA parvai-

Cciiltnut'^’

VaistampAJAna said : -

. c-««r? tlie king, who h


Abalyasaids— ^ o

« ijm i"8"yp'«>'d

leained Brahmana, with ' enough.

devottan.O sinless one 1,1,-.

Blessed he you, go wherever >


„l »PP^,‘,"“,i blood ol

SV”;rto;S.V U.a„l.o, O b,o..

d,J^, foomo ™»=^ e""e'“

ol food.


Vaialiampayaua said

29 Uta.ka, “°:J®''*V)o VO. command

mate said these words —uo y .

me, O mother U is P^op**: V'f* Au.
do something that is agteeahle W you.

Ahalya said — , „e


Utanka said- ,, ,, , |,.ve come a.i':
, o ko.g, boo.; I'm ' „b. of

"//'“'Kf’eojedlor Uie ’f • <''


Tie kms 'Ail - t,„

5 o bc!" el ,i«h bone ol ll'"

5r'fI"m'ro,4'.y

*... fcBe to. day.


Ahalyasaid ,,,g,e l a"' hungry I <

30 Blessed be ^ „orn by the g.\\lw you escape lo-doy.

celestial ear rings *,_h ,, due »a , ..j

wife of Saudasa .^'^,1 ' be we» dis lut-vntaSMa ^ 1 t et this agree-

your preceptor will Ih*" 1 ^ it be $0, O k nc i ^

-cliarged .a w Utanlea 1 ment be '"ade^ wit^i^^ir^^ I 3hall


, ,c^ u- Utanie*

31 Repljmg her “-So determined

went away U Janamej ) doing

upon brn/gmg those « r mgs

what his preceptor's wife li^ d

32 Ihat foremost Ot s,„dasa

Uunka proceeded f®rlh order to

wio had become a canml ml. m «>

solicit the ear rings from him.

■13 Gautama meanwhile
-.lie— Utanha is not J® him how be

111 IS addressed, lewelled ear rings


ment be rriade W'lh ^ ^^^‘*plor I shall

ro'mollor.;l'lod»l«.lAm,ouc

■’7"\ bovc bcoid, o ':'?r;:d«

beg )


you for It. foremost

R You every day ^ You are


had gene lor fetching i best of kings,

(of SaUdasa’s qieenJ' l...- I


lUaasa s q ie'‘v r^'Ym'bave

34 A 1 Hoc, 0 “""; "by V.»bisblh>),
not acted wisely C \jianlia.
that king will, indeed, kill


Ahalya said — w n loiy o"*’

45 Without knowing th S fc He

I rave engaged Ul*"' “ "^y‘*‘any danger

shall not. lowever. come by

through your grace G*«t*"'*

,6 Thus addressed by wr,^^

said — I el it be so j.,,(ied lot***

*nel k^i g Saudasa m a deserW


H.V’S ‘■“’’llLX

Saodasa said -
11 tliA ob


* -u...-. vau seek for


63


KfAlIABlIARATA.


your han(fs by n>e. If I be considered as
one from wboin a gift may be accepted, do
you lliei) say what lliat object is '

Utanka said

12. O foremost of men, O Saudasa, in
my estimation you are a worthy person
from wham gifts may be accepted. I have,
therefore, come to you for .begging of you
tlie jewelled ear*rings (worn by your
Queen).

»3audasa. said

13 'lliose jewelled ear-rings, O teamed
and twice born Risfn, belong to my wife,
They sliould be asUed from her. Du you
iherefore, solicit some other things (tom me
1 shall give It to you, O you of excelleni
vows !

Tltauka said

14 If we be considered asanyautlio*
ritj , do you cease then to urge thi^ pretext.
Po you give those jewelled ear*(ii)gs to me.
Be truthful in speech, O km

Vahhatflpayaua said

l5->l6 Ihus addressed, the king once
more addressed Utankt and said to turn,-'
Po you, at my word, go to my venerable
^ueen O best of men. and ask her say*
titgt^'Give 1 —She of pure vows, thus beg*
ged by you will ceriamty. at my command,
j^ive you, O foremost of tnice-boin persons,
those jewelfed ear-rings of hers without
doubt*

Utanka said

17. Where, O king, shall I be able to
meet your Queen 7 Why do you not your*
self go to her 7 ^

Bandasa said —

*' iS You will find her (o*day near a
forest foiiniain. I cannot see her tO-day
us (he sixth hour of the day has cobie*

Vaishampayana said

19 ihus addressed, Ucanka, O chief
of bharala's race, then left that place
Seeing Madayanii, he informed her ot bis
object.

aa. Hearing the order of Saudasa,
that lady of Urve eyes replied to (he high'
iy t»tetli|;en( Utanka, Q Jaiiamejaya, in
these words.

at. It IS even so, O twice-born one.
You sliould, however, O sinless one, assure
me that you do ml say what is untrue '
You should bim^ inc some signet from
ipy husband.


22. Tliese celestial ear-rings of mine,
made of rich gems, are such that (he
celestials and Yalcshas and great Hishis
always watch for opportunities for taking
them away.

23 If placed at any time on the Earth,
this costly article would then be stolen by
the Nagas If worn by one who is impure
on account of eating, it would then be
taken away by the Yakshas If the wearer
falls asleep, the celestials would then take
(hem away,

24 O best of Brahmanas, these ear-
rings are capable of being taken away,
when such opporlunities come, by celestials
and Rakshasas and Nagas, if worn by a

I careless person,

25. O best of iwice.born ones, these
eer*rings, day and night, always produce
gold. At nit:ht, they shine brightly,
attracting the rays of stars and consieha-
tions*

26 O holy one, if worn by any one, he
would be freed from hunger and thirst and
fear of every sort. Hie wearer of these
ear-rings is freed also from liie fear of
poison and lire and every kind of danger.

27 If worn by one of short stature,
these become short. If worn by one of
tall stature, these grow in size

2$ Even of sudr viitues are these ear-
rings of mine H>ey are lauded and
honoured everywhere Indeed, they are
known over Uie three worlds. Do you,
therefore, bring me some sign.


CHAPTER LVIII.

( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Confiii'iri/.

Vaishampayana said •—

t Returning |o king Saudasa who was
always well disposed towards all his friends,
Uuiika solicited him for some Sign, lhat
foremost one of Ikshaku’s race then gave
bim a sign.

Sandasa 8aid.-~

2. Ihis my present coddition is intoler-
able Ido not see any lefuge. Knowing
this to be my wish, do you give away the
jewelled ear-tings.

3 Thus addressed by the king, Utanka
returned to (he queen and reported to her
the words of her husband He-nn;^ those
svords, the q leen gave to Hianka her
jewelled ear-rings.


asuwj^mediia parva.


4 Having got the ear-rings. Utanka o

relumed lo the king and said W l«‘n. ^

«isli 10 hear, O king, what the ^ ^ I,

of those mysterious words which yo

as a sign to your queen. ^

Saudasa said , •

5 Kshatriyas are seen to l!*® *

Brahmanas from the very beginning ol the

creauon. towards the
ever, many offences originate (on the part
cl Uie Kslialtiyas). |

i As (or miscK, 1 am always boK'"
humility before them. 1 am overtaken y
a cilamitv through a Brahmana. Foss -

sed ol MadayatiU, I do not see any other .

refuge.

7. Indeed. O foremost of all
liavnig a high goal, I do not see any e
leluge lor myself in the matter of
mg the celestial gates or in conUnumg he ,

0 best 0! twice born ones.

8 It IS impossible for » m

hostile to Brafimanas to continue I'ving "»
I'm world or in acquiring happiness l« me
next.

9 Hence have I 6 ‘’'e'’.y®'‘ ."X

my jewelled ear-rmgs which we^e ” .t‘
hyyou Di) you now keep the agreement
which you have made with me to-day.

Utanka said;— I

to. O king, I shall certainly carry out
ny promise I shall truly return and place
myself under your power, there is, «>
ever, a question, O scorcher ol enemies
which 1 wish to ask you.

Sauiaaa said

II. Say. O learned
III your mind. 1 shall certainly «P'y
your words I shall remove whalev
may be in your mind. J have no hesiiaiwn
in tins.


Utankasaid:— , ,

12 . Ihose who are ak.lled in the r«l« ^

duly, say that Brahmanas are of c .

speech. One who acls wrongly “J*""
friends is considered as vile as » t »

to you or not.

Eandikl laid “• ^

,5 11 ,t


„p„.or Brata.na., «
it,. U pi Va' you obouU navar aa.o.u

i S"lS-d'B,.ba.ana, you

I Will surely meet with death.

Kw\'”r.oa"Ia^y 2 r"'‘'''^^^

far the presence of Ahaiya.

Da.,rau, ol ^’(’ 0 ^:";

.blal.tba wi(a o( ' * •"“/auaiad wub

i“a.r.7.'a"l’l"r "OO'-'U*

°r'7«.aa.(o,.ba™--fC',f:S

5 ','. 7 l.b.p“" lord.'ol Im bLc'a.'loo-

. ‘‘rX7:‘;Vd";';:a:aiv»;r'

' disuoee, he coUred’K

, Mrwe^Jhto^f (r’psMtmts. He dim-
1 bed that tree. .

of enemies, to bang on becait to

most of twice-botii ones, then
pluck some fruit*. .

42 — 2V While he was engaged m pluck
« mj tliosi fruit, with eyes .«

" some of them ° h.J

■* deer-skm, jj,at foremost of

S™Vnl“'''wK ...a '..aoka. .( (ba l.ou.,

the knot became loosened.

S ,4 Suddanly 'b*> Ibl

S'”' t'^lia Ta."“d! . »bo «a. .ba.a

,IZ lbo>a jawtllad aar-imsa.

ol ”';f'AitT™'a.‘”i’''''”p''y”b'* to'oU up

i'di :-“TS'"sa7urta--S"
fvliiroVS

r. « -a?' ifw..., bU aun ba ba^.n

^B-abu. bu,...,

Si;.57b7ra7”m7airia7.b,";""‘ bay’

S'Jl. Ky io'u lla.a.ub, baaama I.a.ily

gest aoaie***'


72


MAHABAilftAtA.


too. He (lietl look his seat with sU tb6
Vhshnis silting around him.

21 . Having washed hii feel and re-
moved his faligue, Krishna of mighty
energy, as he sat thefe, then described the
Cheif events of the great battle in answer
to the questions put to him by his father.


CHAPTER LX.

(ANUGITA PARVAl—
Coiiliiitied.

Vasudiva said

t. O yoii of Vnshni'i race, f haoe
repeatedly heard men speaking of the
tvenderful battle.

2 You, however, O mighty-armed one,
have seen it with jour own eyes Do you,
therefore) O sinless onej describe the battle

In lull. V

j— 4 Indeed) tell me how that battle
took place between the great Pandavas
ami Pmshma and ICarna and Kripa and
Drona and Shalya and others, between,
in fact, numerous other Ktliairiyas well,
skilled in arms, difTering from one another
In conduct and dress and coming from
Various kingdoms,

Vaishampayafla said

S* Thus addressed by fni father, he
having eyes like lotus-petals, described, in
the presence of Ins mother also, how ihe
Kaurava heroes had been killed m battle.

Vaeudeva said

6, The feats were highly wrmderful
which were achieved by (hose great Ksha-
trryas. Un account of tlieir large number,
they are incapable of being described in
even hundreds of years.

J. \ shall, however, mention rmly the
foremost of them Do yoo listen, therefore,
10 me as I meniton in brief those feats won
by the kings* of Eirlli, O you of godbke
splendour.

8 nhishms of Kufu’s race became the
Commander-in chief, having eleven divi«
sions of the Kaurava priiKes under his
comiTtand, like Vasava ol the celestial
forces.

9 Highly intelligent Shiklrandm, pro-
tected by me blessed .\i)una, beesme (he
leader o( the Seven divisions of the sons of
PanJu

10 . T>>e battle between the Kurus and
tire randavas pent on for ten days. It


tVas so dreadful as td trlakd ode's hair sUfiii

elect.

if. Theri Slnfchandin, In great battle)
helped by the holder of Gsndiva, killed,
*«th innumerable arrows, the Son of Gangd)
fighting blavely.

12 . Lying on a bed of arrows, Bhishmd
sVaited hice a/i ascetic till the sun leaving
Ins southward path entered on Ins northerly
course whert (hat hero died.

13 Then Drona, that foremost of all
persons conversant with arms, that greatest
of men Under Duryodhana. like KavyS
lumseU of the lord of the Daityas, becainv
the Cornmander-in chief,

t 4 . That foremost of twice-born persons,
ever boasting of Ins prowess m battle, was
supported by the residue of the Kaurava-
army consisting then of nine AkshaithiniS)
and protected by Knpa and Vrisha arid
others,

*5 Dhrlshfadyuirfna famiriar with many
powerful weapons, and gifted with greet
intelligence, became the leader of (hd
Pandavas. He was protected by Qhima
like Varuna protected by Mitra.

t6 That great here, always desirods of
I comparing his itrengUi wiiK Drona, sup*

i iorted by tlie Pandava-army, and recot-
ecung the wrongs inflicted (by Drona) orT
I hh lather (Dnipada, the king of the Pan*
chalas) performed great feats iiT battle.

ly. In that battle between Drona and
the son of Prishata, the kings assembled
from various realms were_ nearly rooted
out.

itf. Tliat furious battle lasted for five
days. At the conclusion of that period)
Drona, exhausted, succumbed to DhrishU^
dyumnar

fy After that, Kama became the Com-
mander-in-chief of Dury^dliana's force*.
He was supported in battle by the residue
of the Kaurava-army wtiich numbered five
Akshauhims

30. Of the sons of Pandu, there were
(hen three Akshauhinis. After the desiruc'-
MOn of innumerabte tieroes, protected by
A'fuAa, they came to battle.

31. The Sola's aon Kama, ihoucli *
dreadful warrior, encountering Partha,
came to his end on the second day, like an
insect encountering a burning fire.

32 After the fall ol Kama, the Kaura-
vas became dtepinird and lost all rhergy.
Numbering itire* Akshauhmis, tlney gather*
cd round ttit king of the Madras


ASIlWAHEDilA PARVA.


13 It.vlnsloit many

.lapnanl, and horseman, the ret.dne ol t '
Pandava array, numbering one Alts .

and overtaken witli rtepression, aupporteo
by Yudliislnhira.

J4. The Kurvj kmg Vudhnlitlms^ m the
baule ihal took pUce. accomphihed
most difficult (eats and ki led. berore baH
tlie day was over, the tcu'g of the Madras.

IS After the fall of Shslya. ll»e creat
SaUdeva, of immeasurable prowess. W.IUd
Sliaku n the man who had brought about
tliequarrei.

j6 After the fall of si akum,

ton of Dlinlarashlra, whose army had sui-
feed an extensive carnage and who on that
eccouiil had become greatly diipiriied,
from tlie field, armed with hiS mace.

17 Ihen Blnmasena of great prowess,
filled with anger, pursued him
vered him wiOiin the waters of the Dwaipa
yana lake.

a 9 WiilUhe residue of their
Tandavas surrounded the lake *"r

with joy, met Durjodhana concealed witum

the water* *-


ag Their wordy "5

through the waien pierced Dutyodha i
Uumg up from the lake, the Utter ap-
proached the Pandavas, armed with 1“»
mace, desirous of battle

30. Tlieo, in the great battle that twk
place, the royal son of Dhritarashtra was |

killed by Dhimaseiia, displayed Jut great

prowess, m the presence of many king

31. After this the residue of

vaarmy - » ‘ wat

.'•s'-Su':

of his father (at the hands of DhnsMa
djumna)

31. 1 heir sons killed of

Oeir friends Willed, only
Pandii, are alive with myself and vuj
dhaiia.


33 'wnb Kv.pi. ."J V'' “'I*

Kfiuvarmait, the son of Urona r p
the unk.lled residue of the I^ai rava-army^
Dhriiarashtra-s son Yuyuwu aUo h‘» *»
caped sUugl ter on account of h» having
adapted the side of the Pandavas.


all es, Vidura and b»nj%y» ' •

Ih. p,.«nc. ol kins Vudbivbllnr. ill. 1».>-

3s Ti.,« d.a 11..1 '■“''l.'jJ'.CS'S
lord, for eighteen dajs M* ^ . j

Ksnh. killed ihetetn. have ascended W


73


VaishimpayARA continued :

36 . III. Vnslin.!,

ll.It dreadful account became 611=d Witb
gnc( and sorrow and pant.


^CHAPTER LXI.

(ANUGI TA PARVA.i—

CtnUnued.

VaishampayauA said —

. ♦ After the great Vasudeva of great

* 1 J fi, shed his narration of the

'“'"•'.“I .idf S the Bhar.U. b.Iore bm

great battle 7 ‘ . j^at hero had pass-

Terer'dredearucimn o'

eHIssss

sister) Subhadra, noticing that
the slalghter ol her
Honed, addressed her brother, saying,

‘7 v-i;

(R.E..n.nC hi.

s.y.nC.-0 OIU, ejed"".- „h.

on' Earth h'i”?, "“ r o enen."... d.

daughi..’".""' „|,„o,nInlloI.l..

- -

kdled m battle by enemies

e,„ce my heart does not from gnrf
K’ak I .To » hundred pieces,

**' r I e Vrilhni race, that .» does not

, m.n wh." A".. "»■


'“'.,‘3.,|,"I! o' ''“""A

■" ” Th... Irt 1... no h.." ‘‘"nA hy

«n*emK» retreating (torn batik w«h


16


riAllAClMRATA


Ihe jiijf, sifnrmnneil al! !ih brothers, vis •
Arjuna and Bltimasena and the twin sons
of Madr}, in propet lime and tVen said
to tliem — Ye lieroes, you have heard the
words winch the highly futelligent and
preat Krishna has said from hn friend*
,sh7p for and the desire of doing good to the
Kurus I Indeed, you liave heard those words
that liave been uttered by tiiat ascetic of
profuse penances, tiiat great sage desirous
of conferring prosperity on liis friends,
that preceptor of righteous conduct, vis,
Vyasa of wonderful featsi You have
heard what Biiislima also said, and what
Govinda loo of great intelligence has
uttered.

7. Remembering those words, ye sons
(I Pandu, I wish to obey lltetn dul) I Dy
obeying those words of theirs great bfessed*
ness will belong to all of jou,

8. *1 Iiose words spoken by those utters
ef Brahma are certain (if obeyed) to
produce considerable benefit. Ye per*
petuaters of Knru’s race, the Earth hat
become divested of her riches.

g— jy. Ye kings, V>asa. therefore,
Informed us of tlie wealifi of Maruiia. II
you tliink tiiat wealth abundant or sufllciept,
how shall we bring it f What, O Bliiina,
do you think about tins? Wlien the king,

0 perpetuater of Kuru’s race, said these
Vords, Blumastna, joioing Ins liands, said
lliese svords in reply,— the words you
have said, O you of mighty arms, on the
subject of biingiitg the riches indicaled
by Vyasa, are approved by met If, O
powetiul one, we succeed in getting the
iiches kept there by tlie son of Avikshita,
then this sacrifice, O ki ig. purposed by us
will be easily accomplished I Ihis is what

1 think. We shall, therefore, bowing our
heads to tlie great Ginsha, and ofTeriiig due
adoration to that deil), bring that wealth
Blessed be >oU Pleasing that god of gods
as also his companions and followers in
words, tliought, and deed, we shall, for-
sooth, obtain that wealtli Those Kionaras
of dreadful appearance who are protecting
that treasure will certainly yield to ns |f
the great deity having the bull for his sign
becomes pleased with us > Hearing these
words uttered by Bhima, O Blisrata, king
Vudlnshllnra the son of Dliarma, became
highly pleased Ihe others, headed by
Aijuna, at the same time, said, — So be it>

tS. The Pandavas then, having resolved
to bring that wealth, ordered their forces
to march under the constellation Dhruba
and OH the day called by the same name.

tg Making the Btahmanas utter bene
dictions on iliem, and having duly adored


the great god Rfahesliwara, ihe sons cf
Fandu started (on their enierprisr)

*0. Pleasing that great deity with
Modakas ond frumenty and with calces
iD'ide of meat, Ihe sons of Pandu started
with cheerful hearts.

31. While they thus started, the citizens,
and many foremost of Bralnninas, with
cheerful hearts, uttered auspicious blessings
(on tlieir heads),

22 fhe Pandavas, going round many
Bralimaiias who daily adored tlieir fires,
and bending their he^ds unto them, procee*
dedon their journey.

2; — 24 Taking the permission of king
Dhritarashtra who was stricken mill gnef
on account of the death of his sons, Ins
queen (Gandhait), and Pritlia also of large
eyes, and keeping ihe Kaiirava-pnnce
Yuyutsn the son of Dhritarasli ra, iiT the
capital, they started, adored by the ciiizens
and by many Draliinanans endued with
great wisdom.


CHAPIER LXIV.

(ANUGITA PARVA)-

Coutnitthi,

Vftishampayana said --

t. 1 1 ey tlien started with cheerful hearts,
and accompanied by men and annuals all
of whuin* and winch were eq lally cheer*
ful I>ey filled tlie ivl ole Ctfiih with the
loud clatter of their wheels.

2 Iheir praises sung by eulogists and
Sulas and Magadh IS and bards, and sup-
ported by their own army lliey appeared
like so many Suns adorned with iheir own
rays.

3 With the white umhrelU held over

Ills head king Yurllnsliihira slo'ewilh
beauty like the lord of the stars on the night
when lie is at full '

4 riial firemostof men the eldest son
of Pandu, accepted, with due forms 'the
blessings and clieers of his gladdened sub*
jects as he went on his ivay.

5 About llie soldiers wlio followed the
king, their confused murmurs seemed to fill
the entire sky.

6 That army crossed many lakes and
risers and forests and pleasure gardens,
they at last came upon the mountains

7 Arrived at that region where that
wealth was buried O kmg, Yudhisiitl ira
Ttsed h» camp with all his brothers and
troops.


ASllWAMEDIlA PARVA


77


p,„ o’d. 1 =I=l kmc

lectly level and auipc * ,uch

pilclied Ins campt P ?, j „,,ih penances
Bfahmsna, as as^U<» •*»

and learning and «> ,««.

prteslAgnivesUya.O >ou ® Vedas

wbo was well-conversant w j ^ j

and all tlie.r Sgs. and fl.e

sons ol Pandu. and ll>e o',""' '‘V, m
Bralimanas and pries .^fo^fned same
sacrificial riles ^ tliemseivcs

. pcopiiialory ceremomes, p nUeed the

111 11,;. ip«.. ,1,.

king and Ins mmisiers m U’* pached
Brahmanas caused llie «^P ‘ ^ divisions,

by laving out six roads and rme oi
King^udhislulnra ^\]e

campment to be ^ ” -companied Ins

addressed ibe you

loremosl of *^^**1’"’“"**’ of ibe matter

and consteUalion be *^**‘*J® .’hjads as we
long inae P«* f"*/, *''* Ye foremost ol
wait In suspense bete * ihis re*

learned D'el”®*'’**' «(t«f tins'

lolulion, do »1,»1 okool? k' t"' ,f, ' u i,.

iiioi.r: 11.0,0 «oid.«i >'‘''‘,V'e;'^i.„,,o

manas wil'i ll'ose amongst t -,i,»ious
..11 .k.llod ,0 ll.O P,"

Mtei, became filled wuli ® -,,.,^,10 to

tS"'?od”f„fu,':.?o'to' ,011.

k i>C, live upon water alone. J
fast also lo-dsv. ,

,6. llooriog .ho,o«o,d. ol
most Brnliinana*, tlie rO)al s®’ *11 food,

passed that ni,»l>i, abstaining Kusba-

and Uing confidently on
grass, like burning fues m a sac •

17. And llie nicbt *‘“* .*?)*^ fe'ain^

"d *of dZ\Z" {«img

follows).


d,d.oo.od .l,"« ° ’‘"'C’

then try to gam our object.

5 Heating these words of those Brali-
manas Yudtust tliira caused of!-nngs to be
a^w Ldeio that deny who loved to lie

downonmountam-breasts.

o Pleasing the (sacrificial) fire with

d°l'loo™'.£'‘

ISokodO.oro will, 11,0 Maolr.! ..id

performed the necessary rites.

4. iio look up w.?i;

lifted them with Mantras, O g- ,
itl^ak.s and frumenty and meat, he made

offerings to the deity.

< With various kinds of 1 ^’**^®. .

formed the remaining rites


A He next presented nffermgs

'So. "'“3

(o.m.d „ Kov.r. 11.0

tag Tliro WSlo, ond ,.M.o,bl,.d,.
“'T s To ll.O oll.o' V.V.I.oo

Fd'"”‘ ?o"Tt,,f,“roo“d?r.nVn'iir,:f


.A He then directed the presen-
9 “*® ' P.nil to duenies,cf 1 flerings

„ o.4'r..lo.ug kfog.l.l.. I.VO

to those "'8*'*/* > ll^r^ed, as U were.

Muladeva) Sme k
will, tbe scent of DNup i
tt.e {'*85“’’^*®} O king became


CHAPTFR I-XV.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
CriifiKiirJ.


the fragtanceo «uw«t . y became

to the •I'J'y *5 , ii^/ing peiformed the

lugl.lk ■‘‘''f'lS.Lod of.ll "" Go...'.

adoration ol Ituora a , ,j toward*


adoration ol *„ .Uad, went toward*

.1.0 tae- p';;;;;' ,„..o.o ««

tlie pl-*<« .1,0 Lord of nclie*. and

Once more ,-,oecl and saluting

bo*'«K '®, 0 various kinds of fluweM

Inn 7 K„,|,ara. having adored

and cakes and^ ,nkiu a-nl


and cakes and iw> il ,nklu a-.d

ilurt* foremost olg* ^,,0 the

N.dH and those k-** . j


The Brahmanas said t—

1. Ut ogermgs be L' ®dtt»y

Mihadcva of line* eyes. lUrms o“r


& and those

lords of 8'"'®' fl^n.s and caused ti.rm
loremosi of Uf«' m ip„1,

to uiitr • ,1„„«d by the «i»»fRy

creal power. *l'r''B . of those

5nd ll-e *“’P^’®ed that spot lobe e*cav4.
Orabmanas, «*“'* veMcI* of various

ted. n.en "“r . ni rmgaras. Kauh.r,

.nd ‘ 5 ''' 6 ';‘‘“’„'r,;r,n.k.*. and mnumef-
KaUsas. beauldul forms, were

.bl. VoJ'...l.lliii. ll.. !"'■


74


maiiabahrata.


lin l)»ct5 towarjj tliein ? I Oi

Guviida, lli3t lin face did not become I
(.heerless nliile 7 j

13 lie O of

(.’real energy. Prom a •pint of clu)di}lmef«,
that powerful hero, tioaslutg (of I >s ptowrs^)
M niy presence, used (d speak o( ins skill
III) biiile).

13 I Imp* llial boy dees imj fie on the
fit-ld, killed ilrcnlfiiUy by Drono and
Kama and fvtips and otliers 7 Do you
lell me Ibis,

14. 'Ibat son of my datigliter alnays
tised to cliallenge Rbisbma and that fire*
most of ali poweiful warriors, SIX . ICaiiia,
in battle,

15 — H's lalker ulio. from exce«a of
ertef. bewailed tbus, Govinds, more afliic
ted than be, answered in lliese words,— llis
face did not become cheerless as lie Iniitht
in the van of battle^. Dreadfirl Ihongli th^t
battle was, lie did not turn bis back upon
II,

17. Mating killed Inindreds and thou*
sands of kings of Esriti, lie was distressed
by Drona and Kama and at last was
killed by the son of Dosfiassrta, ^

l3 IF, O lord, be bad been eneonrttered,
one to one, wnboiil intermission, lie was
irtespable of being killed in battle by even
tiie holder of the thunder boh.

ig When his father Aijuna was with*
drawn from tlie msiii bod) by the Samsap
takas Abhimanyu was surrounded b) the
enraged Kaurava heroes lieaded by Drona
in battle.

20 Then, O father, after he bad killed
n very large number of eneinirs m bailie,
yojr dauuhlri’s son at last succumbed to
the son of Uushasana.

21 Forsooth, he has gone to the celesnsl
region I Kill tins grirl of ihine, O ynii of
great intelligence ^ llieywlioare of pnii*
fled iinderstaiidings in-v'r Langutsb when
they meet with aii) cslam ly.

23 Me by whom Drona and Kama and
Others were ckecUed in battle — tirrocs who
were equal to Ii'dra lilinself in power— why
would nut lie ascend to ilie celestial region,

33 O irresistiW* one^. do yow kill this
grief of tl me * Donut all nv yourself 10 be
S rayed by anger. I hat conqueror of
.soitile Cities has attained to that saiicrified

•nd winch depends upon dearli at tl>e edge

sf weapons

34 Af'er the fall nf that hero- this my

ll•ler Siib'isOra stricken with grief, be
vaiUd aloud, when sli« saw Kaiiti, like a
cmale as ptey. ' ,


25. When she met Draiipsdi, she asVed
het in grief,— O reverend lady, where are
all our sons 7 l.wish to see thein.

26 IlearfMg her lamentations, all the
iCaurava*la<tiFs embraced her and wept
sitting around tier.

27. Se-Mig (her dmgiilfr-m-Uw) Uitsra,
she Slid,— O blessed girl, where has jouf
hnsbsnil gone 7 When lie reiiimi, da JOU
wittiout losing a moment apprise me of it.


23 Alls, O diu,:hler of Virsta, as soon
he heard my voice, he used to come out of
firt^cTutniher wnhoiit the loss of a momenf.
Why 3 o(.s not your husband come out to*
day.

29 AUi, O Abliimany u, yoiir miternsl
uncles — powerful car* warriors— are all
liale, 1 tiey used to bless you wtien they
saw you come l>src prepaied to go oat for
battle.

30 Do you lefl me the incident* ^
battle tO'day as befire, O chastiser ot
enemies. On, why do you not answer nw
to*day— me who am weeptng so biUerly » «

31—33. lietrmg these ramentatlon* of
ibis ddughlrr ol i)ie Vrishi)i*rsce. riitli8»
deeply stricken wnh ciref, addressm her
and slowly said,— O bubhadra, inougn
protected by Vasudeva and baiyaki and
liy Ills own father, your youthful *0'' ■’»
yet been killed, lhat slaughter is due »
the l■■fl<lence of 1 line


33 O dauL liter of Yadu'a race, "lorial -

your son was Do not grieve. Inesist'ble
in battle, your son has, fursoulh, altamed to
the highest end.

34 Yuii are born in a high family cj
great Ksbatrryas Do not grieve, Oyouol

restless qt^uces, O girl of ey es like lotus*
peials t


35 Do you cast your eyes on Ultara,

wl o IS q lick wiili cliild. O bfesse'l fan) »
do not give way to grief, this aospici*
ous girl wilt soon bring forth a son to iha*
tiero ' ^

36~39 Having comforted her, tlmSi
Kui tl, tcnowing every' duty. O p-rpetuaier,

of Yad.i's race. c^slllIg off her grief. O
iiresisttble one, made arrangements for
Abhimanyu’s (ibsequral rites, with the per-
missi n ol king Yudliislillitra and Bhima,
and the twins (v«« , N-ikuU and Sahadeva)
who III prowess resembled Yama liimself.
She also made many presents to the Brah* ^
inknas, and l>e*lowed upon them many kli>e»
O perpeliialer of Yadu’s race tlieii the
Vtishni-dame (Ktinii), comfortsd a Irttle,
addressed llie daugliter of Virata, saying,-—
O faultless daiigliler of Virata, you shoiilik

^ not grieve ' For tlie sake of your liusband#


ASlIWAMEOhA PASVA.


t Urn «iui.n ut» 1 O famoin lady, s s®''
3 yo.n( round Inp., proUct tho duU m w.lUgrcat enorp^w.jl b«

vuur wonib. ithroUi2b tbe power ol V>i Ju* t7,,it. aCi'O


yuur wviiiu.

40. Having saMtbass words, O you «»
Efeatsplrndaiir, Kunii ceas**d. With her
p-ernnssion I have bronglii Siihhadra here.
41 U was ihus, O giver of honours.

ihAl your da.ighler’s son was UiUed O-st
.n your burning gnef. O irtesisuble oue!
Indeed, do nut set your heart on sorrow.


gifted with great energy- w>u oe uoi.. j
! the Pjii J avas.

sed one, «*» become a great pri

l,u

the verge uf the sea.

I herefore O foremost one f


CHAPTER LXll.


•S


S, Iberefore Oioremosiv


ib,.>

truly lake place. . t, . ib,»

1 “

As beards AbS.manyu,h= has gone

't .-...•niK of the celestials, coiiq lere

hv'hnn with his own deeds, ^''at hera
should be grieved for by >ou or, indeed, y

SroierKurns. ^ ^

,S llius addressed by hi« * ‘„1

Dhanan|4>a ol ngcame cheerfuli

neplieiv that hero whn was ever the oa«i"'i; 1 jounced his gnef and eve

6l Ins father iVasudeva). . Year father. O prince, who are 0

3 He duly fed si* millmns of I versant with all ‘^“'‘*1*’ -feat' intelhgence,

has, gifted wnli great energy, w«h edibles I womb O ynu 5*. f.a jiu, '
possessed of every recoimneiidacion. «. I (|,e Moon, in the ligtiieQ ®


{ANUGITA PARVA )—
CoHitiiueii.

VaishampayMia said:— ^

Having lieard tliese words <sf his son, I
udeva, that descendant of Shnra, 01
ngiiieoiis soul, renonnciiig grief, made ex-
cdlentobs-qual offenngi (w Abhimanyu).


4 “S Presenting many clothes to 1 *0 men vyas- u.r-- ‘V/., '.saenfiuB.

K(i-.hita saiisfied the ilnrst lor ’vealiU of p celebrating the S invisible

those Hralnnanas Wonderful were the |,e made himself mvisiu

heaps of gold, the niunber of kme and ©I 1 , . and lh«n« ,, , .

b.J. .nd cUI„, Ib.t .... tb.n 6'.''" . 11 .. lOl

sway. Hie Bralimanas lotnlly declared,— I 3 t
hrt (Krishna's wealili) increase
6. Uien Vasudeva of Dasharha's race,
and Valadeva, and Salyaki, and SatyaUa.
each performed the obsequial rttes of


lid nun.

11,. «'■?

1 • > i.^ariiiir the words of Vyasa, s

1',;: ’.'Sj " i.. 1— y

wealth.


AWnr.

7 Greatly stricken with grief, they coni I
niiil nocomfort. * >-• «<>■”> uia« the case


wilh Ui.

I'apore.

8—9 Deprived
CniilJ {,(( peace
«l Virata, U kii


ioiis of Pandu in the City ol Hasu* |


of


Virata, tj king, for many day*, totally
■hsiauied from atl food, greatly afll cied by
or..< account of lli ' ' ‘ '


gnef

band At this all her .......v... -

P’lnged into excess of grief, li.ey
»'• afraid iliat the embryo in her
^'ght be destroyed


•-—It. men Vy;
state of thiiige by
wrriveil there lhe‘-
Ri'leJ w^l


Ri led wfii, great energy, arrived (at the
pt'ace). addressed Priilia of large eyes,
also Uiiara herself - — i ii...


CllAPlER l.Xllf.

(ANUGl TA PARVA )—

I CoiiliuueJ.

Janamejaya eaid *

, 4..,. .«iaiiv I H, V, I, , lieard these words, O twice

hor’n one! lhal *’1' V’“

v%. . 1 . 0.1 lb. Mor..-b.onlio.. »b., ...p,

’"'''tirro'tr.;o..»lo..bon.

the Earth !

VaiahampayanaBaid:—

fi HavioC beard the words of the
- 6 _ H-ving YuilhoMlnra


'dead! of her hus
datives, becante

womb


nscertaming ^ihe
.... spKiCuil vision,
ighfy intelligent Kishi,


asCellCr


73


mahabuarata.


Tlie neaUli t1ni5 dup oul was pi iced «n larpe
* as Karapui* (uooden cl ests united wiili
iitlier by ch-niis or cords, and (.arricd
bj bullocks or camels) lor proieciion.

17> A portion of tlie weallli was caused
to be carried upon tlie sbouldcrs of nirn
II Stout balances of wood wtili baskets
'-lung like «cales at both ends Indeed, O
ki«^, ibere were oiler inetliods of con*

\ ryance there for carry ing away that wealth
oi ti e son of Pandu,

l3. Iliere were sixty thousands of camels,
and a bundled and twenty thousand horses,
and of elephants, O king, there were one
I imdred thousand

19. Of cars t1 ere were as many, and
of carts too as many, and of she etphauts
as many. Mules and men were of unlimited
number.

30 Tfat wealth which Yudhislilhira
caused to he dug out was even so ninel
Sixteen thousand coins were placed on the
hark of each camel ; eight Ihnusand on each
car, and tweiit>'fuur thousand on each
elephant.

3t>-:], Having loaded these vehicles
^ witit iliat wealth and once more adonni;

* the great deity Shiva, the sou of Pandu
started for tie city of fiasiiuapur, wiili
the permisstm 0! the Island born RisUi,
and placing his pnost Dhanmya m tiie van
*fhai foremast o( men, ore , the royal son
ol Pandu, made short inarches of four
miles every dayT

33 1 hat powerful army. O king ofliicted

with the weight Ihet bore, reiurneJ car*

• rynig that wealth, towards the capital,
phasing ihe heaits of all those perpeiuaters
of I' e ivwtu- ace.


CHAPICR LXVf.

(ANUGIFA PAIIVA )—
Cv/Avr.v.rA.

Vaisllanlp^ynn^ said:—

I Meanwlule, the higl ly energetic Vasu*
deva. accouipau ed by tlie Viishiiis, came
to the cic) of nastiiiapore.

3 While leaving iliat cily for retnrn-
lug to h>s ou u Uaaiaka, he had been reques*
ted by the son ol Dhanna to come beck,
llrice, ki owing, il at tie time fixed lor
the llurse.S-'Crince had c» rne, Il at foremost
of men relumed to Ifastiuapore.

3—4. Accompaiued by the «on Rnkmini,
by Viiyiidhana, by Ciiaiudesluia, by
Si'bmva by Gada, by Krttaiaiman, by the


hfrorc Sarana, by Nishalha and by On*
miiklia, Vaviideva Came, with Valadeva at
the head of Ihe train, and with htibhadra
also accompanying lu’n.

5 Indeed, that hero came for seeing
Dirtiipadi, Uttara and Pnilia and for com*
foning those renowned Kshalriya-ladies
who had been bereft of many of their
protectors.

6 Seeing those heroes come, king
Dnrilarashira, as also the great ViJura,
received them with due honou's.

7. that foremost of men, vis, Ivrishna
of great energy, worshipped by Vidura and
Yuyulsu, cuiitinued to live in the Kuru
capital. ‘

3. It was while the Vrishni heroes O
J .namejaya, were living in the Kuril city,
O kini*. that your father, tliat destroyer of
liosufe heroes, w>as born,

9 ihe royal Paiilcshit, O monarch,
afflicted by the flrahnva*weapon of Ashwal*
llMinan), upon coninig out of (he womb,
lay still and moiiuiiless for he had no life*
By ills birth he liad pleased the ciiirens but
soon plunged iliem into grief.

to. Ihe chittws, learning of the birth
of the prince, iiuerei) a leonine shout, lhat
noise proceeded to the utmost limit of every
'puiitol (he compass, boon, however, ihaC
noise ceased.

tl. Krishna, Ins senses and mind con-
sider bly hfTected, with Vuyudhana in
his company, enieied speedily the inner
apifiincnts of ihe palace

17 lie saw Ills own paternal aunt
(Kunii) coming, loudly weeping and cal-
l«>g wpon Iwin repeatedly.

13 Behind her were Draiipadi and the
famous buhliadra, and the wives of (he
relatives of the Pandavas, all weeping
piteously.

H Meeting Krishna, Kunli, that
d-tut. filer ol the Bliojv race, said to him ■"
a voice choked willi tears,. O foremost of
monarchs.

15 O V'asudeva, O mighty-armed hero
Oevaki by having borne you, lias come to
be considered ns an excellent geueUiX
Yuii are our refuge and oui ghiiy' I his
race (of Pandii; depends upon you lor
Its ptoiector.

16 O Yadava hero, O powetfiil one
Uhs child of your sister's Son, has com,
out of llie wiiinh. killed by Asfiwaltliaiiiane.
U Keshava, do you revive liun I

17. O dehghter of the Yadavas, tlTn was
sowed by you, O powerfnt one. when
Asiissatthamaii bad intpired tlic blade of


ASllV.'AMEDIlA PAR\A.


79


into a Btal ma.Tieapon prM* en»r«
PI ! IndFed, O K«sliava, joif wor'‘> were
lliese —1 sliall revive ilut child li lie comes
cm of ihe womb dead 1
i8— ig I hat chiM, O son has been
lorn dead I ijer i im. O foremost o( men
Yon siimild, O Madiiava, rescue Uiiara
and Subhadra and Oratipadi and m)seif.
and Dharma's son ( Yndlushthira h and
Htiima and Pliatguna, and Naltula and the
mesMUble Sahadeva

20— 2J In this child are fettered the
h/e-breaihs of He Pandav^s and myself*
O jou of (lie Datharha*rac«, on him de-
pends the obsequial cake of Pandu*«s also
of 10) father-iii'law, and of Abimn^nyu
lac, blessed be )oii that favoinite nepu»w
of yours »<ho was so very like you* Oa
you do to-day what will be beneficial
to aV tiVwet t trrgv yurtf tfrfrtresrfy, O
Janarddana.

9 ? Uttara, O destroyer of enemies,
a)iva)s repeats the words said to her by
Abliimanyu Forsoothi O Kiishna, those
hrords were iiiKbiy sgreeabfeto her.

*3 O JOU of the Oasharha-race.
Arjuna’a sen said to this daughter of
Virata,— Vour son, O blessed gul^ will go
to iTiy maternal uncles, .

>4 liking up his quarters whh the
Vrishnis and Andliakas, lie «ilf obfam from
them the science of arms, indeed, various
"wnderfuf weapons and the wticlc of U»e
science of polities and morality. i
25 These were the words, O son, that
that destroyer of hostilr heroes, , Ihe
'On nf Subhadra, that irresistible hero, said
to Uitara from Ins love for her.

:6 O destroyer of Madhu, bowi<i|r
our heads to you, we pray )ow for makmjj
H'ose words of Abliimanyu true? In view
also of (lie time that has come, do jou
accomplish wliai is liighfy beneflciah

37 - Havinp said thtse words to that
fern vf the Vushni's race, Piiiha of Urge
ryes, raised her arms upwards and wuh
'he other tadirs in her company, diopped
down on the Earth, ’

28 All of them, wiih ejes rendered
muddy by tears, repeatedly eaplamed, say*
Alas, the sox oi Vasudee^'s nephew
has been born dead.

2p After fvumi had said so, Jaoarddana
took hold of iier, O Biiarata, and yenlly
raising her from the Earth, comforted her
as foltows.


CHAPTER LXVH,

{ ANUGIIA PAllVA.)—

Vaisltampayaua said —

t~* After Kiiuli iMd s-it up, Subhadra,
seeing her brother, began lo weep aloud,
and stricken with excessive grief, said,— -U
y HI heviiig eyes hke lotus petals, look at
the grandson of Aryuna of g>eat iiiielli*
gencel Alas, the Kuril • race having been
ibiniied, A child lias been b rn that is feeble
aiid^Joid,

I 3 llie blade of grass, , uplifted by
I Droiia's «on for bringing nboiit the desuuc-
lion n( Uhunaseiia, felt upon Uitara and
Vijayaand myseli.

4 Alas tlut bUde, O Keshava, i§ *»ifl
existing rveted^ in me, alter havw,;
pierced my heart, since 1 do nor, O irresis*
libte hero, see this child with my son.

5 What will the righteous-sotiled kini;
Yudhisiitliira tlie j ist say? What will
b'lima^oa and Aijiiua, and the two sotik
of Madravati also say 7

6 fjearin^ that Abhunsnyu’s son was
horn a,td dead, the PandavHS, O you of
Vrishiii's race, will consider themselves as
imposed upon by Ashw^utiaman,

7- Abhimanyu, O Kiishna, was forsooth,
the million of all the Pandava-broilier*.
Hearing this intelligence, what will those
heroes, defeated by the weapon of Drona’s
son, .say T

S What grief, O J in^rdJanit, can be
greater (I, xn this, m* , that Abbimaiiyu's
son should be born and dead 7

9 Uowing to you with my head, O
Unskti^ 1 seek t-> please you to-day ' See
U foremost of men, these two standing
here, vie , Pntha and Draupadi

to— tt. When, O Madhava, the son of
£7rona trierf to destroy theembrios even
■n the Wombs of Ihe ladies of the P.<ndavas,
j»t that nine O guilder of enemies, you said
»n anger to Drona’s son (even these words).
— D wsticJ, of a Urahinana, O vifest of men,

I shati d<«appnirit your wish’ 1 shall re*
vtve Che son of Kii Kin's son.

*3' Jiearing these words of yours and
welI-ki«owii>>' your power, 1 seek lo ^raufy
you, O irresistible feroj Let the son of
Ablumanyu be revived.

•3 If luving pledged yourself previously
you do not nccoinphsh your auspicious vow
do ym* tfirn know for ceitain, O chief of
ilte Vt,shm race, that 1 shall pul an end
to my fife.


Bo


MAHABHARATA.


14 ir, 0 lierd, tins son of Abttimanju
does not revive when }cu, O irresistible one.
are ahve and near, of ssbat other use vk\U
jou be to me ?

<5 Do } oil, therefore O irresistible one
revive tits sou of Abl nnan^u —tins child
who has eyes similar to lits— even as a
rain charged cloud revives the lifeless crops
fon a field)

16 You, Q Keshava, are righteous-
souled truthful and of prowess incapable
of being bafIleJ You should, O chastuer
of enemies make )Our words truthful

17 If only )0u wish it, you can revive
the three worlds (of beii g) if dead I What
need I s>i) , therefore, of tins dartmg child,
Lorn but dead, of your sister's son 7

15 1 know your power, O ICrisI na {
I ) eiefore d I I solicit y ou ' Do you show
this great favour to the sons of Pandu

ig You stiould, O mighty armed one,
si ow mercy to this Uitara, or to me.
ll inking that 1 am your sister or even a
mother who has lost her son. and one who
iias thrown herself upon your protection.

CHAPTER LXVm.
tANUGHA PARVA.)—

CenltHUtJt

Vaishampayana said

t. llius addressed, O king, the des*
troyer of Ueshin greatly possessed by sor>
row answered, ~So be it I— these words
were uttered with sufficient loudness and
they pleased all tlie inmates of the inner
-spartmenls of the palace

3 riie powerful Krishna, that foremost
of men, by uttering these words pleased
all the people assembled there, like one
pouring cold water on s person afilicied
with sweat. .

3— S He tl*en quickly entered the lymg-
in room in which your fatlier was born
It was duty sanctified, O king, with many
garlaiids'of white flowers , with many wetl«
filled water-pots arranged on every side,
wuh char-coal, soaked in clarified butter ol
linduka wood, and mustard seeds, O you
o! mighty arms, with shining weapons
properly arranged and several fires on
every side And it was filled with many
agreeable and aged dames summoned for
walling.

6—7 It was also surrounded by many
well skilled and clever physicians. O you
c( intelligtiicef Gifted with great


energy', he also beheld there all artfefeS
that are destructive of Rakshasas, duly
placed by persons knowing the subject.
Seeing the fyi )g room in which your
fattier was born thus eq I'pt, Hrishikesha
became very glad and said, — Excellent,
Escelieni I’

8—9 When he of Vrishni’s race said
so and presented such a cheerful look,
Draupadi, going there q iickly, addressed
the daughter of Virata, saying, — O blessed
lady, here comes to you your father-in-
l-tw, tlie destroyer of Madhu, that ancient
Rishi of inconceivable soul, that unvan-
quished one

10 Virata’s daughter, checking her tears
said these words in a voice chocked with
grief Covering herself properly, the pinecss
naited for Krishna like the celestials re-
verentully waning for him

tt. The helpless Udy with heart agitated
by sorrow, seeing Govinda coming, be-
wailed, saying,—

13 O lotus eyed one, see us t»o
deprived of our child ' O Janarddana,
both Abhimanyu and myself have been
equally killed.

*3 O you of Vrishm's race, O des-
troyer of Aladhu, I seek to please you by
bending my head, O hero, to you ! Do you
revive this child of mine wlio has been
consumed by the weapon of Drone’s son.

14—15 If king Yudlushlhira the juit,
or Bhimaseiia, or yourself, U lotus eyed
one, had, on that occasion, said,— Let (he
blade of grass destroy the unconscious
mother,— O powerful one, then I would
have been destroyed and this would not
have taken place.

16 Alas, what benefit has been reaped
by Orona's son by doing tl is cruel deed,
vit , the destruction of the child in (he
womb by his Brahma weapon.

17. That self same mother new seeks
to please you O slayer of enemies, by
bending her head * burely. O Govinda.

I shall kill myself if this child does not
revive.

tS In him, O righteous one, I placed
many {expectations I Alas, when these have
been frustrated by Drona's son, what
necessity have t. O Keshava, to carry on
the burden of life?

tg I hoped O Krishna, that with my
child on my lap, O JanardJana I would
salute you with respect 1 Alas, U Keshava,
that hope has been destroyed.

20 O foremost cf all bemgsr at the
death of this heir of Ahhimanju of resl-
iesi eyes, all my hepes lave been destroyed.


ASHWAMKDHA parva


St


.f Madl.,,, 7’ "St, ' . ltd by

you B hold ihis child of his t

the Bralima-weapon. ,, .

„ Th„ ch.1.1 « very *;*“

tery heartless, hire his faOier.

regarrims; the prospeiiiy Yama’s

the Pandavas, he has gooe


!3 1 hid. belor. .1... v<>«'d,

Hut if Ahhi'naoyn f«-|' ^ .

battle. O hero, I would fohow I
mediately.


aiely.

Z 4 I did not. however, keep my vo ^
truel that 1 -"‘I d^l I Pha»Eu‘'

to him no*, wlial, indeed, wilt rnaB

ion say 7


5 O "b« id"'

d,.»dl.l p..=»" “
cast mvself on the burning hre .

::

'cU;;8fy'%b;'J:..« -d -

ocean of sorrow. p

■’• ‘,'r 'Spb.> ’’p’""'"

cUala. and the belples P exceedingly
I fav a hunter. . ,

o,.b„d,


uxix.

(ANUGITA PARVA.)—

' Continued.

VaisHAmpayana said'""

t Ihe helpless R“*[*'y,n/\hus be-
^ettiny back her ctnld. *'* .„rtotUeea«lh
wailed, dropped down in sorrow ont
like a demented creature.


^Unces.


.?tur.Sir.n .bo» Sli',' -Te

i J,ef. caused her to sit up.


used ner lo »-b “i"
king •'’* j I ./ iiands m respect and

-.1. -lb I’".?"?-.!::

Rsehava having e


d creature.

3 . Seeing the princess {,"*

arth deprived of !>«•' •®'’ . the

)Ody uncnvered. IU'H‘ *5 .}„ afil'Cted.

olhu) D'larata-lsdies, deeply
began to weep aloud.


,ix:;;tK»b.,TiU'r..»b'<=ip‘“'

' petals


3. 4;. ;b. -V-'"6

laiion, the palace of the house of

king, was soon converted t>«
m'ow wl.... nobody conid ..io»i».

4 Gr.ody ""ob™ -‘b Kdbur.’o

.IS,' d T bo ...0=1. do~n lor .o™'

„.,’;by.o„o« onbcboorlo.-.....- ,

every du.y Are yon j., „oi

ol Ibo V...bn.-


■ lb »”r",rs'roS' 7 """;

"^”1^0 ond »ilbil"“ ib'C”"”'

" Brahma weapon.


* '* » That hero o( undffcaying gW,

,,.-18 That Hero o Dasharhas.

belonging W fi"7child fhen he «>*

p,„,nr«d ,0 S,,„ (ho hoo.ioe

Loosoul, ...d .bo'o " , U u„.y,, l.nooor

Si 11.0 f ' ""V'' My "O'b. ’’""il

""“*1 ;,'.u“ ov.vo b'» ".Id b.fo.0.11
uue I

creatures.


19 f'.T'N"".'

hood even " J , /gy the merit of those

s5.,'!r.bS:rM.‘o..to


of ih
saint .
race I


7—8 O son, going to
these words of 'U'”®' ihcir
for living creatures to di ^

:'„“;d;or.r.‘h.t' r ';.bioy.».p.o.-

oi« and everything valuable.


„„uo,. do.r to n.0, .•
manyu s son, wl'O


Novoo h.. fV,',ond"vSy-


" fd h."'-*b.xV‘'dord%h.rd'V,

SlCt'l o


MAHABIIARATA.


S2


23 As Kansa and Keslu liave been
rigliteously killed by me, Icl tins child
revive to day by that truth.

24 After ll ese words were uttered by
Vasudeva, that child, O foremost one of
Bharata s family, became animate and
began gradual!) to move, O knig.


CHAPIER LXX


(ANUGITA PARVA)—
C«/tlututd,


Vaisliampayana said

I. When the Brahma weapon was with,
drawn by Krishna at that time, ttie lynig-
Ill-room was lighted up by your father with
Ins etierg).


a AH the Rakshasas were forced to
leate the room and many of them were
billed In the skt a voice was heard, say-
ing,— Cacellent, O KesI ava, Excellent.


3 T lie burning Brahnsa weapon ilien
returned to the Grandfall er Your failiet
get back I Is, O king

4 He child began to move aecordme
*9 n’eipy end pewer IheBharata-
ladies became alt filled wnh joy.


S At the command of Govmda, the
Ural manas were made to utter benedic
linns All the ladies filled with joy, landed
Janarddana.


6 Indeed the wives of those Bltarala*
heroes eij , Kunti and Drupada’s daiigl ter
and Subhadra and Utlara, ai d the wives of
other leading men, like (ship wrccked>
persons who have reached the shore after
liaving got a boat became greatly pleased
6—8 Then wrestlers and actors and
astrologers and Itiose who ei quire after tl e
sleep (of princes), and bonds of bards and
ciilogisis nil uttered the praises of Jrnafd-
dana while ultermg benedictions filled will*
the praWes n| the Kurus, O chief of the
Bharatas.


9 Utisra, rising up at the proper lime,
with a pleased heart a id bearing lief ctnl I
inler arms reverentially saluted tho d«*
lighter of the Yadus

to— S 4 Hejneing greatly, Krishna
made gifts to lUe child of msny vaiitsbie
gems l»ie oti er chicls ol the Vrishni race,
did tlie same llien the poweifiil Janard*
dans, fiimly following truth, bestowed a
name 0,1 il,e hilsi t who was joiir father, O
foanaicli — Si> ca il I* child nf Abhimanyn
lias been born at a tune when this family


has becorne nearlj extinct, let his name be
Parilfsbit ' Hus is what lie said Iherr
your father, O king, began to grow and
please all the people, O Bl arata When
your father was a month old, O hero, the
Pandavas retirrned to their capital, bring-
ing with them abundant riches Hearing
that tlie Pandavas were near, those fore-
most ones of the Vrisliiii race went out

15, 1 he citisens decked the city of Has-
tinapiir with many garlands of flowers,
with beautiful pennons and standards of
various kinds.

16 1 be citizens also, O king, adorned

their respective palaces Desirous of doing
what was beneficial to the sons of Paiidir,
Vidura ordered various kinds of adoration
to be oiTered to the celestials estabhsi ed tn
Ibeir respective temples Flie principal
streets of the aty wvre adorned with
flowers.

tS — 2t, Indeed, the ctly was filled with
llie noise of thousands ol voices which resem-
bled (he softened roar of distant ocean waves
With dancers all engaged in their business,
and with the voice of singers, llie (Kuru)
City then resembled the palace of Vaishta-
vans himself Bards and eulogists, O king,
accompanied by beautiful woinen, were
seen to adirn various retired spots m the
city 1 he pennons were made by (he wind
to float gaily on every pail of llie city, es
bent upon sJiowing the Kurus tl>e southern
and the northern points of the compass.
All the ollvcers also of the government
loudly procUiroed that that was to be a day
ol re|oicing for Hie whole km.dom as a
mark of the success ol llie enterprise fo#
bringing a profuiioit of gems and other
valuables.


CHAPTER LXXI.

( ANHGITA PARVA )—
CenhitufJ

VRisliampayana said •—

1. Hearing that the Pamfavas were near,
(hat destroyer of enemies vis, Yasodeva,
accompanied by Ins ministers, went out (or
seeing them

a Hie Pandavas then, uniting with dio
Viuhnis according M tlieususal loriaihiles,
together entered, O king, the city of H utt”
napitr,

3 Withll e voices and the clatter otesrs
of (hat pewerful host, (ht Eirili an^ the sky.
and (tw firmtine it itself, bect-nr, as it Mjra,
entirely fi-UJ


ASHWAMEOIIA PAR^rA.


^ Willi rrJoJdnE hearts, the Pandavai,
Btcompanied by their officers and friends,
eiMered the capdai, placing that treasure in
Oi'ir van.

5 Going, according to Ctwlom, to king
Uiiriiarashua first, il>ey adored h»s feet,
•nnouncing their respective names

6 Those foremost ones of Bharata's
r»ce, 0 chief ofkntvs theti paid their res*
peciful sahitaiions to Gandluri, the daughter
of Suvala, and to Kiinti

7 They next adored <their unc(e) Vidura
and Yujuisu, ill* son of Ohritaraslitra by
fiis Vaishya wife. 1 hose heroes were then
adored by others and they slione forth m
beauty, O king,

8 After this, O Bharata, those heroes
■sard the news of that hii;htv wonderful
«nd marvellous and gladsome hirih of «our '
talher.

9 Hearing of (hat feat of tf*« highly ^
mtcKigeni Vasiideva, t(iey ad adored ;
isnthna, the dehghterof Oevaki, who was i
every way worthy of adoration.

>0 Ihen, after a few days, Vyasa, the I
V"** of Satyevati, gifted wall great energy,]
**th8 (0 tlie city of H asunapur. i

tl. Ihe perpeiiialers of Knro's race]
"dored the great Wnhi according to the |
bsual custom indeed, those heroes, with ,
If ose f trernosf princes of (Jie Viishmi and
lh« Afldhska*races worafnpped the sag*.

**■“13 After haying conversed on
vaiinus topics, Oliarama’^ son yudhishtlnra
• ddtessed Vyasa and said,— Dos treasure.
O holy <Hie. which has been brougl i
throng), jonr favour, | desire to devote to
that great Horse Sacrifice.

*4 O best of ascetics, 1 wish to have
jcur permission We are all, O Rishi, at I
>our disposal, and at llial of U>e great |
Isiishna.

tS I (!>ve you permission, O king. Da
trhat should be don^ after this Ua you
•dare the denies duty by performing Hie
lio<se>Sseiilicr wsili profuse gifts.

th The l!orse*'»»eririce, O kmg. s* •
rurifier of ail sins Forsnoih, haying adored
t'o dritirs by I'lat sacrifiee }OU *>11 ••rrl/
he purged o( all fins.

VAliharapayAna laJfi —

17 llius addirssrd, thf Kura King
Vudnntitiifra of eietitanus snuf, O inorsarch,
I'egen 10 make !>•« rrrcesiary ptrparauan* ,
for the norse>SacriSec.

Haring rrprrsen’ed all lhi* Is ^
til* Jsiand born Knilnj. |)>< ki-ir rUted


sj

unth great eloquence, approached Vasudeva
and said,— >0 foremost oi alt beings, the
goddess Oevaki has, (hfOu,;h you come to
be constdered as the most fortunate of
Rtotiiers O >0U of undecaying glory, dr
you perform what f sliatf now tetf you, O
tnigtiiy*arined one

30 O delighter of the Kurus, the various
enjoyments weenjiy, have all been acq nred
through ynur power. Tliewhofe Eartn has
been sub] tgaied by you witfilhe help of
your prowess and intelligence.

tf. Do ) on, therefore, cause yourseiito
unde^o the rites of iiitKaCion. Vou are our
highest preceptor and master, if you per*
form the sacrifice, O you of the Dasfiarlia*
race. 1 shall be puriRed from every sm.

2<. Vou are Sacr»ii>.el Vuu are th'*
Indestructible ! Vou are this All* Vnn
are Virtue* Vou are Prajapatif You are
ttie goal of aU creatures f This is my
certain conclusion.

Vftsndeva said *—

23 O miilify*arm<d on*, what you ixv
IS worthy of you O chastiser of enemies!
You are the goal of ah creatures. 1 Ins is
my certain conclusion.

24 Of the heroes of the Kuru.race,
you shine lo>day in great glary (or yorr
virtue! they f>ave sit b*en east into ih"
shade. O king, by yni»! Vou are our
king, and you are our senior.

»5 Will) my approvalTreely granted,
do you wonhip ihe criesliils in |l>e sscrifice
snggesied Do you. U Bharata, appoi it
us 10 wiialever talk you like rrid/, dr
{ pledge myseff that f shs]! aceomp! sh alt,
O sinfess one, (hat you raayst bid me ec*
comptuh.

a6 Dhimasrns and Arjuns and the les
sorts of Mrdravaii will bs sscrir. ng when
you. O kmg, sacrifice;.


CHAPrPR LYXII.

(A.»fUCirA PARVA >-
Confiitutd.

VAiihatapayani lald : ~

t, Tl ur adjr^rred by Kruhn* Ye*
d>fs*<thtra, the iseof Dltsrrrtr, K led ■■■ih
great int'flierncr. siltftci Vyar* ani laii
these words —

a Do you caa<« rn« to b« in tiatrd «h<n
lie prrprr I oar, as y*ti iiufy Vnse, cam*
fpe ih*i fii* Till my cr'.irtt/

drrcndi on ) ou


MAHADa){RaTA.


Vyasa said

3 Mjself, O son of Kunti, and PaiU
and Yojiiavalk) a, sliall, undoubtedly,
achieve every nte at the proper time.

4 T he nte of miii-itin^ jou will be 'per*
formed on the day of ftill moon belonging
to the mniitli of Chaiira, l.et alt the
ncces<anes of the sacrifice, *0 foremost of
ritn, be got ready.

5 Let Sutaswell versed in the science of
horses and let Bralimanas also possessed of
the same learning, select, after exainiitaiion,
a worthy horse in order that your sacrifice
may be completed.

6. Loosening the animal according to
the injunctions of the scriptures. let hio»
namfer over the whole Earth with her belt
of seas, showing jour effutgeiil glory, O
hing.

Vaisliampayam aaid
y. 1 hus addressed (by the Risit), Yii-
dhiduhira, the rojal son of Pandii. answer* |
ed,— ‘..0 be it ''—and t'>en, O moi arch, he I
accomplished all that tliat utterer of Brahma
had said.

8. All the articles necessary for the sa*
cnfice, O king, were duly piocured.

g The royal son of Dhanna, gifted with
immeasurable soul, having pioc ired all the
iiifurineJ tlie Island born

Krnlina of it.

10 1 1 en the highls energetic Vjasa said
to the roy^l aoti of Dliarnia,— ‘As regards
siirselves, we are all prepared to iniiiate
joii in Mew of the sacrifice.

tl. L*t the Sph) a and the Kurcha and
all the oilier articles that, O you of Kuan’s
race, maj be necessary for your sacrifice, be
made of gold.

12 let the horse also be loosened lO'daj,
for wandering on the Earili, according m
llie ordinances of tie sciiptnres Let |)>e
an-mal. duly protected, wander over the
I anil.'


Tndbisbthira said *—

13 Let arrangements he made by >r>ii,

O twice-l < III cr* aboiil lomenmg this I Orse
{'’^^''’*^’‘"11 *1 '« wander over the Lartli at


» 14. Yon should. O a'cet'c say who will
p elect U.s-horse wlnl.* roaming over the
rartli Irtely according la u* mlf.

Vaisbninpayana continned •—

. lima addressed (by litfiff

%nrlltslih,r»). (> kmg. the Island hern
Knsi «a sa<d .-fte «|,o Instn after Hhima-
• »»'». who Ik i! e foremost of all bowmen s»h«


IS cilted Jishnti, who is qtfteJ wiih great
patience nnd capalile of overcoming all re*
sistancr,— he will protect tlie horse lliat
destrojer of the Nivatakavachas can con-
quer the wliole Earth.

>7. In him are all celestial weapons,
His body 1$ like that of a celestial in iis
powers of endurance. His bow and q livers
are celestial. He will follow this lioise.

18 He is well-\erscd in bith Religion
and Profit, He is a master of all the scien*
ces O foremost of kings he svill, according
to the scriptures, cause the horse to rosm
and graze at its will,

tg Hus mighty-armed prince, of dark
color, IS endued with ejes resemb'ing lotus-
petals I hat hero, the father of Abhi*
maiiyu, will protect tlie horse.

20. Bliimasena also is gifted with grea^
energy that son of Kunti i» possessed o'
•niniea«urable power. He is cr>iopetent to
protect the kingdom, helped by Nakuta, O
monarch.

• C' Gifted with great inlelligence and
fame, Sahadeva will, O )<>u of Kuril’s race,
duly attend to all tlie reUttves wlio have
been invited 10 jiiur capital.

22. Thus addreseed by lha Rulil, that
p ipetiMtor of Kutu's race, via, Yudl I'h*
thira, peiformeil ever) tnjunetioii duly
and appointed Plialguna to ailend to the
liofse.


Tudhishthira said


hero.

ckV


Come. O Aijuna, let the horse, O
, be protected by joti You alone
competent to pruiecl it, and none


24. Those Icings O mighty. arn»»d hero
who will come lurvrard loencuunier jou, uy
O sinless one, to av< id bullies with them to
(he best of j our power.

2J Yon should also invite them all to
this sacrifice ul iniiie. Indeed, U niiit'ii)*
armed one, go forth hut iry to establish
irii-ndly relations with them.


ValsliampayAna said:—

26 Hating said so U his brother
SHVjnsachin, the righteoiis-souled kmg
Vuritiishihira commanded Oliuna and Ns*
kula to protect the city.

27. Wilh the permission o' king Dhiils*
raslilrs. Vndtiishiliirs llirn set hahadeva.
(hat forrm >st r>f warriors, to wait uprm all
lire iMViied guesis. •


ASnWAMEDHA PARVA.


85


CHAPTER LXXlll.

(ANUGUA PARVA)—

Coiiliitued,


Vaialiampayana said

I. Wien die l.oiir for initialion came,

all tl>ose great R.tw.]« duly inmated U.e
king for Itie Horse-Sacrince.

! H.vine ih' ’‘pUJXf

, Ulns Yl,dl„.Mh.r. ll.= l"St, gd...! ..«■
gtejt splendour .long ""ih
Uilwijas. .

3 ri.o horse ih.t "OS b"n>K'"
Hise.S.or.fiee u.s let loose
Ills miiinctions ot the .(

uuerer of Bralima, vtii>, Vyasa
great energy. . ^

4. I her. king C’.l •


with Ins excellent low. . , .

„ li.ese were tie words wlucli tlie u -

£'’''Uvn:gf- L« bS;. be

Gn^M/en'dreturn, OBh.ro..'

t”dop .’ee''Afi”un^:‘ H.e bo., bo.ever,
,r' lift '< 'be eelebr.ie,! bo. G.ndiva

iiowUerc ,

'»£•■; Td'e,--

7e”rV.,£.ibv».j;ex’.7.'l'orp^^^^^^^

all sacnficM* ' Proceeded will Parlla


4. Ihen king Yudl>is>dlit'’a ^ all sacnficid ^ ‘‘‘J wnH Panla

kiiig, after Ins iiulialion j.w *"**‘*'' ?* ' ’* '^ f„,oicion8 tiles m favour

garUnd of gold atouad his reck, sl.one Uke »*»“■ ^

a burning fire. i* 1 **'* ,1*!'^'^ Vedas well, »nd many

sod «e..,ns . 0 In ol red


fieial altar.


I .'"' ■ «■ .....f i.e lured over -

of men wl'crev I'aiidavas

** ...V .<reat and wnndeitul battles


lo follow iliai liofse of tbe *v

Hack deer, at tie command of Yorimsi.
Itiira. ,

8. nepeaterlly dr-iw,ng
Gandiva. O kmg. and casing ‘"s ' q

',;rorS;^;re";;e“r“.:S..».‘..or;e.O|

kmg, with a cl eerlul heart. 1

.. - n kinc. wrt” *' * I

9. All Hastmapnr. O «'>

xety children, came * iiial foremost
drsie ol sro.nB ni.sn.n,.>>.
ol Ills Kurus, on the... ol b'S 1

,0 So grool ... il. er"”A^;„ .Jj .he

ol iho prossoto ol bodies. I”""'"’*
was created.

Loud ... "be ™'","Sr“ee.Te

that crowd of men who a Uu"*'.

•» pe-» " ■“

vompeiss and the entire s y.


and many

T.'e.e'l""»lTje;e'.i'»e.oy«o

^1 irawellcd oxer til

..'.orned .o."'.!. 'h'

>3 n''-b"5 „'.",:o.s''e"f..nd‘.ed "LI

l','"»..'''“'"-.d llo«., byjlie ere." e.'-

warsror Anuns ot white I'or

„ O monsreli. .n.ny f,"'*,

Wings. '•'lO lor l.»vi»g

ir"."'Cr"",n.™en on .he held ol Luru-
kshetra.

Many ICJralas also, O kmc. an

'i”*' -11 ,,c»llenl bowmen, anti various

SSrorKu^nhshe.^ end nr-jy^A^

r: Jirg"." •" 'r';""'"

ril Sirn... |•.odu.''b...le.

r« ... tnolt oUce mnumerable balllet


86


MAIIABHARATA


At]iin;* and the icings of various realms
who came lo encounter him.

2$ I shall, O sinless Icing, describe to
jou ihnse battles only which rageil with
great fury and which were the principal
ones among all he fought.


CHAP TER LXXIV.

( ANUGIFA PARVA.)—
CoiitiKKCcf.

Vaishampayana said:—

t. A batile tooh place betweert the
diadem>decked (Arjuna) and the sons and
grandsons of the I rigartaa whose hostihiy
the Pandavas ha<l incurred before and all
of whom were weh*hnown as powerful car*
warriors

a Having learnt that that foremost of
horses which was intended for the sacrifice,
had come to tfieir Itinitdom, lliose I eroes,
Accoutering tfiernselves ui coats mail, sur^
rounded Arjuna.

a Mounted on tfieir cars, drawn by
excellent and well decked sieeds and with
quivers on ttieir backs, t>>ey surrounded
that horse, U king, and tried , to capture
it.

4 Thinking of that attempt of theirs,
tlie diaJem decked Arjuna, forbade those
heroes, with conCilHtory words, O chastiser
bf enemies.

5 Disregarding Arj ina’s message, the)
atiackei him with their arrows ll.e
diadem decked Arj ina resisted (hose war-
riois who were under the control of daikiiess
and passion.

6 Jishnii, addressed ifiem smilingly
and said ‘ Desist, )e uniiglileous ones'
I tfe IS a blessing.'

y. At the time of his starting, he had
been earnestly ordered by king Yudhish*
thira the just not lo kill liiise iCtliatri)as
whose kinsmen had been killed before on the
field of Kurukshetra.

8 Remembering tfiese behests of king
Yndhishilnra the |iist who was gifted willi
great inletligence, Ar|iina asked the In*
gaitas to foibear. But Uiey disregarded
Arjiina’s injunction

9 Then Aijona defeaied Sur) avarman,
the king of the Ingaitas, in baiite, by
shooting countless arrows at him and
laughed in scorn.

10 Tfie Tiigarla warriors, liowetrcr*
fnlit’g the ten points wuh the sound «'


iheir cars and cartwheels, rushed towards
Dhananja) a.

It llieit Suryavarman, showing great
lightness of hand, pierced Dhaoanj-i)a with
liiiiidreds of straight arrows, O king I

12. file other great bowmen, who follow*
ed the king and who were all desirous of
brtngiiig about the destruction of Dlianan*
]aya, siiot showers of arrows on him

13. With numberless arrows shot front
Ins own bowstring, the son of Pandu, O
king, cut oR those clouds, of arrows upon
wtiicii they fell down

14 Gifted with great energy, Ketuvar*
man. the younger brother of Suryavarman,
and gifted with youthful vigour, loiigfit, for
the sake of his brother, against Pandu’s
son endued with great fame

15 Seeing ICeliivarman approaching
i towards him for battle, Vibhatsu, that det*
j troyer of hostile heroes, killed him with

I many sharp.pomted arrows.

16. Upon ICctuvarmana's fall, the power*
fill car*warnor Dhriinvarmen, rushing on
Ins car I. wards Aijuna, showered a per*
feet downpour of arrows on hnn.

17 Seeing ihal lightness of hand showtt
byihe)Oiilh Dhrtiaverman. Gudakesha of
great energy and great;, prowess becamS
iiigtl) pleased with him.

18 I lie son of Indra could^'net see
when the young warrior took out his arrows
and wlien lie placed them on his bowsirtng
aiming at him. lie only saw showers 01
airons m the air.

19 For a brief space of time, Arj’una
pleased his enemy and mentally admired
ins heroism and skill.

30 *I I e Kuru hero, smiling the while,
fought with tliat ynuih who took after an
angry snake. 1 1 e mighty armed Dhanaii*
j-aja glad as lie was m seeing the caurai;e
of Ohritavarman, did not take his hfe.

31 . While, honeser, Parlha of im*
measurable energy fought mildly with him
without wishing lojkill him, Dliritavarmait
shot a Liirning arrow arhnn.

33 Deeply pierced in the hand b) that
arruw, Vij.ja became slnprlled and hit
bow Gandiva dropped .down on the Lsrttl
from t IS relaxed grasp.

33 Tic form of that bow. O king,
when It fell from llie I lasp of Arjuna, t«*
tembled, O Bliarata, lhai of tl.a bow of
lud'a

34. When Ihst preal and crles^ral bow
dropped down, O king, .Ol riiavairnatt
la rgixd loudl) i>i battle.


AShWAMEDHa parva


87


45 UlU, Jislimj, vvsrhfrA up witli
ti>ge wiped t)»e blood from bn band and
once more taking up Itis bow, sbniverod a
'Sfatfrrpcrura/ acrowy
^ '>ei> a loud and eonlnsed noise
arose fi'ling ibe sUy and louchmi lh» very
lieavens. as u were, from various creatures
who spoke tiieidy of (bat feat of Dbanaii*
J«ya.


*7"~28 Seeing Jisiinu i>if)iraed willi
wiaib and hokine bke Varna bimself as be
appears as.ttie end of the cycje. tbc 1 crgarta
warriors hasdiy surrounded lum rushing
bom tlieirt posts and desirous of rescuing
Utiniavarman. Seeing bimself surrounded
“y bis enemies, Ariuna became moic angry

Inanbelore-


’9 He then quickly despatched eigliteen
01 tlieir foremost warriors wuh many arrows
, which resemifecf ihe aero**

el the gteailndra liimsell.

3®* Jhe Irigarta warriors then began
5»eetnn them retreat, Dhananjays,
quickly st,o^ many shalts at them whicli
reieiiibled angry snakes of dieadful poison,
‘"'lUugbedlloud.


,j 31 ' The powerful car*warrrors of the
‘,r'§**'f*s, with dispirited hearts, fled in
#11 dirrciions, greatly afflicted by Dtianan*
J‘y» will Ins arrows.

. 3 * They then addressed 1 hat foremost
tnen, that destroyer of the bawsapiaUa
•’’my. saving,— ' We are your slaves! Wo
S'eldtoyou®’ ’

. 33 t 3 o you command us, O PariUat
W' b-arf htre »s the mon doc>)« 0/ yoat
servants t_Q de),g)ncr of the Kurus, we
lau execute all your commands '


34* Hearing these words expressive of
^lieir submission, Dhan»iij-iya said them,—
LJo ye, o kings, save sour lives, to and
r«pi ihy dominion.’


CHAPrEK LXXV.


(ANUGlfA PAUVA.l—

Coniinutdt

Vaisbatap-jyana said j—

’• That foremost of horses then pro*
ro the kingrfom at
III 10 wander lliere At this.

‘‘"»Rad|iita*s son wlio was greatly courage*

cus in b„He, eaii.e out.

Xing Vairadal^, O chief of llie


»”g It)


(saerihcial) horse

bit kingdom, fought (for


3 The royal son of Bhagadalta, coming
out of bis cit), afflicted the borse wincii
was coining (and seiciii)' It), marched back
iavicds fiiv owrr pi’ace

4 Marking this Che mighty arm'd
chief of the Kuru race, speedily sireidied

bis Goidiva, and suddenly rusiied toivards
his enemy,

5 Stupefied by the arrows shot fiom
Gaiidiva, the heroic son of Bliagadalta,
felling loose l)>e liorse, fled from PartJia

6 Once more entering Ins capital, tliat
foremost of kings, irresistible in baiile,
cased himself m mail, and mounting kis
prince of elephants, came out,

7. I hat powerful car-warrior had a
white (imbreda field over Ins fiead, and
was fanned with a milk*wliite yak tally

8 Moved by ehtiJithnesf and io)]y, )re
Chafleoged Parch*, the powerful car «v«rfi ir
of the Pandavas famed for dreadful deeds
III battle, lo an encouiuer wttfi him,

9 Ibe enraged prince then urged lo>
wards Ar/uiia tfiAt efepbaiic t>l his wficb
resembled e veritable mou'iCain. and from
whose temples and mouth came out ftreaitts
of juice showing excitement.

to Indeed, that elepliant showered its
secrelions bke a great mass of clouds pour*
mg ram Capable of resisting bostilQ ia»tf
of Its own speties, tc had been rqupp^
according to the ordinances of the treatise*
(on war,eleph>>ni>) Irresistible in battle,
u had become 10 infuriete as to be beyond
control,

tf Urged on by (fie prince with (he
Uon*liook, that piiwerful elephant then
Seemed as if it would cut through the sky
(like a flying hill),

la Seeing it advance towards Inm,
king, Dhaiiaii)sya, filfed with anger and
standing on the eaith, O Dharaia, met the
prince on its back.

13 Filled with anger, Vajradatta quick*
ly sited at Arjnna a number of brqad*
headed arrows gifted with tfie energy of
Tire and resembling (as they cotirsed
throueb the air) a cloud of speedily*
moving locusts,

14 Arj ina, houever, with arrows sped
from G«ndiva, cut off tlios' arrows, Some
(nio two, Hnd some into three, pieces ({q
^ t (hem oft m the sky iiseti with those
arrows of his passing liirougti ilie sky.

15 The son of Bhagadatta, seeing (,,,
broad-headed arrows liius cut off quickiy
Sped at Atjuna a number of other arrows in
a conlinuous lu/e.


S8


MAIlAUflARATA.


t6 Filled Aiih anger at tliis, Arjuna
more quickly than before, shot at Dhaga-
datta's son a niimher of straightly coursing
arrows equipped nitU golden wings.

17 Vajradatta of powerful energy,
struck with great force and pierced with
those arrows in that fierce encoiinier, fell
d)wn on the Eaith. Cuiisc luusiiess, how*
ever, did not leave him.

tS M Hinting 011 his prince of elephants
again in the midst nf iliai bsitle, the son of
U'lagadatta, desirous of victory, very coolly
shut a number of arrows at Arjuni.

19, Filled with anger, Jishim then shot
at Itie prince a number of arrows winch
looked like huming flames of fire and
w Inch appeared to be so many snakes of
(] readfni pjison.

30 . Pierced therewith, the powerful ele*
phant. emiitinj; a Urge quanlity of Llood,
looked like a mountain of many springs
discharging rillets of water coloured with
red chalk.


CHAPTER LXXVI.

(ANUOITA PARVA)—
CcnItiititJ.

Vaisliampayana s’md

I. riius went on that battle, O chief of
the Dharatas. for three da)S between
Ar]iina and that prince tike the eneounter
between him of a hundred aacrilicee and
Vnira.

3—3 On the fourth day. Vajradatta
of great power laughed loudly and ad*
dressing At jnua, said these words * Wait,
wait, O Arjuna I You Shalt not escape
me alive I Killing you ( shall duly disciiarge
the water-riieof my father.

4. My a<(d father Dhagadatta. wlio
was the liiend nf yonr father, w,S kill'd by
3 ou o<i account ol Ins weight nf years Do
you, liowevcr. figtit me who am but a boy.

5 Ktvi'igsaid ihese wsrdt, O you ef
Kuril's race, king Vajradaiia, Tilted with
anger, urged lus clep'iaiit towards the acn
of I’andu.

6 Urged on by the highly
Vajiadjtta, that ftince of rIepKants, as if
l•tslsr<^ ts r>i cutting |l rough the sky, rushed
toward* t) lanarjaya,

7. llrft best of e'ephan't drenched
A'Juna with a s'>owee ef emitiad (rem
Ik* end of h»s trunk, has a wars of tin*
clouds d»*»*e*>,ng a h.JI with its doww-pswe,

ft }n,)r*d, urged «n by |l>e Vitrg. (ho
(lephaM, rtpeiisdiy reating Ikta cloud.


rttshed towards Fhalguna, sending forth
deep noise from its mouth.

9 Indeed, urged on by Vajmdalta that
prince of elepliants quickly moved towards

'ihe'liowerful car-ivarnur of the Kurus, with
the tread of one that seemed to dance in
excitement.

10 Seeing that beast of Vajradatta ad*
sance towards him, that destroyer e(
enemies, ei* , the powerful I)lianaii}«ya,
retying on Gandiva, stood his ground with*
out shaking with fear.

tt. Recollecting sshat an obstacle Vajra*
daita was proving to the performance of
I Ins task, and remembering the old enmiiy
of the house, the son of Pandu became
greatly excited with rage against the king.

13 . Worked up with rage, DhananJijt
impeded the course of that beast with a
shower of arrows like (lie shore resisting the
surging sea.

13 Tliat best of elephants and beaiilifut
In appearance, thus impeded by ArJ'in*.
Slopped in ns course, with body pierced with
many an arrow, like a porcupine with iis
quills erect.

14. Seeing his elephant Impeded In IH
course, the royal sod Bhagadaiia. deprived
of sense by anger, shot many whetted
arrows at Aijuna.

IS- The mighty •armed Atjuna baffleJ
all those arrows with many foe.deslroytnff
arrows of Ills. Hie feat appeared to b«
exceedingly wondeiful,

16 Once more the king of (lie Pragjyo*
lishas, worked up with rage, forcibly urged
his e'ephant, which resembled a mounuin,
at AiJuna.

17. 5 eelrrg the heasl once more advan-
cing towards him. Arjuna shot wilh g'***

sircngii, an arrow at It which resembled a

veritable flame of fire.

15. Cm to the quick, O kmg. by the
son cl Pandu, the beast suddrotv diopprp
down on the Barth like a muuniam«summit
loosened by a thunder-boll.

19 SiriKk with Dlananjaya's arrow,
|he elephani. as it lay on |he Perth. l*cteJ
I ke a hnce mownum <1 ff lyrng <*n tl>*
ground, loorened by the licit el India.

to. When the elephant ef Ve{r»d*ll*
eras pewstrairrl en t».e ground, the »<sw *1
Pawdu witjressrng the king wrS® had lal|«*S
dawn with his brart, sskI,— 'O a net fear.

>1. Indeed. Yu Jh it thira cf great energy
sSmI ta me •* I'e eemml»si#nlng «n« fee tl is
task even Ifiese words. Vew* shws .4

« 9 t. O nVansnj.*.. kffl these kJrrgs (wb#
may glee yew bstiU).


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


%


O forunf^t of wm, >nij »Uo«ld eon-
Snlet jMir ia>k a* accfimpli>iied il only^oii
tJiwlile iiio«e hostile kmesl You shmild
Ool also, O Dhaiiaiijaya, kit) the wkrfiors
those kio^s who tnty come fortli to
f 5 <}it )oit.

J 3 they showhl be requested to come,
«uh all their kinsmen and friends, to the

iiorse>Sacriflce vf

7 t (favine Iieard these commands of
my blether, I shall not kill you, O k'nR ^
Rue up; let no fear be yoiits; icturn to
your ciiy safe and sound, O king,

25 When the day ef fidl moon In the
moiiili of Cfiaitra comes, you shall O
Kreat king, go lo that saCfiRce of king
Yndlinlitlnra the just, for « takes pl^ce 1

liial day t

26 Time addressed by Arjiins, the
toy.'l son of Qhagadatta, defeated by the
*«» of Pandu,“said,“' So he »t.’


CUAPTBR LXXVfl.-

(ANUGITA PARVA.H-

Confinerd.

VaUhAtapayana said:—

I, Ihere took place a great ballJebe-
t»ee/i the diadettt decked Aijuna and (he
hundreds of Saifidhavxs who ttiU lived
• Her the destruction of tfieir clan.

3 Hearing lliat he of white hnrs»s find
entered their territories, those Kshaliiyas
taiTie out against him, unable to bear that
foieinost one of Pandti’s race.

J. 1 liose waiTinrs who were as terrible
as dreadfut p asan finding the horse within
their dmuinuin, seired 11 without being
filled with any fear of Parllia who was the
younger broUier of fifnmasena.

4 Advaivcnvg ayainsi Vibliatsit wfio

svstied cm fool, armed whilh Ins Imw, up lO

the saciiRcMl Imrse, Ihey attacked him from
a near point

5 Defeated in baltfe befor-, those
ICsiiatiiyas of great enrrg), moved by the
desire of victory, surrounded (tiat foremost

6. Procla immg ilieir names anci families
end their various feels, Oiey slioweced tUetr
arrows on Pariha.

7. rcmring showers of arrows of such
fierce .eiier;;y as were capable of obslruc-
I'l'g ilie course of hosi'le elephants, flwie
I eroes surrounded the son of Kinili, detV'
ous of defeaiing him in baiife.

la


8 Themselves sealed on cars, tkej;
fought Aijuna of dreadful feats who was
o» foot.

g. From every side they began tn strike
that hero, (hat destroyer of C(ie Niva(a«
fcavachas that destroyer of the Samssptakas,
that destroyer of tlie king of the Smdlms.

to Surrt’unding him on a)i sides a«
sritfcin a cage by means of a tfiousartd cars
and ten thousand liorse, (hose brave war*
nois expressed their py.

II — 12. Recollecting the destruction bv
Dlianaiijaya of Jayadratha in battle, l>
yi>a of Kuru's race, they poured heavy
showers of arrows on that hero like a mass
<if clouds slioweriKg a heavy downpour.
Overwhelmed with that arrowy shower,
Atyina looked (ike ifie suit covered by a
cloud.

13. That foremoit son of Pando, in
the midst of that cloud of arrows, te~
sembfed a bird <11 the midst of an iron cage,
O Qharata.

14, Seeing the sen of Kiinti thus affliCtecI
I with arrows, cries of o<i and alas wera
I itiiered by the tliree worlds, and the Suit
' himself became thorn of his splendour.

15 t hen. O king, a terrible wind began
lo blow, and R,«hii swallowed up baiti tlit)
Sun and the ^ioon simultaneously.

16 Many meteors struck the solar disc
and (hen shot in different directions. Jhe
prince ef mounUins, era, Keilasa, began
ttf tremble,

17. The «even {celestial) Rishis, as aNn
ll>e Ollier Rivlns of Heaven, stricken with
fear, and afflicted with giief and sorrow,
breathed hoi sighs.

18. Prercmg tlirfltigh the sky. those
meteors fell o« the (iiiiar disc as well Aff
the points of (he c>«inpass became filled with
smoke and assumed a strange aspect.

19 Reddish clouds, with fl4shes of

lightning playing m their midst and the
bow of In ha measuring them from side tu
side, suddenly cuvered ilie sky and poured
flesh and bloods on die Barth.

*<» Such was the arpect which all nutiire
assumed when that htra was overwhelmed
svilli showers of arrows Indeed, when
P((.<lg«na, (list forernnsc one among tl e
(|liar.<<as, was thus eflfiUed, (liose marvsis
were witnessed.

at Overwl rimed by that dense cloud
ot rtiinws, Aipma breatne stiipelird His
bow, Gai'divM, tell down Irnm ins relaxed
gtip and his iealheiii fence alrodropped
down.

a* When Dliarianjaya heetme slupe-
fied, ibc Saindhava waiMora once more


HrAIUBtiARATA.


sliot lorUmith at tliat sensetast warrior,
nDmbarleii other arrows,

23 Ui'darstaiiding that fTi» sen of
Frittra was iiisensibler the cetesttals. with
T earts suicUcn V'uh leaf, began to seeTc Im
tveli bein;* by iHtCitng varioiit henediclioiis
Then the celes'iat Rislus/ the seven
Fisliis and the twice born Kistns, became
engaged in silent recitations liOm desire 1
®1 giving vicloiy to Uie h Jthly inteUigtni '
ion oljrniha'i.

35 When at last theeneipyof Paitlia
tilszed forth tlirough those deeds oi the
(Inellers of the ceUstu) region, that hero,
who was conversant with ce\esU-il weapons
of gieal efffcact, stood immovabte lihe a
lit],

3dr The dehghter of the liurtn then
drew his celesiul bow And ai lie repea*
tedl) stretched the bowstring, the twang
that followed resembled the loud sound of
•erne strong maclnne

3? Like Piirandara pauring ram, the
powerful Ac]una then, with that bow of his^
poured incessant showers ol arrows on hts
enemies.

38 Pierced by those arrow*,- the Saind*
lava narnais null their e nefs became
mvisibU like trees coveied witn beusts.

39 1 error stricken at the very sound
(>[ Oandiia and filled with consternation
Hiey (led awa). In grief of heart Cliey st>ed
tears and cued aloud.

30 llie powerful warrior moved amidst
that host ol enemies with the celerity ot a
fisrj wheel, all ilie lime piercing those
tiaiiiors with Ills aaows

3t Tike the great Indra, tire holder nf
the lhunder*boll, (hat desirojer of enemies.
si«, Arj'ina, stioC from I is bow ui every
Uiri.ction that shower of airows which
teseinbi d a sigU produced by magic

33 Ihe Kaurava hero, piercing the
hostile army wiili showers of arrows looked
lesplendent like the autumnal Sun when he
disperses (he clouds with Ins powerful rays


CHAPrCR LWVTII.
(ANUGITN parva.j—
CoiiliiiutJ,

VAlsbaiapayana «aid

I. ] !■« l•tesls(l,l• b'Idrr of Gandivs.
r'« it for beitU sio-xi I nniovalle on the
( -I'd hVe linaaval Inmstlf,


I 3 TliS Sailtdhava warriofs, once itioff
ralfying, showered in great rage (epCated
dowii'pours of arrows on him'

3 'file mighty armed hero, Uughtng
at till enemies^ who had once more lahied
but who were on the puint of deaths
addressed them in these soft words *—

4 Do >e fi'ght lo the best of )our power
and do ye try to defeat me. Do yc, how*
ever, accomplish all necessary deeds, lor K
great danger awaits }0<t all.

S- See, r fight all of you, bafffmg yout
clouds of arrows' Bunt as you are oif
battle, wait a little. 1 shall soon quell your
pride.

6. Tlie holder of Gandiva, having said
these words it anger, recollected, however/
the words, O Bliarata, of his eldest brotlier.

7—8 lliose words were —You should
not, O child, kill those Kshalriyas who
will come against you for battle] *1 1 ey
should, i owever, be defeated by you!
Iliac foremost 0! men Phalgnna, had beeif
thus addressed by king Yiidliishthira the
yist. ol great sml He, tlieielore, begacT
to reflect thus. I lius was I cotnmittioned'
by my brother. Warriors advancing
against me should not be killed.

9 f must act in such a way as not to
falsify the words ei king Vudhisiithira lh«
)ust.

Fo Having arrived at this concluiion,
Plialguna, that foremost of men. then saidl
10 (hose Samdhav-is who were all dreadfuh
iri baule, these words.

rr. r say what is for jour benefit.
Iliougli staying before me, 1 do not wisir
(u kill you. He amongst you who will say
10 ine that he has been defeated by tne and
tliat I e IS mine, will be spared by me.

13 H'avingheard'these words of mine/
act towards me in that way winch may best
secure your well being. By acting in •
different way you will place yourselves in t'
situation ol great fear and danger.

13 Having said these words to (hoir
heroic warriors, the cmef of the Kurus
began lo fi<hl Uiem. Arj ina was worked
np witli rage His enemies, desirous of
victory, were eq ully enraged.

14 The Saiiidiiivas (hen, O king, ahot
hundredrand thoiriaiids of Straiglit ariowt
at (he wieMer of Grndiva.

15. Dtiananjaya, w«lh his own wiielled
arrow*, cui ofl iliosa arrows of sharp and
lertible paints, resembling sn«k«s a( sJrerd*
fui poison, before tliey CvuIJ cams up to*
Itinii


ASttWAMCDllA TAItVA.


t5 lt.vin?cul lliote “7“**

beJfcVed Willi KiinUa-fe»ll>eri. *

pierced esch o( ll-c wiffiof J opposed W Inn*
with a wlielied arrow.

Ih. a

l«ling llial 11 wai n'lanai'l.y* I! „ud *l
1i l,d il„„ line J.,.. India. 111.11 liii'>"1 *•
him ami .lid ji.tlini «'lli S''*' 'i'"’

IS. The di.dim a.eh.d ”

5.1.1 po.ir b.ni.d ihi.i .1"'

«fl all tliose weapon* Itrlore any .

could reacli Inm. Al lenK"‘

Fandu became bijili'y ang^y-

I, Will, m.ny il'.'Bht ”'’,„Vd° .1
beaded arrow*, be C.il ofl ”«*“*
many of ll.o« warriors wbo w«»e rusUi«^
film (lom d«*ire of victory.

to. Many A'd. "»^"y
many moved not; all of „ „i,ieJ

uiitred socti a I xid none llxt reseni

(lie roar of ibe ocean.

St. A* tb.ywere killed l>y 7^7*’* T
Immeasurable power, ibey loo<t t n •
aecurdiiitf lo lu» urei'njili and pro** «

... I i«.;.d

Patilia tucceeded m depitvi l5
number of l1io*« warrior* ol t"eir ** .,,, 1 ,^
mean* of bi* sliarpert arrow* i<i ibal battle.

„ . . ...„m .....an, tbe


rt-SiS'SSHS

i-r.v~.iV;St 5 '.s

Seeing him prostrate on and bav. Coma

.iihuii: 1;:,;.?.^

r’;?,'. F. ii •ii-' 1'""''” r

1.11 brothii. ””

lheri*ailto iier o suter.

„J,|.. .1. 1 j y

m 1,»; him tom d Ahhimmy...
«on. oiiRinated from Suralha.

3 ,. r.lins h'” "“’'JP'i.fi'wj "i" '
'ti,., ihdd .rr


d^>h. ‘‘r " rh.=;£L,^^^^

they were rendered cbretlee* iidrnl^

look ber grandtjn III ber atm* 1 mercy « «( eieemie* I''** “‘Tant

Alim..” ,c„.,h. *’ '’„'ii::r,... hyKtoi


proceeded to lii» inaiernai warno*!

lor ti.e safety ot all Uic bamdlia

. 5 - 1 hi qnlin, ""rtol.

...owh.ihiCiuldd.loi_hm.^l^^^, ’


bun, O loteinu>l ol men. 1 t miniarasb'ra, ,

en?;ired^ir,:r;.t'L-\tr-rba!:%.^

Wnete 1 * be T | Kshatnya pr-Cfces all the time.

59 DussliaU answered b>m, ‘'y^U-

tins cinld died broUe».lic*iied.

me as to bow lie died.

3,_33 O Dliananiaya. he


you «l.« h™», .I'X'.i, I

,1,. c'liM wboie friends anil
pleased 7“’’ 'n been killed and wl.o bnn-

kiosmen bave all bee ,,»* t*ke‘'

,e11 knows notbing 01
p"ii. i).....i.=iJ>.’toi.-

"""""j’"" Vmr.j


« md hill «<

pi.„. tovijldl J ,11

"vi.h

.1 V.m*.


3 ,- 3 , o .. vrji'i’ij'md’hSrlSidi;

Sid “byVm. o "mil 1 K. p..«- ""

.HiilidinhB.iil .tlhi". •Iidb..im»..r"


92-


MAIIABilARATA.


and then dismissed her, asking her to
lelurn to her p-iUce.

45 Dijssliala aski“d allj her warriors lo
desist from iliat iireHt b-itile, and adoring
I'artfia, she of bcrtuiiful lace returned lo-
>vai ds her paUce.

46 Haxing defeated those heroes. vi» ,
tlie baiiidhav.»5, thus, Dliananjaya began
10 follow that horsi which ranged at its
Will.

47. The heroic Arjiina duly foil >wed
that sacnitciHl ) orse even as the divine
holder of Pm^Ua lud in dajs of yote follow
ed the deer lhrou,jb the sky.

48 *1 he horse, at its will, passed throiigti
various kingdoms successively, multiplying
the feats of Aij ina.

49 in course of lime, O king, the horse

wandering at ns pleasure, at Iasi arrived
wjihin the kingduii) of Afanipura, followed
by the sun of Paiidu ,


CffAPIER L\XIX.
(ANUGUA PARVA.)-
Ctrtllltuti.

Vaiflhampayatia said •—

t. Hearint that Ins father Arjitna had
arrived witliin his kingdom, the king of
Manipura, Vabhruvtliana went out with
humility, with a number of Urahinanas and
aome treasure m his van,

3 Uemembenng, however, rhe duties
of Kshatnjas ihe highly intelhgem Dhaiian*
y-iya, seeing the king of Mampura arrive in
that guise, did not approve of it,
j 3 'Ihe righteous-souled Plialgiina
^ aiiitnly said,->-Your conduct is noi p'nper.

' You have ceitainly fallen away from Kslia*
atciya dunes.

4. I have come fiere as (he protector of
1 Yudhishlliira's sacriRcul horse. Why, O
; son, will you iigt figlit me, serrng that I
I ave come wiihm your teniiories 7
5 Tie on yoti, O yon of foolish uii*
derslan I Mg, fie on you olid have deviated
Horn KslMt'iya duties' Fie on you who
\«uiild icceive me peacefully even though 1
tiave come here for hgliling with you

C— 3 In thus receiving me peacefully
' y lu act lise a wunian O you of nreichcd
tuiderstHiidiiig. if 1 had come Iti you, leav*
i< g aside my arms, then wm'd iln* ponduct
<>l yuuis have been fit. O worst «it men I *
leitning Out these words were addirssed :
by l>er husband, the daugfiier of ((m |
tyuakt Uuig, riJ., U Uj t, unable to lot* ate I


It, pierced 'th rough the Earih an-f came up
there She saw her son standing theie
perfectly cheerless and wnli face hanging
down.

9—10. Indeed, the prince was repeatedly
rebuked by Ins father wliu wan desiroui of
battle will) him, O m ■nari,ii ! 1 he dangluer
of the Snake, possessed of beautiful limbs,
errs , Ulnpi, said these words consistent with
righteousness and duty to the prince who
hiniself was cinversant with ngliieousness
and duty. Know that I am your inoilier
Utupi that am the daughter of a snake.

Jl. Da yon perforin my order, Oson'
for you would then acquire great merit|
Fight your father, thia furemisi one o*
Kuri/> race, (his fiero who ti irfesistible m
baule.

12 Forsooth, he will ll rii be pleased
with you. 1 lius was king Vabhriivahana
incited against Ins father by iii> (step)
mother.

13— 14 At last, gifted as he was with
great energy, he made up his imnd, O chief
of the BiMralas, lo fight Dtianaiijaya.
Putting on Ills armour of bright goll and
h's shining head'iJress, he gut upon ati
exo-lleiit car winch liad hundreds nl quivers
toady on it. That car was tq iipc wilfi
necevsaiies for battle and had lunees yuksd
fo It which were ff.et like (lie mind.

15 It had excellent wheels and a strong
Upashkara, and was adorned with golden
OMianients ol every soit. Raising his
siandard winch was decorated musi beauii*
fully and whici) bnre tlie device ui a hon ni
gold, ihe beautiful prince Vablnuvahaiia
proceeded against this father for battle.

l5 Caming upon the sacrificial horse
which was protected by Paitlia, the herciC
prince caused ll to 'be seized by persons
weli-veised in veterinary science.

, 17. Seeing the horse seiz'd, Uhananjiya
became filled with joy Standing un t<i«
Etcth. that lleio began to oppose tlie ad*
Vance of Ins con wlio was on his car.

18 The king afRicled the hero with
repealed showeis of arrows gifted with
wlietted points and rcseiislihiig snakes of
dreadful poison.

19 Incomparable was the b^ltle which
liKik place between the father and son. It
leseinbled tne battlr between the celeslHl*
Mid Mie Asiiras of old PiCli was pleased
with obtaining the other for an antagonist.

20. Then Vablituvahena, laughing, cut
the dladiiii. decked Arjuna, that ftrelllo^t
of men, in (he siioutJer with a i(raig'>r
aiiuw. •


ASHWAMEOHA parva.


r.::::::::,?. o';.'.,. ...i-n. ‘■-“'‘.t'S

ui Kiiiiii ilifou^l'i I'le airow P,

llie Cafll'.


-l,ng acute pain. U.e int«Ui«e.u

tr>aua..ia\a feiieJ awMle. aupporimg »«hm-

Hl r.r .> eVc'lkm bow. He aiaoJ.

!«o?;;« :o b..ceU.t.a« energy and aecmed

txteiiiatly like one dead.

>3-n i>-t

reLainm;; cOllsClonbliess, lauoc

wn ol Sl.aUra CbUr-n-

O iiiiilily-aiined one. y waillu

rftoo. l“

arrows on ilie ptmce. ,

.6 K.,.g Y.bl,™v.h.n.

hs own broad beaded irom

arrows, wbicb ^“'''';,,„MVd me tbonde.* i

Gaiidiva and wlnclr reiem j I

bolt el Indra in eplendouf. »«itw
some into ibree, parts. ,

,7. men the '

gold and rese.nbbng ^ul,

UeUlng’sCarWaS cut oft by raftna
some excellent arrows of Ins.

,8. 11,. .0.. a, ...S

killed the king’s bofses of latg«


teini; 111* falber killed.

36 11. l.-a been pi.rcd

A?,..., »..b .'1 b.u>=

(ore dropped d.w at the va

'"LTHeannU

k.lkd and that agitation


L to ine.neiu o.

.« I .> hiirtiiiii' wtb sorrow,
3S. lUr e ,nd treinbli.n:

weeping piieonsly tbe MAinpura

all over, tl.e motber of ibc king 01
her killed liusband.


chapieu lxxx.


(ANUGUA PAKVA.)-

Cenltnued.


Vai8l.amp.sau3 8A,d: ^

I. Inat lady b * J j j^ufujng


Ur..,. ‘.“."'“•b'",''

I years.


29


‘730.

Ibai foreinobl «“f. of llie Uiundef


Uescendiiig M"'" . , .

:d up wall rage, loognt


m,. ilie

bolt, began 10 afflict fn«1 gre-t'y'


31. llie poweflul ,V-bk w

ui n-t •»* bn-

lace Imn. again «,{ dreadlul

•trows rescnibUng snakes
poison


y.u i-.« i"', 'a.u'.a";!
,„.r "“'‘’Y.lfXi.J I. 1.“* ‘ '


'jT' F..™ •■p'l:'.,


a wliellcd ariow liavii g

33_33 11.., .rr™. O »»

tbe bony of „,eal pa”**

very vuaU vaiiseil n,f.„a,i|aya, deep-
delighlet of llic H t, j son. »'«•»

ly pierced tberew.tb by_^
otopped down m “ u.,,, that bear**’ ®*

o .;,.al w»" iAi".-". U“

tlie butijien* of tbe I • j,^gainc iniW"*

son ot Clnitangada »'» wgj «YH«S l»

svious. ibc \*SW


yoor.tlnil :: U.d I*--.

''T'..

I S0ln.ll yon. p.eiy,

6 O rig'iteou* Udy^ \„uwii(tor youc
Yon are. O I' “
virtoes) over - your bo»uan.l to be

«.a'bry*" '

■'““Ty'tobl'j'”". b».

”,oi.i.biy I'"'" ba „„3, il.c

g—g Having said tl ji.ebnake-

qoeeniy Ulupi l"C jrangada went lo

I King, ibe lay on tbe lafU* and ad-

‘ «,«Te Her bumanii uy on ^ ,H.,t>and,


94


MAlfABAllRATA.


Here thal liOTse ftf yOUrs I It has been
liberated by me

to. Indeed O powerful one, this s«cri*
ficial liorse of ki< g Yudl'isbiliirn the lirtt,
stinuld be followed by you. Why then do
y<iii he still on the E«rth.

11 My life breaths depend on yon O
delnrhlerof the IC.ini? How is it that he
who IS the giver of other people's hfe-
brealhs renounces litS o’Mt f'fc breolhs ■
to day 7 I

12. See, O Uhipi, ihis beaniifiil form of I
yo«r hnsbsind lymg-prnstratc on the graniid I
How IS It lliat jois do not grieve, having
caused Itirn to h* hilled Ihrotigh your son
whtiin you did excite with your words T

13 It IS fit tliat this boy should yield lo
the power oi death and he thus on the
groiii d bsside" Ins own father Oh, let
V»iiya, Ut lum that »« Called GudakesUa,
let tl IS Hero with reddish ejes return to life

14 O blessed l*dy, p lygstny 5 s iia‘
fault with man Women only cnmmit «in
hv t ikmc more than one luisband. D*
ptu, iheieforet chensli such thoughts (o(
\ei geance),

15 llu relaiionsh p was ordained by
the biiprrme Creator himself It is, besides,
an elernal and unchangeable one Do yon
attend to that relaiionslnp Let }ourunion
(with Dhananjaya) be made true

id If. having killed yeiir husband
thiofgh your son, you do not revive hint
to day beinre my eyes, I shall then re>
nouiice my own life«breaths

17. Forsooth. O reverend lady.'afflicted
as 1 am wiih grief and deprived as I am
of both husband and son, t shall sit I ere
to day in Praya-vow before yeur presence.

iS Having said so to the daughter of
the Snake-Chief, w lio was * co wile with her
tn A<]u«a, the princess Clisilravatnin Sat in
Praya, O king, restrainllg speech.

Vaisliampayana said

19 Ceasing in lament, the cheerless
queen, taking upon her lap (he feet of her
husband sai there, sighiug t aavily and
desiring also for the restoraiien of her son
to life. ’ «•

20— jl King Vabliruvahana then, re-
gaining conrclonsness, saw his mother sea-
led in that gnne on the 'fi-ld of battle
Adiressmg her he said —What can be
more painful tlian (he sight of my mother,
who li»s been browght np m luxury, lying
on the naked Eirtli beside her heroic bus-
band stretched thereon.

22. Alas, this destroyer of all enemies,
this foremost of all wiclJera el •reeponS| bas


been kilted by me in battle. It ts clear
that men do die, till their hour comes

*3 Ob, the heart nf tins princess seems
to be very hard since it does "ot break
even on seeing her mighty armed am!
broad chested liusband lying dead on tfie
groiiaid.

24 It Is clear that one does not die till
one's hour comes, since neither myself, nor
my mother IS deprived of life.

25 ^ aU«, alas, the golden coal of mail of
(Ins foremost hero of Kiiru's race, killed by
me, Iks son knewtugly, is lying on the
ground, cut off from his body.

26 Alas, ye Brahmanas, see my heroic
father lying prostrate on tlie Earth, on a
hero's bed, killed by Ins son

27 What benefit is done to this hero,
killed by me in battle, by those Brahmanas
wtio wei« commissioned t» attend upon this
foremost one of Kmu's race engaged tit
following the horse 7

»S Let the Brahmanas direct what ex-
piation stiould now be done by me, a ciu*l
and sinful wretch, who -fits killed ins own
father in battle.

29 Having killed my own father, t
siniiUI, siilTeniig every sort of misery,
wander ovrr the Eirih, cruel that I ain»
covering m>sel| with his skin.

30 G*ve me the two halves of my sire's
head to-dav, for there is no oth»r expution
for me who have killed my own father.

3» See, O daughter of the foremost nf
Su-rkes your husband Icillad hj me Indeed,
by kilting Aijina in battle I have accom-
plished what IS pleasant to you

32 I shall tn day follow in the (rack
by which my father lias gone, O blessed
one, I cannot comfort m^sell.

33 Be happy tf> da), O mnther, seeing

myself and tiue w, elder of Giiidiva bolti
embrace death to day. 1 sweirloyouby
truth Itself. I

34 — 33 Having said these words, the
kiiiK, s arely afn cied will, grief, O monarch,
thuchesl water, and exclaimed in sorrow —
let all creaiiires mobile and immobile,
listen to me I Do yon also listen to me, O
motlierl I sa> (fie truth, O best of alt
daughters of the snakes.

36 If this best of men. Jaja, r«y father
does not rise up, I shall emaciate my own
body, tittliig on the fi-ld of bailie

37 Having kiIIe,J my fath-e, there is no
rescue for me Afflicted as I am wnh the
tan ul patric, |r, I shall, forsooth, t arc td
sink in Hell.


ASijV^AtletJrtA paRVA.


^3


ii Rv Jcilfi-'tf ■ KlUatnyn <me

iecom.s cleaned b> "' '^"’e * ,®L

Imndred Uine II) k>ll">K '"5
€»er, SO dreadful In* bten frty
fescue js tirlpossible.
eg I Ins Dltanaisjaya. lire son of f
ll.e cue I.ero grtted *.ih m.al.ty in«Ky*
I’oMeieed of iij'l'lfow* sO'd.
creator of nfy be.np How citi I b*
(tscued after having killed bimT
<0 Having bewailed tbti*. I'‘*

« Dhaiianiaya, king Vabliriivaliana. louc»

ed water and became ailenl, vov If
starve liimself td dedlli. ,

VaishampaVafla Said ' ,

4f-4J. Wlien ll.e Wmgof

flwstiserol enemies, -Bl cled wftb e '« > n«*lf

witli 1.15 mmlier. sal down f
<« death. Ulhpi lhe« ihoirgl'l
Uiaihaaibeviuiie ol

'file eem, the great refuge of <lie Snates,
iKut ihouglil of, arrived 0>efe* .

43 'll." d.ujl,i.r ol 1^0 r.....o 5

Handing Mil the field.

, 44 Rise lip O son i Ho J"*’*
Inhnu has not been ’?"<? bv

Tim hero is incapable el being
fnen as atso b)r Ihe eelesiral* headed l»y
Vaiava himself. , ,

4 s 1 1.000 .oli.biloJ ll"> f,,:,

Otiviiig jouf ooiioos, lor ll.e ''^"'^‘...roinou.
I...m;.l ol men. Ol. . lo">
lather. ,

AT, O joif ol Kiiro^face.
aveiUining the prnwes* O'

»n, this destroyer of hostile ' •

king, carte here f.«r ffghtliig *S‘Hi )oi»


e Pgliting - .

Weie urged by iiTe lo ITcnt y ^ ,

kio. O .0,., Hi obopool K

Cuinmitted any, even the lea* , «

his challenge

4 S He IS a Risln. f| *

"hXlt h.^veH’'',V'mc"pable cl deleaimg
Tim III battle.

Snakes arolten at they die.

5, o p,...i..i V.04. Tw

«l F,tth» s lan #r iiiCompsiaWe «« Bf


32 After the g«n1 fiad been plawd on
I Is breast, the heroic and powerful Ji^shnd
became resived Openi.ig ins ted eye*, he
role up tiU^ one who liad slept long.

M Seeing hf« lather, tlie great hero of

in ejliatlstibfc energy. reslofe.Uo

ness and iju.le at his ease. VabhrtivaliaiiS

adored him with respect.

SI \Vliert that foreiTtost of i^en. O
PoJmuI one, a«-ke l.ont the l.le,

death with every *1

the chastiser of P-ka rained down ceUstuI
flowefl. ^ .

ee liettfe-driiWi Struck tf Aobodyj
p,!d«ced their music deep a. the
It tire clouds A loud np-oar wa» ‘■"'d
i„ the sky consiiling of the vrerd.— Escel
lent, Eicelkilt.

A The m1gfiiy*afrt*d fyiiananjay*.
iwng up and well eomforled. embraced
VabUfUJahaiia and smeTled hiS head

erf ifa saw siltmc at » dntanerf
..fn, SSII. this letter's i«o{h« StMckeit
Lit. gii'l. i" The company <” Ulupt.
W,a..f..Ua aiWed.-\Vn) is H »!'•»
thing in tue Reid oi beiite seems lo b..r
■he rrtark* of gnef, wonder and 1 'X ^ ”

S r .1 S.b ‘"..t 11.0 C..,

do )Oii then tell life

r;<v Wi.y has yni|f nfolhei' coin- to 1 1#

brought Oirt the Irdies.

<I<« rJid.-Ul Ui-pf he asked.


CHAP1F.R LXXMf.

(ANUGIIA PARVA >—

, Contiruii.

M*n.r«iirl f.ieridlr meij^

.«!aid*lliskmg.O d.ugMer ot a i..ak^

O c« 'Mdst*

to me tool


KAHADHAKATA.


■5 I hope, O \oii of ample hips, that
neither I, nor this Vahrnvahana here, have,
O beautiful Udy, done any injury to you
Unconsciooslj ?

4 Has Chitran^ada of faultless limbs,
descended from the line of Chttravahana,
dune you any wrong 7

5. To him the daughter of ihe Prince of
Snakes answered smilingly,~-Vou have not
offended me, nor lias Vabhruvahana done
me any wrong,

6 Nor this prince's mother who is atwaj s
obedient to me as a hand maid. Listen,
how all this has been caused by me.

7 You should not be angry i\iih me.
Indeed, I seek to please ]ou by bending my
head III respect O you of Kiiru's race all
this hat been done by me for your good, O
powerful one I

8— *10, O mtghty<armed Olunanjaya,

^ Hear all (hat 1 have done In the great
battle of the Bharata* Princes, you had
killed the royal son of Shantanu by unfair
ways. Wliat 1 have done has eipiated
yeur sin You did not overthrow Biushma
while figliting with you I

tl*~ia He was engaged wuh Shikandm
Relying on him as yoifr help, you did bring
about tl e overthrow of Shatiiann's son If
you had died without liaving evpuied your
' sin vou would then have fallen, forsooth, into
^ Hell on account of that sinful deed of yours
Even this winch you have got from your son
is llie expiation of that sin '

13 Formerly. O king, I heard this said
by the Vasiis while they were m the com-
pany of Ganga, O you of great in(<:>ligcnce
I4w|j Afler (he fall of Shautanu's snn,
those celestials vt» , die Vasus, coming
to the banks of Ganga, bathed in her wateis,
and calling tlie goddess of that stream, they
uttered these terrible words having (he
sanclion of Dhagirati herself, via , — bhan-
tanu's son Biushma has been killed by
Dhai an}a)a.

16. Indeed, G* goddess, n'lf-hma then
was engagerl with anotlier, and had ceased
to fight. For this fault we shall to-day
imprecate a curse on Ujiananjaya ! •

17 To this, the goddess Ganga readily
agreed, saying,— De it so I^Hearing these
words 1 became very much distressed and |
penriraliiiy inio tl e nether regions reprcscn- ;
led everyti ing to my father.

tS— 19 Informed of what had taken
place, my father became plunged m grief.
Going to the VasuS. he begged litem for
your take, again and again gealifymg

'tlwra by every means in hrs poaer. Ikcy

then said to him,— Dbananjeya has a higl 1/


blessed son ‘who, youthful as ho Is, !s the
king of Manipura.

ao He will, standing on tie field 0!
battle, caat Dliananjaya down on tfie Earth.
When this will take place, O Prince of
Snakes, Arjuna will be freed from our
curse I

2t. Do you return !— Thus addressed
by the Vasus, he came back and informed
me of what had taken place. Having
learnt all this, O hero 1 have freed you
from the curse of the Vasus in thus.

23 Hie king of the Celestials himself) (
incapable of defeating you in battle. I fie
son IS one's awn self. It is far tins that you
have been defeated by him,

23 I cannot be held, O powerful one, to
have committed any sin How, indeed,
would you hold me censurable 7

24 Thus addressed (by Uliipi), Vi|aya
became cl<eerful of heart and said to lier,— '
All this yon have done, O goddess, is
highly agreeable to me.

35—26 After this, Jaya addressed lilt
son. the king of Manipura, and said to
him in llie hearing of Cliitrangada, the
daughter ( in Uw) of Kuril's race 'the
tiorse-Sacrifice of Yiidhishlliira will take
place on tlie day of lull moon in the coining
in Mitfi of Ciiaitra. Come there, O king,
with your mother and your counsellors and
• fficers I* ,

37—38 Thus addressed by Parlha, king
Vabhruvahana of great Intelligence, with
tearful eyes, said these words to Ins father,
— ‘ O you who are conversant wiili every
duly, 1 shall certainty go at your command,
to the great Horse Sacrifice, and lake tipm
myself the task of distributing food among
the twiee-borii ones I

39 For, however, showing your grace
towards me, do you enter your own c>ty
with your two wives Do not cheiish any
scruple about this, O you who are fully ac*
quaiiited witii every duiyl

3<» O lord, having lived for one niglit in
your own palace in happiness, yrui may
tlien follow the horse, O foremost of vicloM-
ous warriors I

31—33 ’Hie ape-hannrred son of Kiintt,
t) us addressed by his son, answered the
eliild of Chitrangada, saying —You know,

migluy.armed one. what vuw I am obser*
snug 7 O you of large eyes till the ter-
nssnatinis cf this my vow, I cannot tnief
your city.

1 33 O foremost of men. tl is ,sacflflcial
horse wanders at wiH. fjlessings on sou.

I must go awayr I have no place to fcst
(or even a abort whila I


98


MAIIABHARATA.


live yet, O monarch, although you have ,
offended me in battle.

26. Thus addressed, the king of '
Magadha considered himself defeated and
spared Thinking then that it was his duly
to do so, he approached Arjuna and join*
ing his hands in respect adored him.

27 And he said, — Defeated have t been
by you ' Blessed be you, 1 do not venture
to continue the battle, lell me what I am
to do now for you' Consider your com*
mand as afteady carried out/

28 Comforting him agairr, Arjuna once
more said to him —-You should go to the
Horse Sacrifice of our king which takes
place at the coming full moon of Chaiira.

29 Thus addressed by him the son of
Sahadeva said —So be it, — and then duly
adored that horse as also Phalguna, that
foremost of warriors,

30. The sacrificial horse then, having
beautiful manes, proceeded at liis will along
the seacoast, going to the countries of fhe
Bangas, the Pundraa, and the Koshalas

3t. In those kingdoms Dhananjaya,
wilh his bow Gandiva, O king, defeated
numberless Miechchha armies one after
another.


CHAPTER LXXJJlII. I

(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
CeuttntieJ,

Vaisliainpayaiia contiutiecl !

t. Adoeed by the king of M-rgadUa,
Pandu's son having wh te horses yoked to
1 1$ car, proceeded along the soutli, follow-
ing the (sacrificial) horse.

2. lurning round In course of his
wanderings at will, (he strong horse came
upon the beautiful city of the Chedis called
after the oyster.

3 Sharabha, the son of Shishupala,

giiied will) great strength, first met Arjuna
in battle and then adored him with due
I unours, .

4 Adored by him, O king, (hat best of
horses then proceeded to the kingdom of the
Kashis, tfie Angas, the Koshalas, (he
Kiratas, and the langanas.

5 Receiving due honours in all those
kinudcms Dhananjsya turned his course
Indeed the son of Kunii then proceeded
to tl e country of the Dasharnas.

6 The ruler of that people was
Chiirangada who was gifted with great
Strength and was a crusher cl enemies


Between him and Vijaya took place a Very
dreadful battle.

7 Bringing him under his control the
diadem decked Arjuna, that foremast of
men, went to the kingdom of the Nisliada
king vie , tl e son of Ekalavya

8 The son of Ekalavya received Arjuna
III battle' The encounter took place be-
tween the Kuru hero and the Nishadas was
so furious as to make the liairs stand erect.

9 Unvanguished in battle, the brave son
of Kunti defeated the Nishada king who
proved an impediment to the sacrifice.

to Having subjugated the son of
Ekalavya, O king the son of Indra duly
adored by (he Nishadas, then proceeded
towards the southern ocean

It. In those regions battles took place
between the diadem decked hero and (hd
Oravidas and Andhras and the dreadful
Mahishakas and the hillmen of Kolwa.

t2 Subjugating those tribes without

I having fo perform any terrific feats Arjuna
proceeded to the country of the Surasliiras/
his footsteps guided by the horse.

13 Arrived at Ooksrna, lie went thened
to Prabhasa Then he proceeded to the
beautiful city of Dwaravaii protected by the
lieroescf the Vrishni ^ace,

14 When the beautiful sacrificial horse
of the Kuru king reached Dwaravati, the
Vadava youths, used force against that
foremost of horses.

15 — lO King Ugrasena, however, soon
went out and forbade those youths fronl
doing what they thought Then the king
of the Vnshnis and the Andhakas, issuing
out of Ins palace, with Vasudeva, the
malcinat uncle of Arjuna, in his company,
cheerf lily met the Kuru hero and received
him with due rites.

17. The two elderly chiefs honoured
Aijuna duly Oelting (heir permission, (he
Kuru prince tlien proceeded to where ihd
horse he followed led him.

10 The sacrificial horse then proceeded
along the coast of the western ocean a id at
fast reached the country of the five water*
full of population and prosperity.

tg Thence, O king, the horse proceeded
to the country of the Oandharas Arrived
there, it roamed at will, followed by the son
of Kunll

30 Tlien took place a dreadful bittle
between the diadem-decked hero and the
king of the OanUhara*, vie, the son of
bhakuni, who had a bitter remembrance 01
the giudge his father bore to the randayaSi


ASHWAMEDIIA PARVA


CHAPTER LXXXIV.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
ConiittueJ^


Vaisbampayana Bald .

I. The heroic son of Shakiinl.
a powerii.l car-warrior ^

dliaras, accompanied l>y a Ur« cuflv ha«*’*
ceeded again,; .he Knru hero of ^

That force contained and

car,, and wa, adorned with many Rags ana
banners. . ^

1 . Unable to bear. and.
ing to avenge, llie ijih bows,

Shaktini, those warriors, arinca i*
rushed together at Parlha. _

3 . 1 he unvanquished bu*‘

ou, soul addressed P beneficial

tliey were reluctant to accept i
word, of Yudlushlhira.

. '’iS;

sweet words, they ‘“'U”* ‘ 'gj^ficiat Ikw**'
K .rl’«r=l P.n ju b.c.,n. m..d «..H

of many Gtndhara warrior,. •

G.«dl,.r... O .■»g. "." and

i.b.m.d ii.t iio<«. "'"'‘I “y
desisted from battle. *

7 . Resisted, ^Jf,ou.ided him

iiara combaunts who sull j

nail sides, the son of Faii^V „ 3 „y.

rent energy, cut u.us

levioudy iMini'ig moss

nhed. „ ™«r»

8 When il.. 1 ,.X.

he royal son of »
resist the son of Panau* .

figliUng wiili him, iiiovea oy . kiH the

kings wlio fight with me,

commands ot Yudlushlhira.

c.«., o b..o, .. bgW
Do net seek defeat. cu-Wnm.

1,. Thus addressed, the e

stupefied by folly, swift sh.|» the

end covered with ms ly iumselt

Kuru hero who bavUe.

U. Then Partha. wH*. * ^e ^„eniies.
arrow, cut off me head-g caused th»t

Of immeasurable soul, he also


r 55

head'fcar 10 be borne along a greit dif-

7b.7 «

,olu,...nlr "P*"^ J;;®G™ab.r.. tb.n

TJie prince ® c .j followed


ms on account of A 1 j

stupefied limb lnd«d.

not aware of ^*5 greatly afllicled

cba.gbd l..m o!

tl.pb.nl. and burst.

ro" 7 nd«'“-d‘‘XS' .b.»l Ibt 6 . 1 d .g™

*'rA:«bg.b..^e;ry.t?nrni'.«

being Kuru hero famed for ^ot*-

in front of the Kuru ne seen who

most of fesW- wess of Dhanan aya.

was able to bear the ^ of iho

,9 Then ‘he with all

Oaudhsras. ’’”*' 1 came out ot hef

the ea«Ileiit Arghya foe

city, taking »

'''irSbtlu.b.dt...tbt..t»n_^ur«-d 5
beart frum bBhli.’B ."y ^ j toil.

J„bnn «bu nt.t !• .2 _

„ -lb. P"”"'?' mnc). lu.vstd‘

'* hTm’ m battle, and became mchiied 10 o*

of Paiidu. „A »1 armed hero. h.. 5 i,le measure, I O

S;,4tf‘u'''b7t.. y" ■" "y


kmg. that you >

followers


34


g., nu..ncb..Wb.pptn^.^.

i.o.l.ln.ts ,„!y Yin .honIJ 2^

...nd.ng “°n”. „1 „or Un.g ”'"=b

‘fa°ct un Ibt da, ol Inll "oun uf Ih.

takes P**S? ,

month of Cuailfu.


MAIiAOIIARATA.


CHAPTER LXXXV.

(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
CeulinueJ,

Vaishampayana said •

1. Having said iliese words, Parlha
staried, following i!ie liorse winch roamed at
will. 1 lie iacnh,.Ml liorse ttn.i» turned to-
wards the road leading to tlie city ol llasti-
napur.

2. YudliislilhiraJ heard from lus inlelli-
geiice-bcdrers that the horse had turned
back And heariiij; also lli.it Arjuna was
hale and heart}, he tiecame filled with joy.

3. Hearing also the (eats, performed by
V naja III the coiiiitrj of the Gaiidharas as
aUo in other tingdcinis, the king became
higlil} pleased.

4—6 In the meantime, seeing that the i
twelilh da} of the lighted (oiliu„ht m the |
niomh uf Maglia hud come, anil marking
also that the constellation was favourable.
King \ iidhislnhira the just summoned all
his brothers, ns , Unuiia and Nakula and
bahadeva. Gifted with p-eai encig), Uie
King, U jou Of Kuru's race, that foremou
cfdll persons knovMiig dunes, said these
words in proper tune. Indeed, tint fore*
niosl of all speakers, addressing Ulnma, the
first of all sinners, said,

7. Your yotiiiger brotiter (Arjnna), O
Bliima«end, is relunintg with the iiorse. I
hate learnt this f.oin those men who had
followed Arjnna,

8. The time is come The sacrificial-
horse is nesr. Itie diy of full moon of the
inonin of Migha is also near, the month
is about to eitpire, O Viiltodara

9 Let, therefore, learned Br-ilim.snas
tiiowing the Vedas took for a sicrthcial
spot (or Ibe celebralien of the Horse bacti-
hce,

10. Thus addressed, Bhims obejed the
royal command He became very glad upon
bearing that Arjund of curly hair was about
to return.

11. Then Btnma went out with a number
of men knowing the rules of laying out
!.acnficnl grounds and coiislri.clii.g build-
ings. And he took with Inm m«iiy Brali-
nmias well versed in all the rites of sacii-
fees.

J3. Bliima selected a beautiful place and
caused it lo b- duly measured out for laying
the sacnhcul compound, NnmberCess
houses and mansions were conyirueled on
It and high and broad roads al.o were laid
cut.


13 Soon enr/iigh the ICaiirava hero fiHsiJ
that ground with {liundreds of excellent
palaces the surhee was levelled and
inide smooth with jewels and gems, and
adorned wnh various golden structures.

14- Columns were raised, ornainenled
with bright gold and high and wide
iMumphal arclies aKo were made on that
stcnricial compound. All these were made
of puie gold.

»S The righteous-souled prince also
cairsed apartments to be duly constructed
foi* the accomodation of ladies and of the
numeioiis kings who, coming from many
kingdoms, were expected to grace ih?
sacrifice with their presence,

16 The son of Kunti also caused many

paUceS to be duly erected for Brahmanas
who were expected to come from various
kingdtinis,

17. Ihen the mighty -armed Bliimasena,
at the command of the king, sent ouC
messengers to the great kings of the Eattli.

iS. Those best of kings came to tlie
Horse Saciifice of the {{urn king for doing
what was agieeable to him. And they
brought many gems with ilinn and many
female slaves and horses and weapons

19 Ihe sounds which arose from those
great kings who lived within those pivihons
touvUed itie very heavens and reseiiibled
the noise made by the roaring ocean,

20 King Yudhis'ithira, the defigl ter of
the Kjrus, assigned to the monacciis 'vlw
thus came to Ins sacnriLe vsrious kinds of
food and drink, and beds also of celestial
beauty.

31 The chief of the Bharatis, vis t
*kmg Yudliivhlhira Itie just, avsigned several
stables well filled with different kinds of
corn and sugar cane and milk to the
animals, ^

22. To that ’ great sacrifice of king
Yudhishthira the just who was gifted with
high intelligence, there al>o came a large
number of ascetics all of whom were utter*
ers of Brahma

23 Indeed, O king, all the foremost
ones among the twice born class that were
then alive esme to Hist saciifice, accoin-
pained by Heir disciples. liie. Kutu king
received them all

24 King YudhishtI ira of great energy,
renouncing ill prnle, I nnself followed all
his guests to the pavilions that had been
assigned lor their residence.

25 Ihen all the mechanfes and en-

gineers. having completed the arrange-
menis of the sacrifice, mformjd king
\ udhisliUiira of it, .


TOI


ftSllWAMEDHA PARVA


l6. lU.rmB

l,„8 .hi, pleiJ-a "'“"B

and aiiention, became » 1 K hwn

v<it'i Ins btolhets all of wliom bo
duly.


clitcted togeiber-


iVitTeon, desifous of defeaUt'b ,

,3 Th. (invit.d) IhPBs '".V-

ctlltht pt.pa.slioi.. ol Ui>l
Liing lliore of ibe kinj, * ui.imasoia.
cufuals. made. O Bkarata. by

29 . They saw a«d

made of gold, and many . luxury. »'“!

oilier articles 0! enjojmenl a oarts.

CO yds of men coUecled al

teistls and cauldrons and ] < nolbmg

covers. Tbe mvited

Ihere lhal was no; made of go •

3t. Many direction*

set up, made, according »o adorned

of lie scriptures, of . e(!oltr«nce.

with gold Gifted ’*•'^ 1 ’ ,8 ^ dedicated

these were duly planted ana «

(with scriptural Mantras). I * • ,


lll«. , A Urg. ““'■"j'Ud t..'.

' diief of bnabt ear-rings made

gaYla..d$andwearmg b g

of gold, uk'oS "Ta'l food to tbe iwice-

haSds d»».imjed dm

born classes by pandavas

gave away to t - . ,vgre. besides, so

‘T^ “r » b.


(with scriptural Mantras). 1 ..‘J-U

3. tI .«T.t

of land and water, collected tnere
cccasionr


CHAPina LXXKVI.


(ANUGllA PAUVAl—
Conlmued.


occasion. i,,_-

33 — 44 . A"'^ ^’'“and

and many buffaloes a®** '"f ^many beasts
and many aquatic ' ^,5 birds, and

of prey, and "’* 1 '^, ‘Porous and oviparous

many specimens of vivip 6 liU-bo>n

' creatures, and many tit vegetable

and many belonging ^ plants

bmgdom, and many ^

>.l,rEh 1 ... Pt gio" «» m.P"'*""-
35 S,.,..g >'■”?« W "C 3 c"™

adurned witli annnals j wonder,

the .nvited.lt.ngs ^ sweetmeats

“i rer''.r"rniEed';h.P .-4 B..l.».n.=.
37 And so large , cymbals wero

Ih d ih. .o'mds ol d,pm. ji ^ tta,.

';™;,d,''S:p«d irod. d.y .. day-

33 . u,». ffS;*,'.!." M.;,

0 ! the inielUgent U g Vu^^ jedicated on tbc
lulls of food. O bine- ^ere seen of

• occasion danfied butler,

curds and many UUes ot clar.nw

c..- O tnonar


curds and many taxes “


Bluma*.".. “A „ ,l,„, tog. »''»
“1” Xat lor.tn..t ol m.ii a™
iMve J,®,. „ iwebesi honors.

’Vtfo: .44,....d by

assisted by the twins. ^

4 j"','"'™";),. Lctof""'! '■>'

Govinda. cam vaUdeva m the van.
v,..bd.,. >"4 Yd,..dh.n.

h„=d pllSyrnrirCd. , .'nd N,.b.U,d

6 The powerful ®* adoraiion-

.fibred them tlie most resp«

ir™i'«;™g.r»b,Eb

"T A. ,b. e;d .. .

''d'fh ' b" >'■4

„,„„d >■• A'l

Uie universe began lu t- ^

, Pt manylbyioe..


103


MAUAOHARATA.


lo. O powerful monirclii tliat a^jent e(
mine informed me tliat the mighty-armed
hero IS very near to us. You begin tocele*
brate your Horse-Sacnfice.

It. Thus addressed, king Yudhiahlliira
the ]<ist said him, — By good luck, O
Madhava, Arjuna comes back safely I
12 I wisli to ascertain from you. O de*
lighter of ttie Yadavas, what has been said
m this matter by tliat mightiest of heroes
amongs the sons of Pandu I

13—14 Thus addressed by king Viidhish*
ihira the just, the lord of the Vtishnis
and the Andliakas, that foremost of eloquent
men, said these words to that monarcli of
righteous soul —My agent, reported the
words of Partha thus to me, O great king, —
Yudhishthira, O Krishna, should be told
these words ol mine when the time comesl
15 O chiel ol the Kauravas, mariy kings
will come (to your sacrifice) 1 When they
arrive, high honours should be paid to them.
This would, indeed, be worthy lor us

16—17. O giver of honours, the king
should further be informed at my request
that he should do what is necessary for
preventing a distinction similar to what oc-
curred at the time of preseniing the Arghya
(on the occasion ol the (tajasuya Sacitfice)
Let Krishna also approve ol Hus Let net.
O king, through the ill feeling of kings, the
people be destroyed.

18. My man further reported, O king,
these' words of Dhananjaya. Listen as 1
repeat them.

ig O monarch, the king of M-tnipura,
my dear son Vabhruvahana. will come at
the sacrifice,

30 . Do you honour him duly for my sake.
O powerful one, he is always attached and
deeply devoted to me

31 . Hearing these words, king Yudbish-
thira the ]ust approved ol them and said as
follows.


CHAPTER LXXXVH.

( ANDGITA PARVA )—
Conltnued.

Tudbislitliira said —

I. 1 have heard, O Krishna, your
agreeable words. Tliey are worthy of you
Gladsome and sweet as nectar are they
Indeed, they fill my heart with great joy, O
powerlut one.

3. O Hrishikesha, I have heard that


Vijaya has fought numberless battles with
the kings of the Earth.

3 Why IS Partha, always dissociated
from ease and comfort! Viyaya is exceed-
liigly intelligent. I Ills, therefore, pains my
heart vtry much.

4 I always, O Janarddana, think, when
1 am withdrawn from business, of Kiinti's
son Jishnu. Ihe lot of ihat delighter of the
Pandus is highly miserable,

$. His body has every auspicious mark.
Wiiat, however, O Krislina, is that sign in
his exccUent body for which he has always
to suffer misery and discomfort!

6 lhatsonof Kuiiti has to bear a large
share of misery, I do not see any censur-
able mark in his body. You should explain
the cause to me if I deserve to hear it.

7. Thus addressed, Hiishikesha, that
enhancer of the glory of the Blioja princes,
having thought for a long time, answered as
follows ■— I do not see any censurable mark
in this prince, except that the cheek-bones
of this foremost ol men are a little too high

9 For this that that foremost of men has
always to be on the road I really do not
see anything else fer which he could be
trade so unhappy.

to. Thus answered by the Intelligent
Krishna, tliat foremost of men, vts , king,
Yudhishthira, said to the chief of the
Vrisimis that it was even so.

ti. Ihe princess Draupadi, however,
looked angrily and askance at Krishna.
The destroyer of Keshi, vie. Hrishikeshs,
approved of that mark of love (for his friend)
which the princess of .Panchala, who also
was ins friend, showed.

12 Bliimasena and the other Kurus,
including the sacrificial priests, ivlio heard
of the agreeable triumphs of Arjuna iii
course of his following the horse, became
highly please'd.

While they were still engaged in
talking about Arj nia. a messenger came
from that great liero bearing message from
him.

14 Going to the presence of the Kuru
king the intelligent messenger bowed liis
head in respect and inforined hi n of the
arrival of that foremost of men, vj».,
Phalguna.

15 On receipt of this news tears of joy
covered the king s eyes Lsrge gifts were
made to the messenger for the very sweet
tidings he had brought

16 On the second day from that date,
a loud dm was heard when that forAnost of
men, that chief of ifie Kurus, came. '


ASHWAMEDflA PARVA.


i) iTie citlst ratsed by tbe lioof* of lhat '
boTse as it walked close to Atjuna, looked '
as beauiiiu] as Ibat raised by llie celestial j
lofse Uctichasshravas 1

18 And as Arjona advanced. H# beard j
Tni»ny pleasing words «j»«r«d by the citfteas
By good luck, O Partha, you are outol
tianger. Praise to king YudlnstiUiira.

19 VVho else tlian Arfnoa could return
alter having caused (he horse (o wander
Over Uie wliole Earth and after baviiig
defeated all the kings in battle t

Jo. \Vc have not heard of such a fea*
having been done by even Sagara and
blher great kings of yore.

St. Future kings also will never b« able
lo perform so difficult a feat. O foremost
une of Kuru's raccj as this which you have
done.

JJ. Listening to such words, agreeable
lo the ear, of ilie ctiiJens, the tiglileous
'ouUd Phalguna entered tne sacnficiat
tompound.

*3 Then king Yudhishtliira with aff his
miiiDiert, and Knshnj, the deh^hterof the
Yadui, plating Ohriiarashtra m thetf van,
Ivent out for|reee«viug Ohananj-rya

>1 Saluting the feet of hts unde
’Whfiiarashtra), and tlitn el wise king
Yudhishiliira ihe just, and then adormt
B’lima and others, he embraced Keshava

JJ Adored by them all and worship
pmg them in return according to doe rues,
the mighty-armed hero, aecornpamed by
Ihose princes, took rest like a ship wrecked
^‘<h tossed on (lie waves resting on reach-
ing the shore

j 6 Meanwhile the wise king Vabhni-
Vahjisa, accompanied by his mothers lOn-
I'angada and Uluoi], came to the Kurti
eapnal.

27 The m>s.hty*armed prince d ily salut-
ed all h(s elders of Kuru’s race and the
O'her king* present there, and was honored
by (hem all m reforii Jle then entered
the exctlltiit abode of his gtandmothtr
Kuuii.


CHAPTER Lx>ixv«n.

( ANUGITA PARVA. )—
CaetinufJ*

VaUhampayanA lald.—

t- *Efitctiog the palace of the Pandavas
the mighty-aimed pnnce saluted hn grand*
fDPlhtr in tcotbmg and sntct words.


2 Then rjueen ChiUangada, and {Ulapi)
tke daughter of (the snake) Ka iravya,
together humbly approached Pritha and
Krishna I hey then met bubhadra and Hie
other faciies of the Kuru race with due
formafjiies

3 Kuntf gave them many gems and
costly tiings Draupadi and Subhadra
and the other Udies of Kuru’s race all
made presents to eliem.

4 The two ladies look up their resi-
dence there, using costly beds and seats,
treated ivitb affection and honor by Kuntf
herself from destre of doing what was
agreeable (0 Partha.

3 King Vabhrilvahana of great energy,
duly honored (by Kunti), then met Dhnta*
(pshtra according (0 due rites

0 Ooing then lo king Vudhishihira
and fibima and (he other Pandeves (he
mighty prince of iKunipura saluted them
all with humility.

f They all embraced him with great
love and honored htm duly. And those
I powerful car-warrfor highly pleased wilfi
him. made large gifts of weafih to him

$ The king of M^nipari then fmmbty
approached Krishna, (hat hero armed with
the discus and the mace like a second Pra*
dyumna approad mg his lather Krishna
gave lo the hug a very cosily and excel*
lent car adorned with gold and to which
were yoked excellent horses

to Then king Yudhishthira the Jutt,
and Bhima, and Phalguna and the twins,
each separately Uonered bun and made
cosily presents to him

It — la On the third day, the sage
Vyasa the son 0! Satyavati, lhat foremost
of elopurnt men approaching Yudhishtliira,
sard, ^-From this day, O son of Kunti, do
youbegii your sacrifice The (ime for it
has comet The nioment for undertaking
the rite IS at hand ihe pnes(s are urging
you

*3 Let the sacrifice be performed in
sucti a way lhat no limb msy become
defective On account of the very large
<|<tanti(y of gold that Is req iired for this
sacrifice. >l lias come to be called the sacri*
fice of profuse gold,

14 Do you al>o. O great king, make
(he Oakihina ol this oaciitice three time*
of what ts enj-imed f,f t the mrrit of your
sacrifice incresse (hrctfold. fha Orah*
raanas ate competent for the purpose.

13, Acqiiring (he meiits (hen of three
Itersc* Sacrifices, etch with profuse prcserts,
you shall be freed *0 king, from the tin el
Kaytng killed yeut kinsatn,


t64


MAtlABAHRATA. >


1 6 The bath wliidi one performs uponi
tompletion of the Horse-Sacrifice, O king,
IS hit’hly powerful and prndiiclive of the
lu);lie>t merit. Hiat merit will be yours, O
king of Ivuru's race

17 Thus addressed by Vyasa of incom-

parable tiUelligence, the righteous souled
Yudhishthira of great energy underwent
the initiation for performance at tfte Horse-
Sacrifice. j

18. rit* fflighly-armed king then per-
formed the great Horse Sacrifice characie-
tised by gifts of food and presents in proCu-
Sinn and capable of fructifying every desire
and producing every merit.

19 Die priests, well-conversant with
the Vedas, did every rite, duly, moving
about in all directions. they, were all
\vell-trained, and possessed of omniscience.

20 In rtotlung was there any deviation
from tlie ordinances, and nothing was done
improperly those foremoit ol twice-born
persons followed the proced ire as laid down
as It should be followed in those points
about wluch no directions are given

St. Ihose best ef twice-bornoncs having
first performed the rite called Prttvar^a
otherwise e4lled Dharmat then duly per-
formed the rile of Ablnshava, O king

32 Those (ortmait of Soma Dnnkexi O
monarch, extraciing the juice of the Soma,
then performed the Savana rite, following
the injunctions of the scriptures.

33 Among those who came to -that
sacrifice none could be seen who was cheer-
less, none who was poor, none who was
iiiingry, none who was plunged into giiel,
and none that seemed to be vulgar.

24. Dliimssena of great energy, at the
command of Die king, caused food to be
ceaselessly distributed among those who
desired to eat.

25. rollowing the injunctions of the
scriptures, priests, well versed in sacrificial
riles of every kind, performed every day nil
the acts necessary to complete the great
sacrifice.

25 Amongst the Sadasyns of king
Yiidl ishthira of great intelligence there was
roue who was not n master of the siv
branches of (Vedic) learning. 1 here was
none among them who was not an observer
of vows, none who was not an Upadhayi,
hone «\vho was not well-versed in dialectical
dMputalions.

27. When the lime esme for errclmg
|he saciificial stake. O chief of ffharaias
race. $u slakes were set up which were made
ol Vilw^. SIX which were made of Khadira,
and SIX nl iclrwerc made of Satrasarnui,


28<'v Two stakes were set up by the
priests which were made of Devadaru in
that sacrifice of tlie Kuru king, and one
which was made of Shleshmataka.

the behest of the king, Bliima
caused some other stakes to be set up, for
the sake of beauty only, winch were made
of gold. c, ,

Adorned with fine cipths supplied
by the royal sage, thase stakes shone tliere
like fndra and the denies with ihy seven
celestial Rishis standing around them in
Hfaven., , , •

3t. A number of golden brinks fWrre
made for making thtrewiih a Chayana,
llie Chayana made resemliled u) beauty
jthat which bad been made for Daloha,
the ford of creatures. , ^ ^

32. 1 *be Chayanla measured eight and
ten cubits and had four stones or lairs.
A golden bird, of the shape of^Garuda,
was then made, having three angles.

33 Following the injunctions of iho
scriptures, the priests endued with great
learning then d ily lied to the stakes both
animals and birds, ^ assigning each to its
particular deity. ^

34 Dulls, possessed of such mirks as
are raentioned in the scriptures, and
aguatic anima/s were properly tied to the
stakes after the rite's ol the sacrificial fire
had been performed.

35. In that sacrifice of the great son of
Kiiuti, thtee hundred aiumils were lied
to lh« stakes set Up. including that fore-
most of horses.

36 riist sacrifice looked greatly heanti-
ful as if adorned witli the celestial Kishis,
with the Gandiiarvis singing 1 1 chorus and
the various tribes of Apsiras dincing m
metnment.

37 It teemed, besides, with Kimpiirii'
shas and was tadimed with Kmniras.
All around U were houses of Brahmsnas
crowned with ascetic success.

38 There were daily seen the disciples
ol Vyass, itiose foremost of twice-born
ones, who are compilers of all branches of
learning, and well conversint with sscri-
ficial rites.

39 there was Nara Is, and there wn
Tunivuni of gresl splendo ir. there were
Vtshwavastt and Chitrasena and otliers,
allol whom were pioficient in music.

40 At intervals of tl e sacnfict .1 rites,

llose Gsndtarsas iLiIlrd in mmic and
wcIl-Neised In dancing, usrd to fltsse llio
Uffllinianas who were cngancd in the
aactifice. .


ASUWAMEDUA PARtfA.


te;


cuapter.

(ANUGU'A parva.)—

Vai«liampaya'>»'“^"

1. 11.V1..I! '“'"f.-

tiles, lUe oilier excetU sacfificeA,

were *«nficed. the PV;'« f'" Uve scnp*
according lo the ‘"J ' j wandered
lures, that horse (which haa

over the whole vkotid). „.-ce«.

j *li« cuiii"i;

r.rr".'*.”' -a

Ill, a.v.dtd

3 1I,C n™''"'”"'
minds tahinu up the in n, -^ia‘s race-

, K..,j Yodl.l.Ml«r* tta J

all Ins younger 1^'’®^'’' , it,« smoVe.
aeciifrting to the scnpt e».^
espshle ol purging ^oked. '

ol Ihc m.,ro« ll.« ■»•• ■ Q

t s The temainme “mos.

iilein eacriflcul pnesis p
*‘r;..,n,.h,..aa.pi-aa.e««.e~|
ol that monarch who “ ,, , .iiMstrimis

V,";.' i,r.''ar,c!;r.’v'ia-d ..n*
'T' n.,.. Y,.ai.,>i.a'i'a

. ‘'.oM....a p'”' ,M

♦iiih* 4 ».and 10 Vyasa he ft
wliole Barth.


rliole Earth. ,

* snn Vyasa. having

8-9 Satyavaiis son vy^

iccepied the Girth. k«nc

most one ol ...d — O

Vedi.ishil.lra the Just. » d e

kings, the E.rt . wMehy ,„e he

I .eiitrn to >"‘'\^"ur.hm.n.»>r*‘»*''^'
pnrchashig vahie, lor
ous o( wealth


IS ol wealth

Viidhlshlhira *»• *r

tn The great ^ , 1 .,, brother* hi »h*
intelligence »laV’’e "“.d to his »•«•»««*•
miosl ot the Vmgs mvii-d J^o

a.id 10 those Ur.umana*’ .w .cr.o-

tl. The OaVshlna n''’*|J’*^,j"fice „ »|,e

ture. lor the » 'VL*!

Kstih Earth

• aciiUciat prleste the

Ailuna. ^ . .t,.t|

;. -v. — ■’ssr:.- V’^


tSA'SiSS'-fS'Z

brothers When Draipsdi aYf*

words, hts brother* , Q^e^t

said — • !‘d by this announcement,

aeiisatiati created i>y hie voice

Then. O Dharata. ai» ' ,

.nlhrsltv.»»>‘''^''ycr >d*

’’I'” .V .t til.. m>. miirs, ■* ■’• I
ttxcell-nt' ”**= »poU'. arrsc.
ol Oral«nan*» t* „,l^

„ ih. ui-'j IV“ -

,1 3. in.

. . .ne! 1. h«w«^ver. give I J

Yoduy“i..i.‘’'X;'i lb.

Vy*»» ’ ., . ,i,at foremost one

„ Tl.... "1 ; i'll'. .« b" b;»'b“'i
of Korn’s rac*-*'* 5 * „ ^way f" '’ions «

became Uebhng the DsVslhU*

golden COO'S. u »»'';j^.SaCrtr.ce.


II. Accepl'Oif that * ^ ,,aro5«g. H^ve

ir." ” “ "'”

foor parts . . as the FJ'*

b.clhers . having got

tie sacrificial pri ,.i,r* dist'l*

..nhmited ‘l”*'',‘'‘hm‘’an »a gUdly and

umed rt e'de.ire ol ooc. recp-mi.

uccordll'k t aU.dl'ld-'*

>. '"'"'‘.Sj”:; to Y..i. 1-1


;iiRlI-I r


III'


MAHASAllRATA,


XO^


BralimsHAS, wUh ]oyi returned tA

tbcic respective abodes.

jy. holy and illustrious Vyasa

respectfully presented Ins own share) winch
was veiy large, of that gold to ICunti.

s 5 Heceiving that gift of affection from
Jier father-in-law, Prilha became pleased
a«d devoted It to the petfotmattce of vaii«
oUs acts of merit.

39 King Yudhislithira, having bathed
at llie conclusion of lus sacriBce and be*
come purged of all his sms, shone lit the
imdst dI his brothers, honoured by all, like
ilie king of the deities 111 the midst of the
dwellers oi the celestial regioit,

3? Ihe sons of Pandii, surrounded by
the asssmtied Wings, looked as beautiful.
O king, at the planets in llie midst of the
slats

31 To those Icings they made presents
of vAinus jewels and gems, and elephants
and horses and orntineiits of gold, and
'-n-'Ie slaves and clotlis and Immense
q laotity of gold.

33 Indeed, Prillit’s son, by distclbnling
that untold riciies aniong the invited kings,
shane, O king, like Vauhravana, the lord
tii richest

33. Simnanvng next the heroic king
VoUhrcivenanit, Yiidlnshtiiira, aave to ■•im
vaiious kinds of wealth in profusion and
l^ave him permission to return honie.

3|. Ihe son of Pandu, for pleasing* his
ister Uussliala, established her mlant
„rsnc.roi lit Ins paternal kingdom.

35. Ihe Kuru king Yudliishthira, having
> mil mastery over hit senses, than dis-
nnS'd the assembled Umgs all of whom

I .oi been prepeil> classed and honoured by
hull.

36-^37. The illiisttioiis son of Pandn,

II it ck^s'iser of locs, ihtn duly adoted the
great G <vinda and VaUdeva of gieat

jtt/Wv.'. trtd. ‘I'lftnr-i/iifrs ih 'Ulttvi 'fviJiw,

htroes ■•.ting Pradjumna for their firat
AssKie) by ins brothers, he then dismissed
them lor retuining to Dwaraka.

33 fhtis was celebrate l that sacrifice
King Yud' K'lll ira the j isl, which Was
disd'%vtshej hy a pin{ii,i»» <tr f{»i] and
'.if-ii.U .«id 1 li gems, and ocewns of

w n«-c of ddfeleiit ki lJ«.

39 rime were Uk*s whose muecon-
su -J of cU.ifi-l b illi-r and mxnuaciis of
> > > i t >er* were. (Im). O^nicf ut it Mfata's
rtt- i-ury lueis inade of drinks liaviug


a- Of m-n i-iiipl>yej «■» making and
4.a ia» t'ts aweetuieais called Khandava*


ragas, aid 0! animals killed for food, there
Was no end.

41. 1 he vast compound was Ailed with
men inebriated with ivine, and with young
ladies* filled with Jjy. Ihe extensive
grounds constantly echoed with the sminds
of drUcni and the blare of cotichs. With
all these, the sacriAce became luglity
delightful.

42. ' Let agreeable tilings be given
away,' — ' Let agreeable food be eaten,’—
lliese were the sounds which were re-
peatedly heard day and night m that
sacrifice It was like a great festival, full
of rejoicing and contenisd men. People
of various kingdoms speak of that sacrifice
to this day.

43 Having showered weatih in lorrenti,
anil various objects el desire, and jewels
and gems, and drinks of various kinds, the
foremost one of Bliarata’s race, purged of
ail Ins stns, and his purpose fulfilled, enter-
ed Ins capital.


CHAPTER XC.

(ANUGIIA PARVA )—

Centinutd,

Janamejaya said t—

t You should tell me «f any wonderful
incident which took place in the sacrifice of
my grandsire.

ValBbampayana said .* —

j Hear, O chief of kings, of a most
wonderful event winch took place, O power-
ful monarch, at the conclusion of that great
llorse-baci ifice.

3 — ^3. On all the foremost of Drahmants
and all the kinsmen and relatives and
friends, and all the poor, the blind, and
the tielplesi ones, being gratified, O clne1 n't
Bharata's race, when the gifts made in
prohiston were being spoken of on all sides.
Indeed when flivvers were rained tj iwn on
the I ead of king Yudhishihira the just, •
bine ejed innniio "Se, O sinless one, with
one side of hts body conve-t-d Into gold,
c-me there and spoke in a voice that was as
lond and deep at thunder.

6—7 Repaatedly littering Stich deep
sounds and thereby (nvlileniinf all animals
and trids, that pmutl dweller of a hole,

' with lari.e lindy sptke m a lionian vniee
and said.— 'Ye kinve. this great •sacrifice
•a not erj lal to a fraitha of powdered ba/ley
given away bya liberal Brabrnana of Kuttr-
kshettAwhowasobseTing the UnchchJYows


-


8

0 Vine, all lliose fofem«t cX
bfcame slficken witli wonder.

9. Approaclnng ce li»ve

Jhen aslted *nm, »ay»nK, ,,sotl"^ol ll»e
,eu come to this sacrtfice, t^'l* “

good and tlie p'oii'T *

10 What u ll>« txXt^t your

What your learningT vou v»bo

refuge: Mow sl.ould wo i'®'*

thus censure tins our aacnhcc

„. W.lhm.t 1..V1"? »■>'

portion of ll«e sci»p»wrea. V s*ccord-
should be done has been don j ^ to

...

reason, with the helpol vanou
riles. , . -

„ Th«.

Iron, liave been duly adored
to the way pointed out hy »acred

libations have been ..^as H'at

Pre with the help of proper ^ away

which should be given, has been g
without prtde. , .

13 the twice born *'*” w,’*ds* !'•«

pleased with gdis of battles

Kshatnyai have been |i>e

fought ‘® > ’leasTd wdh Sl-ad-

grandfathers have been please**

hv


accomplishing their ^esir .oeeches, *'“*

others with the residue of lli«P‘0‘
collected on the spot

,S •” »""v

protectiots. in

,6 Tli.t, llk'.l"''- Br.l.m...«

yon truly tl^clare I according

Indeed do yo i ded* experience

’a“ued

know. .._,.i. Vrtisare


.1 )o.

rapt alieininn as I tfu X

what troU place was ihr

„ Wonderful

,„„t il..t •■.PP'""’ j;, UU by ™-
...d .1. “"I" Br.hmsd.

H..VCT. ° j '"•'■■•

,'c. of fb™

?u^.-b.rn:7".d, fpp-

g^hl ___

The Mnngoose ^oii

O twice born I „,5 was of the

koowo by lb. ""™|'^„y „gblt0Pi p.'.;;”'

“'js '"ii. pi«i"j

pallet


,d_,B p. '<

e^y .1 lb. ,„k pl,c. |. Ji'.J-

,, B.«bCl““'"’; Ibinoi: tb.l

I„1 l.mi". P ,„„d lO I". • J
,l..r. 'v“ ' P*‘= 'ki'' ,* ®

„„..«bi.»'B”;, 7 .d pp ;oa I".

S:"d’.o;r.'..ro..oiJ


„ Vod.

Wist You have have 7*°’ oUean cd

You have come into I' " yoorsell

V.« boon

,8 Thus addressed by lhc'« ,„.«ered
persons, the J,*,,ce»t»orn ones if

Itiem as „nt false Neld'

h."fi.lp'rc"‘^=™|[7^p;;f‘;u„ , h.ve

?;u%rr^ort’ cl twice tons P-oas.


line vou. b.. —

'Mbest they could.

while the S'l „gd in piehin^ np grems

«,"^"’"-Ai 5 ».'byb... .nd haor..,b.
,*'.rp;.=i.i».ii"'‘’ -


MAHABIIARATA. It


, tdS


31. Unatle to obtaiirgrains of corn, the
1ital\mana soon became eal\ansteA wtlb
liunger and toil, tndcedi with all the
members ol Ins family, he had no food
to cat.

3a That best of Brahmanas passed the
days in terrible suffering. One d^y, after
the sixth division came, he succeeded in
gtXUn^ i frastlia of bailey.

33-~34 lhat barley was then reduced
by those ascetics to powder for mAhing
what IS called baktii of it. Ilavint; finished
their siUnt recitations and otlier daily riles. '
and Iiaviiig duly poured libations on the
sacred fire, those ascetics divided lhat little
quantity of powdered barley amongst them*
selves so that the share of each came up 10 the
measure of KuJiiv .3 (twelve double haiidtuls)
As they were about to s't down (or eating,
there came to (heir shade a guest.

33 Seeing the person who came as a
puest, all of them became liighly pleased
Indeed, seeing him, they sainted linn and
made (he usual enquiries of health and
happmeaa.

3$. I hey were of pure minds, seU'Con*
trolled, and gilled with faith and conUol
over the passions, breed from malice, they
lalconqiered anger. Possessed n( piety,
they were never pained at seeing Ulwr
people's happiness.

37—33, lliey hid renru >ced p'tde and
liaugt (mess and and anger Indeed, they
knew every duty, O foreinost of twice born
ones! liilorming their guest of their own
penances and of (he race or family to which
they belonged, and ascertaining from him
in reinrn those particulars, they caused
that hungry guest ol theirs to enter their
cottage. Addressing hiMi tl ey and, — this
is the Arghya for you. Hits W4ter is lor
washing yonr feel there are scattered
some iCusha grass for your seal, O siii«
less one.

39 Here H seme clean Sakiu acqured
bv lawful means. O,oow<*ifol one ! triven
by us, O foremost ol lwice*bgrn persons,
do you accept tt.

40. *lhu5 addressed by them, that l)rah>
mans accepted the l^ulava (twelve tlouhle
handfuti) of powdered bailey which was
offered to t nn and ate it all. Uol hi«
bunker, O king, was not satisfied with
what he ate.

4t. The Rrshmana while oirservirrg the
UiiHichi vow. seeing (hat Ini guest a hunger
was tiUI untitisfird, began to It ink of what
otlicr food he could place belora iiH>* for

pletsirg httit.

4S. Ihtrt hi* wiU ssnl to Mm,— Let my
•hate he gittn to hml (.et this (h^remast


af twice>born persons be pleased 'and frt
Uitn then go wherever he will.

43 Knowing lhat his chaste wife who
said »o, was herself strickeu with hunger,
that best of Dralimanas could not approve
of her share of (he powdered barley bring
given to the guest.

44 — 46 Indeed, that best of Brah-

I maiias endued witli learning, knowing from
j liisoivn slate Ifiat his aged toil worn, rheer*
' less, and helpless wife was herself afiln-ted
by hunger, and seeing lhat lady who had
been emaciated into mere skm and hones,
wa« quivering with weakness, addressed
tier and said,—' O beautiful one. with even
animals, with evert worms and insects,
wives are fed and protected. You should
not. therefore, say so. I lie wife treats her
husband with kindness and feeds and pro*

tects iitm.

47 Everything connected wJlIi rrll*
gioii. pleasure, and wealth, eareful nursing,
offspring (or perpetuating the race, are all
dependent on the w»fe Indeed, lit* merits
of a person hiintell as also ol his deceased
ancestors depend also on her,

4S. The wife should know her husband
by his deeds. Indeed, lhat man who fails to
protect his wide, earns great infanty hero
ami goes into Hrll here-ifter. buch a insii
falls dovrn from even a position of great
fame and never succeeds in ocqtitin>I
happy legions heieslter.

49 llios addressed, she answered him,
saying,— O twice born one, our religious
•CIS and wealih are united Du you take
a fourth of tins bailey ( Indeed, be ple-ised
null me.

$1. rruih, plensure, religious ment, ami
II aven, as acquirable by goo 1 q islnies, of
w.iinen, as nUo all the olqecis ol thnr
d<*i<e, O foremost of twice boiuones.de*
pend on the husband.


51. In the production of children the
I mother contubutes lier blood the father
coiitiibnle* Ins seed, the husband i* tlie
highest drily ol Ih" wife. 1 hrough the
favour ©I the husband, women get both
pleasure and offspring as tlie reward.


SI. You ore tny Pali find) fur the
pioirctmn yon give me You aie my
Biiariii for tlie ineatis of Sirsicance y« *
give me. Yon are, agam, boon.eiver In me
ou aecnunt of your iMvtng piesrntcd me •
SOI*. t>>i yo I tl ervlure. take mvtiiateol
tlie bat ley and give it to (he RU**I*


of advanced .

sou »r* greatly weakened, •»•• o
laiit, you are very laucS emasiatsJ.


* A5HWAMBDHA PARVA


54 Tims tddressed tjy litr, f)« took ti«r
sliare of tlie povtdered bfuley- and adtlrn*
siti^ Ins encst, said,>-> O t>»>sce*born oiie«

0 best of men, do >ou accept tins quantity

01 powdeied bailey as well.

5$. Tfie Bralimana, having accepted
tliai quantity, immediately ate it up, but his
huiuer was not yet satisfied. Seem/ him
tiiRfaiiRed, the Braliinana m the obser-
vance o( the Unchcha vow became thought*
lul

j6 His son then said to him,— 'O b>st
ol men, t-ihin/ my chare «f the barley do
you ^ive It to llie guest I I consider tins
»ct of (lime as one of great merit, lliere*
^ore, ] do ic,

57 Van should be always malnlahied

by me wnh great care. Maintenance of
the lather >s a duty which the g*od always
covet. '

58 The fnaiiitenance of the father in
his old age is the duty (aid down for (he
>nn, rins is the eternal Shruti (audition)
current in the llitee woilds, Cl learned
Kislii,

59 By living on barely you are capable
cl practising penances. ( he hf«>breath is
the great deity which lives (i> the bodies of
all embodied creatures.'

TI10 father said

6®. J/ yon Aiiaiit to the age of even a
a thousand jrars, )ou wilt stilt seem to me
to be only a little child tlaviug begotten
a son, the fattier achieves success through
him,

61. O powerful one, I know that the
hunger ol children is very strong ( am
ctd ( shall samel ow succeed in holding
my life breatiis. Dj you, O son, bceoine
strong,

6s Old and decrepit as I am, O son,
hunger scarcely aOliets me 1 have, again,
for many years, practised penances, i have
no fear oi death.

The soa said •—

63 1 am your on«pr?nf. The Shmti

deeUres that one’s offip'lng is called Puira,
became one i« rescued by him. One's own
self, again, takes hirih as his sen. Qo you,
(heitfoie, rescue yourself by your own seif.

The father said —

6t In form you are like me. fn con-
duct and in self.controi, also, you are my
like You have been eKamined on various
eccasidiis by me, I shatt, therefore, accept
jour share of the barley, O ion S

ds. ifaving said this, that foremost ol


twice-borii pertans cheerfully took his son's
share of the bailey and simtingly pnseiued
It to his twice-horn guest.

66 Having eaten that barley also, the
guest's hunger was not taififi<-d. Ifi*
rrghteoiir-souled Irost In the observance of ~
the Vnclicha vom became asliamed.

6y— 63. Desirous of dmng what was
agreeable to him, his chaste daughter-in-
law then, bearing her share el the bailey,
approached him and said,'— I hrough your
son. Oleariiel Brahmana, 1 shall obtans
a son Do you, iherclore, take my share
ol the bailey and give it to tins guest.

69 Through your grace, numiro n re-
gions of beatitude wilt be mine for eieriuiy.
through a graildsoii one obtains lhn<>e re-
gions going where one hat not to suffer any
kind ol misery.

JO. Like the three lold objects of life
beginning with Keli/ion, or the tliree lul 1
sacred fires, there is a tuple aggregate of
evedaslin/ Heavens, depending upon the
son, the grandson, aud the gf eat-grandsoii,

71. The son is called Puira because he
frees hiS ancestor’s debt. Ihroiii;!) sons and
grandsons one always enjoys the happiness
of ihose regions whicli are rtserved (or the
piput and the good.

The father-in-law said

yt — 75 O you ol cxcelleiit vows an )
conduct, seeing you wasted by wind and
Situ, deprived ol your very complexiui,
emaciated, and almost desiiiute ol conscious-
ness through hunger, how can 1 be sue’*
a transgressor against the rules of virtue
as to take your share ol the bailey 7 U
auspicious damsel, you shout t not say so,

(or the sake of thn«e auspicious results
for which every family must try.

74 O auspicious lady, how can | hof f
you at even ihis, (he sixth division of the
day nbstainin/ from food and observinif
vows 7 Voir are gifted widi pitrtty and
good conduct a»i) penances Alas, even
you have to pass your days m so much
misery.

73 . You are a clntd, afflicted by hunger,
ana belong (n tlie softer sex You should
be alwajs protected by me 1 Al-s, ( have
to see you worn out witli fast-, O you who
aic tfic delighler of alt your kinsmen.

The daoghter-ia-laflr said

j6 You are the senior of my senior,
•inca you are the deny of my deitv. You
are, indeed, the god of tny god. Oajou,
therefore. O powerful one, take my si are
ot (he barley.


no


MAtlABTtAKAT'At


' 77 My TiTe breAl^s* ant} rcIi|>ioui
rites, tiave all one object, vie , tUe servtCAof
my elder. 1 lireiigh jniir favonr, O learned
Bralmnna, I shall obtain many regiom of
happiness hereafter. ,, ^

78 I deserve to be looked after by joi
Know, O (wice-born one, that 1 am wholly
devoced to you Cherishing aUo tins
tlioughti vtt , that my happiness is yonr
concern, you should lake this my share ol
the barley.

The father-in-law sard '

79 O chaste lady, on account of such
conduct of yours you will for ever shine la
tlory for endued witlf vows and steadiness
in religions rites your eyes are directed to
that conduct which should be observed to-
viards elders.

80 1 lierefore O daughier-in taw, t
shall lake your share of the barley You
desarve not to he deceived by me, consider-
inki: all your virtues You are truly. O
blessed damsel, the foremost of all persona
observing the duties of righteousness

81 Having saM so to her, the Brahmans
look her share of the barley and gave it
to Ins guest At this the guest became
pleased with that great Qrahmana gifted
with great piety.

8j— 83 Will* grSlified soul, 'that finl
of twfce-born persons, endued with g'real
eloquence, who was nene else than |l>e
deity of Virtue in a human form then
addressed that farenio«t ol Bralimanas and
said ,— *0 best of twice born «nes« I am
highly pleased with this pure gift of yours,
tins gift of what was acquired by fair means
by yon, and which you aid freely part willi,
according to the rules of virtue.

S4 Indeed, this gift of yours is being
brtnled about in lleoven Ify Che dweflers ol
th«t happv region Af-i'l^ fliwers have
hrwi rained duwii from (ha sky on the
Eailh.

45 The celestial Ttiihts the deities
the Gandl arvas (hose wli 1 wsik before the
drilies and the crlesiul messengers, are
all landing you, struck with wonder at
your gift ,

85 The twice born Rishis who live in
the regions of Urakma, leatrd rat iiieir
cars, are anxious to see you O foremost
of twice-born persons, go to Heaven.

87 1 he Pitris living m (heir own re(«|On,

have all been rescued by them OtI ees,
aUn, wtin have not ailained to the nnsiiion
• nf Pune, bsve equally been rescued by-'pou
for countless cycles.


fi 88 For ysiir Bralimacharyya, your
gtfis, your sacrifices yonr penances, and
3 our acts of piety done wuli a pure heart,
j go you la Heaven

I 89 O you of excellent vow e,'you prac-
tise penances with great dev^iion Your
gifts have, therefore, pleaseil lie denies
ly, O best of twice born ones

90 Since yon have made this gift, in a
seasofs of great diffii-ijlty, witli a pure heart,
)ou have by tins act of yours, eonq lered
ihe celestial region

91 Hunger destroys one's wisdom and
ditves o£E one's nghteons u iderstanding.
One whose nxeihgence 1$ overwlielined by
hunger renounces all foriitiide

91 He, therefore, who conquers hunger,
Coi qiiers Hraven, forsootii. Une’s riglite-
ouaness IS never destroyed as long as he
cherishes the tnclinalion of malting gifts

93 Disregarding filial affection, disre-
garding the affect'iois oi>e feels for his wife,
and reckoning virtue as the foremast. yo»
have paid no ^leniion (b the cravings of
nature

91- The acquisition of riches if an Act of
slight merit lisgift to h worthy persort
IS fraught •Willi greater tnerit Of sliH
greater mei It IS the (proper) tune Lastly,
devotion is fraught with the Inghestr merit

95 The door of Heaven irvery diflkiill
(o see I iirough carelessness men eannpc
see It. , 1 he bar ol Heaven^s door has cup'*
drty for tts s-ed 1 hat bar is kept fasieiird
by desKO and af!-ction Indeed, Heaven's
door IS unapproachable

96 1 hose men who have subdued aneer
and conq lered their passions those Qrah-
ni anas wiio are gifted with penances ainl
tvlio make gifts according to the extent of
their ability, succeed in seerig it.

97. It has been <aid tlial he who gives
away a hundred, having a tlioiisand, he who
gives away ten having a hundred, and lie
who gives a handful of water, having no
money, are alt equal as regards the merit
they acq lire.

9S King Raolidevi*, when ri/vrsJed of
■It his riel es,’ gave a small qianlily of
water wilti “a pure heart Ihrongh tins
gift, O learned Drahmana, he went to the
Celestial region,

99 The deity of righteousness Is never

pUaied so rencti witli large gifts of cosily
llniigs as null gift I of even w-<(li>tess lhii>c<.
ll acq iireii lawfully and given away witl»
devotion and faith. •

100 King N’rig* had male cifis rd
Ihutlsanda of ktnt l» (he twice Ovtncfjtf


)lSllWXMl£D«ik »AKVA.


6 , sWWk >«»y "“fy “• "S

yot IjElorig lo lii'i'. I'C intollc I

' lOI. Uiltii>ara’s *oi ,h o IwU

b.J,. I. re, „ang in >l>«

having allaiiied 10 the regions P

of their power and wtih the Mv o» K
ousness One does not ac<iii"


.bl L, «I . hErm„««


•cisuch irteril


ot ’ aS«:«ti«
ktngs

114 liearinp


by fair means. _ , .n.

103 Throoeli .ngtr, >''' i.,l,

are ifeslroyed Tfirougl' c con*er-

10 go to llie cefestui regw • „j ^

.Ill, tt.a b.,.ris«l brougl.

Eoa... .1 coadact, ''‘‘"r

,04 Th, Itbd. O B""""?’ 'L.cU

HU mid. by )oo (ol a Ii,«i o.re

betley) is much greater l c.,,,r,c«s with

p,olo ,4 gilu or marry llorio-SacriBco,.


>■1 ''“T'd

£r,rV.:'bo“p,. n.a-=

.OroorO,. a>

*‘5 1.1 ..itiarrd ihnse Woro* '

f„r tl.w that 1 means eo npare

.ba’. /ra-'X- «'


„j .Having „.,ngoes.>di»‘

1 ^'“^^:;**;. W "host Brah.
appeared f"’"’ . “•* 1 ^.,. ilieir respecuve


u,„r roap-o

homes.


eitis or many nui.'i -


barley you liave c«n.j '*'*‘',„''hai>omes$.
region of Braliinsn Go ye'^ .f ^Urah*

O learned Br-luna«a. to the ®L„,

man who 11 witl out the slam of ‘i*'^*'***

106 Ofosemostof ‘*‘”ii'oT)or »•*
actlestuf car is f-ere for aU «i ^

r,.”r",,m'‘,b‘.’,f,«y h iw‘«o....->

Behold me 1 , t,

,0, Yoo ha«, t..ci..d joor body
Um,ol ,oor aobrovom"" 7''„',;“„d4„.,r
d^l,“,„'m,'uw,"sO oor, ,o Um
Tr A.ro, ...0 B'r'y

''?,‘‘"'ll"S,‘“d°lS.,.r ro

to the celestial tegio* w---,.

.0, A.ur.ba..raro.dDmW-‘"-
mg all duties, had I daughter «n-

o'.’.ombS.U Br. '.«•■'•■ •
out of tny liole , ,

.,„_„4 ,.bo«'«';i;;trf"c".u,“d by
powdered barley, wd ,, , -„a | ad glve.l

powder which U|at j ^ Drahmanat

L,y .odrb.proaoo”

royheadbecainsgn'd. P 0 firm m

the gift of that Brahmana

'truth and his 1 j._ .

►a.plebcdy has become golden.


j coi.qi.e'*; « ';Xt wende.lul


He.rse.Sac«»fice> , ^

“9 ficr'Vul'ons° ( ** ''-^*

lughly ot retfdn wuh th«

S o**®"'! ,1 .*

Absle.iMon

lures. ",;„i trolhlulness and

eiireV''''

sac.tfic®* ,


cuapieb Wl


(ANUGUA parva.)--

CcH/r««rii.


icfifiee* Iheg


jltacUed
,} observe

ajjdsell coi'l'ul.’ „ I

»• io’fr:".=b*.'." "”’p‘ f

seen inlM* k„. Hits is my convic*
;::n':“'S:..“o:.™'‘.o. og..... ==-«>■« to
suiely cotrecU t. •■


mahabharata.


Its


g Numherlets kin^Si O best of lw»ce>
born petsons, bavintr adored llie celeslials
III sacrifices acq iired > i^U fame liere and
obt-<ined the celestial region liereafter.

4 Gifted with great energy , tbe pMvet
fill king of tlie denies, vtt , Indra of a
ttiousand ejes, obtained tlie sovereignty
over llie denies tlirougli tile many sacrifices
lie performed witli gifts in profusion and
ailaiiied to the fruition of all Ins desires
5—6 Wlicn king Yudlilshtlnra, wllli
Dlimia and Arjiina by Inm, resembled Ibe
king of il e deities bimself in prosperity
and prowess, why then did that miingoose
depreciate tliat great llorse^Sactifice of the
great monaich,

Vaiahampayana aaid t—

7. Do )ou listen to me, O king, as I
describe to you duly, O Bharata, ifie excel*
lent orriinances about sacrifice and the
fruits also, O king, that sacrifice yields
8 Formerly, on one occasion Shakra
cclebr,«ted a partienlar sacrifice While the
limbs of the sacrifice were spread out, the
Ititwijas became busy in performing the
various rites ordained m the scriptures.

9— f 0 *1 he pmirer of libaliens, possessed
el ever) qnalificatidn, became engaged in
pouring lihattons of clarified butter. I he
great Ulshis were seated around Ihe
celestials svere summoned one by one by
contented Bralimanas of great learning
riKeriiig scriptural Mantras rn sweet voices
*1 1’ose loremosi of Adtiwaryyus, not fatigued
with svlial they did, lecned the Mantras
of the Yajurveda In soft accents

II. Ihe time came for killing the
animals Wiien the animals selected lor
Sacrifice were seiced, llie great Ktshis, O
king, felt mercy for them.

IS Seeing that ihe anrmalt had nil be*
come dispirued, those Kistiis, gifted with
wealth of penances, approached Shakra
s/>/i w/i •. ’m, vr/d/wl tf, wv.'Jiivt

is not auspicious '

13 Desirous of winning great merit
as )eu are, this IS, indeed, a maik of your
ixneiance of the i ites of sacrifice. O Puran*
dara, animals have not been ordained to
be killed in sacrifices,

14 O powerfni one, lliese preparations
of yours are destructive of merit | Ihis
sacrifice IS not consistent with snriue. Ihe
destruction of creatures can never be usd
to be an act of virtue I

15 If )ou wrsb h, let ytnjr priests
periorm year sacrifice according to iho
Agama, t)y perfotmrng a sacrtfiM accord*
h>g ta (he sciipivrat ordmancst, great Still
be the ratsit Bct|<iircd by youa


t6 Q you of n hundred e)et dojou
perform the sacrifice with seeds of grain
which have been kept for three years I hisi

0 Shakra, would he frauttht with great
Ttriue and productive of fruits ef high
efficacy.

17 The deity cf a hundred sacrifices,
however, move i by pride and overwhelmed
by stnpefaciioii, did not accept these words
uttered by tlie Kisins.

18 llien O Bharata, a great dispute
arose in that sacrifice of Shakra between
the ascetics as to how sapnflees should be
performed that is, should they be perform*
cd. with mobile creatures or with immobile
objects

>9 All of them were exhausted with
disputation 'Ihe Ruins, thou, those he*
holders of truth, having made a compact
with Shakra, asked king Vasu*>«

so O highly blessed one, what is the
Vedic declaration about sacrifices T Is it
preferable to perform sacrifices with animals
or with seeds and juices

91. Hearing the grestlen, Jt/ng Vaati,
without at all jid^ng the meiiis of He
argnmems adicanced nti boili sides, at once
answered saying *■*' Sacrifices may be pers

1 Mined with any of the two kinds of objeclf
ready ’

73 Having answered the q leslion thus,
lie had to enter the nether regions Indeed,
the poweiful king of the Chedis had to
undergo that miseiy for having answered
falsely.

7j. Tlierefore, when a doubt arisen, no
person, tiewever wise, should sini>ly decide
the mstler, unless he be the powerful and
selfiborn Lord himself of creatures.

74 Gifts made by a sinner with an im*
pure heari, for tins even when very large,
iiccorne lost, buch gilts go for nothing.

IS, Qij ijui. madit h.15 a-iyefion of

unrigliienus coi»ducl.“Otie, that is. who 1*
of sinful sniil and wtxi is a deftroyrr, ) ist
lams IS never acquired cither ki this wiiild
or in (he neat.

36 That person cf tnile Intrll genre,
S(t>o, from desire of acqu ring meni, ceic*
bralei aacrifices with wealth »cq»'»ed hv
unfair means, never succeeds in acquuirg
merit.

ay. That low wretch of sinful so^ wh*
hypocriiically assuming a garb of'virtoe
mshes elks to Ifrahmanai onlycteaies the
eonv<tfon in men atMut Ids own vkrt»o.

ai. That Brahmana ©f oncerirolled
Mndvtl, wha aequiiff utal.h by sia/el


A^»wamed»a PARVA.


overwhelmed p^^sio:\ and stupe.
(iciiQn, attains at Ust to the goal of iBe
sinful, '

99' Some orte, overwhelmed fey cupi'-
diiy and stupefaction, becomes bent on
sionnjj riches. He Is seen to persecute all
creiitures, lirged fey & sTntiil ind tihpure
fendsrstandlng.

30. who, feavinp acquired riches Iby
tucb means, mahes gifts or performs
sacrifices therewith, heVtr enloys the (runs
of those gifts or sacrifices In the other
World on accoun't of the wealth having
been acquired by dntair meant.

3fe ^Men having wrilih of penances,
by giving awfty, to the best of \heir po'fcer,
ferains of corn piefeed up from the fields or
roots or fruits or potherbs or water or
•eaves, acqufre great rherlt And proceed
to the celestial regicA.

, 2J~-33 Such gifts are fraugfet «ilh
Vuiue and equal to high austerities. Such
5i‘ls, ai also merely to all creatdres, ind
"•alimacharyya, truthfulness of speech,
"Od kindness, and forttlude, and forgive*
C*ss* forth th‘o hlernal foundatfons of
which Itself fa eternaf. \Ve hear of
''■shvamilra and oilier krngs of ancient
times ’

.34~3|; indeed, VfahmvaAiftl'a, and
i *j*'m*”^ king Janaka. and Kakshasena
“bd Arshtfsrna and king Sindhlidwipa.

and many ether king*, gifted with ,
weaiih of penances, having Vnade gifts of,
ariwfe* acquired by TairneSs, fiave attained
*“•'1*1, success.

,,35. Those amdngst firahmanai and
tihatriyas, VaishyAs and ShildraS, who
Pwform penartccs, O Bharata, and who
purify themselves, by gifts and other deeds
®‘ tiehteousness, proceed to the belestfal
*■^100.


CHAPTER XClI.
f ANUGITA PAnVA.J—
Concludtd, *

Janamejaj^a said : — ,

t. U, O illiulrioiis one, ceieSiial region
|s the frUu ot riches acquired by fair means,
you fully describe iC to me. You are
well. conversant with the subject and, it is,
‘“crefore, proper for you lo explain u.

2. O twice-born one, you haVe Said to
me what ihe liigli fruit was that acciired
*0 that Brahmana, who lived according
•*> the Unchcha mode, through his gift of
powdered’ barley. ForsooJh, all you have
»aiil is true,


1 3. In whit nay, however, was the altaini
ment held certain of the highest end in all
sacrifices T O foremost of twice-borh
persons, you should fully expound alt this

to me. ,

tTaisbampayana said

4. Regarding it is cited (his old narrd«
(Ive, O chastiser of enemies, of what toofc
place teemecly in the great sacrifice o£
Agastye.

5. Formerly, O king, AgastyS of great
energy, devoted to the well-being ot all
creatures, entered into a Oiksha extending^
for twelve years,

6 . In that sacrifice of Ihe great RisM
many Hotris were engaged who resembled
blaxing tires m (he splendour of their bodies.
Among them were men who lived upon
roots orfrUits, or who used two pieces c£

' stoite only lor husking their cotn. Or who
were sapporfed by only the rdys (of ibo
fPoon),

7. Among them were also r^en who
never took any food ifnless it was placed
beforethemby elhers desirous of feeding
them, and those who never ate anything
Without having first served the celestials^
the departed Manes, and guests, and those
who never washed the food which they took.
There were alto Yalis and Vikshus among
them, O king.

8. AH Ot them were rrten who had obtain*
ed a sight of ihe deity of Virtue in his em*
bodied form. They liad subjugated anger
and acquired a complete mastery over aff
their senses Living (n the observance of
selt-controf, (hey were freed from pride and
(he desire of injuring otf erd.

9. Tliey were always observa nt of a pure
conduct and were never obstructed by (heir
senses, fhose great, Rishis attended that
sacniice and performed its various rites.

to. The illustrious Rtshi (Agaslya) ac-
quired the food which was collected in that
sacrifice and that came up to the required
quantity, by lawful means according to the
beStoriiiS power.

II— ’13 Numeroih oihi-r ascetics at that
, lime celebrated large sacrifices. As Atras-
I tya. however, was engaged in tint sacrifice
of his, the thoUsand.eyed (ndra, O best of
' the Bharacas, ceased (D pour rain (an the
Earth) At the Intervals, O king, of the
sacrtficial rues, tins talk look place among
those RishiS of purifisd souls about the
great Agastya, vie ' This Agastya, en-
gaged in sacrifice, is making gifts of food
with heart purged of pride and vanity.

14,* Flip deny of the clouds, however,
has cea*«d to peut ram. flow, tndttd


ASHwAMEPriA PARVA


114


Will food prow? This sienflce of the
je Brahm^nas, is great and extends lor
twelve jearsi

15—20 The deUy will nol pour rain
for ihese twelve years 1 hmhing on this
you should do some favour to this Rishi ol
*.reat intelligence, vte , Agastya of severe
penances ' VVI en tiiese words were said.
Agastja of great prowess pleasiig all
ti ose ascetics by bending lits head said —

* If Vasava does not pour ram for these
tw»Iie years 1 shall lien perform the
mental sacrifice Ihis is tie eternal ordi
nance IfVasavadoes not pour tarn for
these ti elve years 1 shall then perform the
Touch Sacrifice This is the eternal sacri
n e If Vasava does nol pour ram for
'I cse twelve years I $1 all then putting
foril) all my exertions make arrangemenis I
for oil er sncrificcj ch-jracierised by llie
observa ce of the most difficuU and severe
voi s 1 f present sacrifice of mme, with
Seeds, has been arranged lor by me with
labour of many years

21 1 slull with seeds do much good

No obstacle w 11 arise I Ills cny sacrifice
IS incc'pable of being bafHed

93—23 It matters little whether the
deity DO us ram or no downpours come
Indeed, li Indra does nol el nn own will,
show any regard for me. I shall, in that
case, change myself into tndra and keep
all creatures alive Every creature, on
whatever food I e has been nourished, will
coi tiiiue to be nourished on it as before
24 I can even repeatedly create a
d fferent order of ihmgs Let gold and
whatever else 0! riches (here is, come tO
thrs place to da/.

25 — 27 Let all (he wealth Which k in
the tl ree worlds come here to day of its
oi>n accord^ 1 e* all (he tribes of celestial
Apsaras, all tl e Gandharvas along with
the Ivmnaras and Visliwavasu, and others
there are (of that order) approach this
sacrifice of mine ^ Let all il e wealth which
exists among the Northern Uurus come ol
tl eir own accord (o these sacrifices Let
lieaven and all those who have Heaven
(or their home, and Dharma himself, coroc
here ' j

38 After tl e ascetic had uttered ihese
wirds everyi) ing look place as he desired,
by virtue of h s penances, for Agastya was
gitled wHh a mind wliKh resembled a burn*
sni; fire and was possessed of extraodmary
e ergy

29 The Pistis who were there saw the
power of penal ces with re|oicing hearts
Filled w 111 wonder they their said these
words of grave significance.


The Rishis said —

30. We have been highly pleased svllfl
words you have uttered We do nol, hoW*
ever, wish that your penances should suffef
any diminution Ihose sacrifices are'ap*
proved by us which are performed by fair
meahs Indeed, we wish duly those sacrl*
(ices sthjcli rest on lawful means.

3t. Acqiiring our food by Uwful means
and observant of our respective dunes we
sfiall seek to go thro igli sacrificial initia*
lions and tlie pouring ol libations on the
sacred fire and the other religious rites

We should worship the celestials,
practising Brahmacliaryya by lawful means.
Completing the period ol Brahmacliaryya
we have come out of our house, obsetv*
ing lawful methods. That understanding!
which IS freed fro n the desire bf inHicimg
i an^ kind of injury on others is approved
by us '

34 Vou should, always, O powerful one,
commend such abstention from injury irt
nil sacrifices We shall then be hiijhly
pleased O foremost ol twice born ones.
After the completion of your sacrifice, when
dismissed by you, we elialt then, leaving
Ih s place, go away

33 As they were saving these w*^*^*'
Purandara, the king of the deities, gifted
with great energy, seeing the power Ol
Agasiya's penances poured rain

35 Indeed, O Janamejaya, till the con^
pleiion of the saciifice ol that Rishi m
great prowess, the deity of ram poured
ram which met the wrslies o( men bol"
about q lantity and time,

37 Placing Vrihaipatl before him fhe
king of II e denies came there, O royal
sage, and pleased the Hishi Agastya.

38 On the lerminalfon of that sacrifice!
Agastya, filled witli joy, adored all those
great Rishts duly and then sent them >11
away.

Janamejaya saiS —

39 Who was that mimgoose with a
golden head, which said all (hose words it
a human voice 7 Asked by me, do y®'*
tell me this,

Vaishanipayana said'—

40 You did not ask me before antf,
lljerefore I did not lelJ jotT Hear as I
tell you who that nn»ngo<Ke was and why
he could assume a In^liv voice

41 Formethy, the Rishi Jamadac"*
desired to perform m Shraddha
Homa Cow came to him and the Riak*
milked her himseU.


iiSllV'/AMlDltA PAtVA.


i, II, Alin

fcliicli was tie«. diirable, j a«ger»

deUy Dharma. as«um»«R »be lorm oi k
wtered that Vtssel ot m«lK. _

AX Irtdeed, Dharma wai
determining *hat that done

tutoutd do *heit Dharma

lo hrm Having thought U'UI,

Spoiled that mil*. , , , ^

44 Itrowns ll.,l Ih" •; ’S
Vra» Anger, the ascetic *aa «« „g

Self to the Rishi.


t»5


, Vnu tiavB not don*
without any •"'.''‘J* . i have no grudgd
' ne any mjury to^aay*

'Ttw- >«; :r,d‘pSlx-’

P,4.hh4b4C4«.
lainongo”** nl-asc the P'trl*

sa. He then began curse

I in order to bring a Aj,e,e words —

S, ,hM h= «” S, «l Dl»™>


uudt.|br,b«p.abdu.db,,^ VudbUblbl.4.

.£ Xz SH^

favour.


JamadagttUald—

47 I have seen you, .^./you lih«»

ernbodtedform. Go you -herever you


riNis asiiwameD'*^ I^ahVA.


A PROSE ENGLISJ! TRANSLATION


or

THE iAHABHARATA.

(TRANSLATED LITERALLY EROSI THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT).


ASHE.AMA.'VA.SIKA. 3PABVA-

VOL. XV.


IDtTCO & PPOttSQCO or

ItAKHATHA NATH BUTT, (.SUtlriy H.A, M.B.A.S,

Rector, Kesiiub Academy 5

•Author of the English Translalions of the Rantayana, Vishnu Paranam,
Srintad Bhagavatam, Kamandaktya, Ntfisara, Bhagavad-Gita,
and many other uoorks

40, Nayatt Chand Duti's Street, Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:

PsiNTED ur H. C D.4SS, Etrsira P*!ss,
40, Rayait Chand Dull't Street,


1905,


ASHR A-M AV ASIK A


pab-va;


TiBLE OP CONTENTS,


'’v’' ■ .,1 f-,,,.! SCI »I Bliiios. “*

v«ahu.u..«-

" cimssIV-V,..*-. ccsda*” t.
Dhntarashtt*— p. 6. . ^

CiurTEa V-Dhtiuraihua**
YudhishHiira— p. 7* . , j-.«IhedW

OhnwrashWa— p. 9* , «»f

C»m.s vn.-l«t.s=ltoc sbost «.
and peace— p. to- . «»utet

CaantJ^ vt«

about reiutnmgtnw forest p

csms.

l»i iMcnuon snd spoloS““ « ""


dtscrtbed by a Brahnu M-a'eUirlbutes

CHiPTea Xl.-Dbt‘«rashlra cut
money— p. U- advises Bhinw.

CaAPrea p« »S*

10 give up fits Itostilc f e g ^J^mumcates
Chaptbr apoft^Z

to Ohntarashtra, Yudins

'’’cLics XV.-Db';>””“"’‘
l«,cl.t Ihc 1°'”' drt«»nsti»n

lo Iono”thc blmd W— P' I „ i„,
ca«tss XVU.-K>»«‘» '■'P”

sons-p. 'S- ,, Tl« scivsl ol lb'

Caarr**^ ao.

patty at the lotest-P- ao- ^ b«f

Casrcss X1X.-A<'>«*'«
ttntage— p>


Ca.rrrsXX-Tbc-.rrl..l ol s.cclic
CttAPTUt XXI.—

-■X'm. KX<U,-ibP roys.

P* wlV—The roe«f''’g.®l,*''j

'‘c'„':J;rxXV.-Thc..«c cocUnucd-
f' VXVI -DbntscscMcs ecqui-

, J'njSbE. p' r "

'^'*“:;'.Vxxvu.-^'« p.s.i"s «' »

■ Si*l«.riby vldhlsMbirs-P- >9-

’"c;«t“s xxvin.-ibp i-..cy •'
V«!s»-P, 3”- Ti,, conyeriawn ol

v^^Sbrr.SoiK.coo

Ca<pr«l“ ’bXXl

„„ her .oo'-P’ bb „|,o„

tjSSrScS dcocoycd CC-PP-X-

‘’•cu’.PT.S XXXV.-J-P"i»’”"’

”c“.TT«"’'xXXVI.-Vy.=s OOOCO.C.

”c:;;:^;i;ssrsc=s

C..CCX.S XXXV.n.-Vod....blh„ss

'“""'"“"xXX.X-Nx.do dccbcs


THUS MAS-A-BSAE-A— A.

...i, (lU eholish).

ashrahavasika parva.


OSASTEB 1. I , i;„|.

. •* R*'® -n'J

-Ilf


'iiara) and alto the Codden of
'Sarasvah), let ut cry tucceu.

mamejiyasaid:- k,„g4,m.

I. AtWf having ,hl Pan-

iw did my B^f***’**''*!*!! 'v,n| Dhciu-
ivai treat Ihe high**o'>>«‘* 8

istiua)


r'*of ro>a' Lir"rihV,vi<e

”"f ‘v'dl:

kilUd. - -


,1 trwv>i« •‘•a"' upw” " •

, ‘'how .nd..d, d .d >’'« iISfj J,','*, ‘Tj ■ Th. , ”', kmSS:

milted, beliavet How aw« the king* , (a etieit

- - Ji- sy{Fic;;^ ;f.s"Jrr.


II Gatidliari act < « noble

j For Itaw many «' y^u should

midfadter rule the kutgdom T V«u
' -ne all lliii«

.AampayaM said'-
lU.i..a rtgim'd » „ lulled.

'■ "“.du,., Se..l.ya

.T;’JTs:;:ri.%.ed.o .... »p»-

itniarashira. consult that

6. The Pandavaa ‘ j for

"« -n ”TLUm« under ll« -dvtce
iar», Uiey did all Uung
the old king. often to go

7. I hose hef«» i,,.n%ltef h»v'"8

ilhalkiogandsilbesid I wishes

8 They did all things under^l^^^

mand pi In'.g KunU-

l;s?:a.'orde,‘.dG^a.. — -

9. Oraupadj

old' kh g ‘'j^d the
Unit osiit laVlittltt.!**


j.*.- ...d »'« ''tu‘'';?„i';;;

.1.. ai>.°";'p,' h„d R.k.hi.....

•Trvd.-»^"^rd''-irt:^-°M

Sr'S«Kr"." d .P. .d,a.....l.au»" el

the law. ♦r»M»nt pohey

Vidura, hy 1' riawas cot numerous *5'^®*

,.d P»;d"'’'f ‘!'yua,,„|.,l„ra 111. I... »=>"
lO deatli. tv'uc

said anyth* ig »n the -sn of

,8 On tl ose o«V;.re tnU U e Wl ly
''"'’"‘rrit"™"."''. Y..ai, .1 il... '“d LO

p',r ..d

ai. ’ . d V-t 1 us kinoi G

atidihetkliaudhoieytu uv


1


mmiabaiirata.


food sgreeaWy preparad by the admjxmre,
o! nany articles, were caused to be made for i
Ih- old kin,; ai m Ixs prosperous da)S.

S'*. Those bings who canie there cna
after dootlier, all used to wait upon llie o!d
Kuru king as before.

33—26 Kunti Oraupadi, and she «t ilie
S.aiwaU race pos<r*<3ed of great fame,
and UlupMhe uau^hter of the Naga king,
•Mid qjeen Clutra ipada, and tie Sister of
Dh(i<iitaketu, and the diugrttr of Jara*
sandlUi-^t'iese and many oilier lades, O
i-ti'g, used 10 wait uasn llic daughter of
biivala like maids oi all work. Yudnisthrs
aUiys enjoined upon I is brothers ihai
Dl rit iraslitra, who was deprived of all lii«
children, might not feel 1 imsetf uni >ppt m
any way. 1 hey also, on their part, iisiening
to these pregnant commdtids from kutc
Yudliishthirai showed particular obedience
lo the old king,

97. There was one exception however
It was Ohimasena. Alt that had fotiowed
from tliat match at dice which had been
broug) t about by the wicked understanding
of iSiritsrashtra. did not go away from
lh« heart o( that hero


CHAPTER II.

(ASHRAMAVASIKAS PARVA.)—

CcnliiiurJ,

Vftisliampayana said

I. Ihus adored by the Pandavas, the
royal son of Amvika passed his time happily
KS before, waited upon and lionourcd by

the Rishis.

o That perpetuaier of Kiiru's race usrd
lo make those foremost of oSefings wlich
should be given to II e (Jtal manas I 1 ie
cayat son of Kuiiti always placed those
anicles at Dlifitarashtra's command.

3 — 4 Shorn of malice as kmg Vudlnsh-
tliira wa% I e was always affect onaie
towards I is uncle Addressing h»s broil ers
and ministers, the king said,— King Dhitta
raslitra shou'd be 1 ononred both by niysilt
and you all • He 1 idee J, is a well wisher
oi mine wlio obeys the commands of Dhtita*
rashxra.

5—6. He. on the other hand, who treats
him otlieriMse, »s my enemy £uch a man
should certainly be punislied by me On
days of perfoimiiig llic rites ordained for
iti« Pitrn, as also in the Shraddhas petfomr'
cd for his sons and aS well wisfcrs, the
ftreat Kuut king Dtirttaraslilra, gave


away to Orabmanas, as esch deserved
immense quantity of wealth after Ins heart,

7. King Yudhishtbita the just, and
‘Bhima. and Ary ina» nnd the iwn;' dtsirou'
of doing urat was liked by tK |d kings,
used to execute all tiis command

8 They always took care^ -tlh^nld
kiqg who wis aif! ct«d With the destru tion
of liir sons arrf grandsons, — with, that i',
grief caus'd by the Pai dsvas themselves,-'
might net die of his grief.

9 Indeed, the Pandavas treated him
in such a way that that Kuru liero might
not be deprived of that bappine<s and all,
those articles of emn'^enl whidi he ha 4
during bis sons* h f

10 Tfie five bsSitiers, fiV , the sons of
Pandu treated thus Dhritarashira, living
under his command

tt Dhritarashtra also, seeing themsd
humble and obedient to his commands and
acting towards lum as discipks towards
preceptors, treated ihern also like a loving
preceptor in return,

19 Gandhan by perro'mlng the van'
oits rites of ilie Shraddha and making gififf
to Qfshmanas of vatious objects of enjnyj
menl, became freed from the debtkhe oaeo
to her slam children.

13 Thus rfid that foremost of rrgliteouS
men, nr. king Yiidhishiiiira the Jtwh
endued wiili great mtelligehce, ahng with

I Ills brothers, adored king Ohritarashtra.

Vishampayana said

14 Endued with great energy, that
P'rpe'uater of Kiiru's race, vir • the old
king Dhriiarashtra, could not see any ill'
wilt in Yudhishthira.

15. Seeing that the great Pandavas
were in the observance ef a wise and
righteous conduct, king Dhriiamshtra, the
son of Amvika, became pleased with tliem.

16 SuvaU's daughter, Gandhari, re*
no incmg all sorrow for her (slain) childreiv,
began 10 show great love for the Pandavas
as they were her own chridren.

17 Gifted wHh great energy, the Kurw

king Yudhistiihira never did anything tlmt
w-is disl ked by the royal son of Vichitra-
vwyy^ On tlie other hand, he always
treated him in a highly agreeable way.

i&— Whatever acte grave or light,
were directed by king Dhrilarashtr* or
the helpless Gandhari to be done, were all
done with respect, O monarch, by that
destroyer of hostile heroes, me, tlx PaA»
dava king.


mahadharata.


15 Employed In doing Ihe beliests ef the
(he Uvins never said anything that
was disagreeable to the old king. Iben
Dlintarashtri one day honoured hia friends
by Jus confidence Addressing them wilh
tearful eye*, he said these words.

Dhntaraslitra said —

id You know how the destrucliort o(
Kurus has happened All (hat was brought
about by my fautt, though the Kauravas
approved of all my counsels.

17. Fool that S was, 1 installed the
wicked minded Ouryodljana, that erthancer
rf the terrors of kinsmen, to rule over the
Kurus

18 — 20 Vasirdeva had sard tome— 'Let
this sinful wretch of w eked understanding
be slam along with all his friends and
eounsellets ’ — 1 did not listen to those words
cf great significance All wise men gave
me tl e same benehctal advice Vidura,
Bhislima, Drona, and Kripa said the same
thi ig, rhehofy and gieat Vyasa repea-
tedly sard the same, as also Sanjaya and
Gaiidhari Overwhelmed,, however, by
Rlial afleciion, ( could not follow (lutt advice.
Bitter repentance is now my lot for my
neglect > ^ <

91 T also repent for not having bestowed
that biasing prospeniy, derived from istrea
jind grandsires on the great Pandavas
possessed of every accontplishment

33 I he eldest brother of Oada foresaw
the destruction of all the kings Janarddaua,
lowever, considered that destruc^on as
tiighfy beneRctaf,'

33 So many battalions of troops*
betongmg to me, have been destroyed 1
AlaS my heart is pierced wiih ihousands
of darts on account ol all these results.

34 Of tvvicked understanding as t am,
now after the lapse of fifteen years, t am
trying to expiate my stns

35 Now at the fourth division of the
£iay or somet mes at the cigt fti division,
^vi(h the regiilariiy of a vow, 1 eat a little
lo<jd for simply satisfying my thirst. Gan-
dhaii knows this

96 All my attendants believe that I cal
'bs, usual llirptigh (ear of Yudtishihira
alone 1 concealed my deeds, for if the eldest I
son of Paiidii came to know of my vow, he ;
he would feel great pain.

27 Clad in deer.slrin 1 lie down on the
Earth, spreading a small quantity of Kinha
grass and pass the time in silent reotaiions
ihe illustiiuoiis Gandhari also, passes ler
lime in the observance 0! similar vows
bS 'thus do we both act, we who have


lost a hundred sons none ef whom ever
retreated from battle. 1 do not, however,
grieve for those children ol mine. Ibey
have all died while performing Kshatriya
duties.

39 Having sard these words, the eld
king then addressed Yiidhnhthira in parti-
cular and said,— 'Blessed be you, O son of
the princess of Yadu'srace! fjsten now
to wliat 1 say,

30 Cherished by you, O son, I have
lived these years very happily. I have ,
(with your help) made large gilts and per-
formed Shraddhas repeatedly.

31. I have O son, to the best of my
power, acquired irteril largely, this Gan-
dhari though destitute of sons, has lived
with great foilitude, looking all the while
at me.

32 They who infleted great wrongs
on Draiipadi and robbed you ol >0“* ■<
a01uence -^those cruel men— have all left

; the world, killed in battle according to the
: practice of their order.

33 I have rwthing to do for them, O
deiigUteroi the Kurus' Killed w’Kh their
faces towards battle, they have attained to
those regions which are reserved for the
wielderaof weapons.

34 I should now, do what Is benefieis!
and mertiorioos fer'meks also for Gandhan.

0 great king, you slwutd grant me per-
mission*

35. "You are the foremost of all righteous
persons You are alwsysdevolcd to virtue,

1 he king IS the preceptor ol all tteatuttS. ,
It IS for this tliat I say so.

3(5 With your permission, O hero, I
shall retro mto the forest, clad w rags
and barks, O king, along with this Gan-
dhari

— jg I shall live in the forest, always
blessing you ft is proper, O son, for the
members of our family, to make over sove-
reignty, when old age comes to children
and lead Ihe forest mode of I fe. Living
there on air atone-, ei~wbstain ng from all |
food, 1 shall vriih this wife ol mine, O hero, 1
practise severe austeciiies. j

35 You shall be a sharer of those pe- f
nances, O-son for you are the kingi Kings J
are sharers of both auspicious and inauspi- «
cious acts done in their kingdom. ,

, . I J I ! '

7Tidhisbtlura said —

40. When you, O king, are thus^subject 1
to gnef, sovereignty does not please me at
all. Fie on me who am of wicked un-
derstanding, devoted to the pleasures of


PART*


I . iriM r dicmlv, 1 would reicul you Rom Iht Itytf ol
ruU, and abiolutoly noEligenl ol my t j your hOftu
concemso


At I «,..h all mv trolhers, wa»j Dlmtaraslitra said:— ,

,o;;mo^”ol 'yo:;«..’i:.v.4 55_.0 -''■R''-"'' • -S^’oTowm^

‘S™,n”'Rr’i.odTo"1 'R'»R ’.l‘S.°.’;oH.-.u,ra.n,l,.baU .hooU

oakod 0...1.. o ^ ...«o p„.

d/c’.vtd by'you who RR” "S""'’”' S,“”“'„°d”bi y'oo'’ mpocti’ Tam

Zra. limyOo'"hI.o la..o.ly ^.tT.Id. V.ulbLd, O kmg, E-ant »•

fuch gtief. ‘ ;i flf ol P*'""**""'

, 43 What AVJ’/orsacri* Vaisbampayana Said —

\ ttuclesofenioymeiU. what yjd, O U.og. „_58 ^Having «*'<* o”®Dhntl.

h S-oemgS." much affl-™- ' Vodb-^'S y{if.,io:'uomhEogVo

• 4t I ocnc'd'c "IV hmgd"'" “ ^(""'d '.'h5“m,d “th hand. .o.nJd .ogolhor. U -

aol'myacu Ubo « k"::::,. S";%’„d .» . 1.0 R'“> -

umfual ol lhc« word, ihat 1 am add.m- 'X tmg Ihmush y°“

■"rvou am ouo.,a.ho. y;u.am -


to SOllCIl il'c a» -

A'v r'"^..L“Xr.iSh'&


/ '"g* .


.2, °Ji;;o?hS.'So^J'’"^^

anybody else whom you may w'h* ruddenly^ohe^ ®''* ‘’**'*’

48 1 am not th« kmg. hJ: JS'mc'’;=“V.rud by . i..o.c."E R"''-

mn'ld!,mTmmpcrro.!!io'>>oyo'‘''''0 am TudhuWllira ‘AJ* “

so w. am y- Rbddmu « _D«y „ .u-da, on a -mb

dl.ana and oilers »’ 6 ± Tie o" n’® *’*'


dhana and others wet® rnoth«r

ibalGaodha.i .1 aj much my momm

r.?.\.',JI.?o?mSMlmll°!hV;«V’A^
lo me when I am depttveo o j r |


pieces, leans iooa»y


‘o .•.U^I.balMam .1 - -R,?-


Alub..b.l.ne.toy.u. V»iabanipar«M aaW :-

‘ ’"hesiance. Weareai « t, ^ Pandara king.


fpandara king, knowing eve^

. l.«

54 ^ 1 think. ° *eU dotmy! * By | the ' touch cl the kms's hand

you and execuung ywt cffmmto«


heidlowImaaemycb«.nee.

dependent on you. O kmR «»
ih? lever el your heart be removeu


I > MAMABirARATA^ > '


on niitcli^ H<re\{ewel< and medicinal
tierbs, Uhnuraslitra regained Ins conaci
ousn«s 3 .

- I • Ti* ' -

DhritaraslitraAiM — „ >

• 63 ., .Oa jDtiiragaiiir loueKmr, O son &C
Pandn.jVrtOi your band, and do joo un-
brace me O you having e^es like laiuS
petal*, 1 am reitored to iny senses tl^rougti
tlifc auspicious loucli oi your band (j r i
6g 10 king, I uitk to smell y^urTiead
* 11)6 clasp vt ;your arms IS highly gniUly-
mg to me. '

70 'liils IS Uie eighth division «f the'J
day and therefore, the hour (or taking niy
!om ' For|ii 3 t‘having taken my loud, O
scrdu of (Curu'a race, t aid sO weak tliat t
CidinotTnoie ‘ ,

ji. Great iias been my exertion while
lohciting you tendered cfieerless by ii,
U sun, 1 had fainted . - i j

71 O petpelUAfoc^ of Kuru's race, 1
think that teceivmg (he tuuefi of > our i and,
whichls }Iixe (nectar in its vivifying effects
1 tiavt been testored W my senses.

VRiaUampayana said ^ •

73 thus addressed. O Ohkraia, by the
eldest brother of Ins father, (he son, of
Kunli, from alfeetion, 'gently touched every
pert el -hU body. 1 r •

'Regaining his life, king^ Ohrita-
rasUtraembraceu thekoR of 'Pandu with i li
arms and smelled ins liead.*- *•

75. Vidura and oihers>wep^ hfauditn
great sorrow On account, ho»ever oi the
poignancy of Iheir sorrow, they said noiliuig,
10 either the oTd king of the son of Paiidu
76 Gandhari, kiiowi ig every duty, bore
her sorrow/wilh patience, (Snd toided as
herjheart was, O king, said nothing ^ r

77. Tlie other ladies, Kunti among them
became greatly ofU'Ctedj lliey wept.isli«I
du)<^ ■jeofusA. uacs^ and sal &u(iouudin^
the old king. , , - •

7S.— Then Dhrifarbshtra^onco rnore’pd*
dressing Yudhisli\l]ira,^said l> ese words'—-
'Do yoi, O king, , permit me rid placUse

penances. ^ i j n \ \ ^ t
79’ By speaking repeatedly. O son, my
mind becomes weakened You should dot,
Oson,.afflctme^ierilns^^^,„^, ,
So. When that foremost one oT Kurus
^acVWksYaying so fo YudhishUnr* a Mud
sound of waiting afose from all'the waritors
t^titre present * u s i:’’

81—82. Seeing his royal father of great
iptendeur, emiciated and pale, 'deduced to


aUto unworthy of lifm.i Worn out wkh
fasts, and looking like a skeleton covered
with akin, DIarma'sson Yudlnshthira shed
tears of grief and once more said these

Sj. 'Oforeindst ofmen.nl do not wish
(ur life and the E^rtlvt O scorcher of
enemies, I sliali engage myself m doing
«fi4t IS pi«asant to you. , ,

84 If I deserve your favour, il I am
dear io you, do you eit something,' I shall
then know what to do.'

85. Gifted wtihigreal energy, Dhnta-
rasliira ihen said.to Yudhishthira •>•'1 wish,
O son,, to take some food, with your per-
missim

86 When Dliritarashtra said these words
to Yudhist thira, Satyavati’s ion'Vyasa
came there and said as follaws. >


CHAPTER IV.

(

( ASHRAM VASIKA PARVA,)— .

CfntinueJ, i

Vyasa said — * ,

t O mi2,hly armed ViidhiihlhirB, do
unliesixatiiigly ivliat Dfiniarathlra of Ivurui*
(anniy has said ^ ^

a ^ Hus king IS old He has, again, been
made so iless 1 think be will nct^be able ^
to bear ins grief long. , ^ 1

3 The higlily blessed Gandhari, endued

wKli great wisdoTnaivd kinOly speech,') beat 8
with ivrtliude her excessive grief owing to
llie loss of her sons ^ t

4 ] also tell you (what the old king say^.) ‘
Do joo obey my words 'Let ihe old king
have your permission l.et lum not die an
ingloriobk death at home. , t

5 Let this king follow the path of r6yal ’
sages of old Indeed, all royal sages, retire '
into the woods at last. ^ .. (\

Vnisbattpsybna said ^

6 — 7 — ^hus addressed at that time by
Vyasa Of wonderful deeds, king YudI ish-
Ihira the yust, 'gifted wUh migt ty energy^ i
said to tie 'great 8506116*111656 words,—
%Yaur holy *611 is held by us in great re-
verence Yob alone ate out pleCeptor ,You
alone are the refuge of tins oUr kingdom
asalsoof our family. '

8 I am your son You 'O holy one, are
my fall er 1 You are our fcn g. and yoij are
oUr preceptor I llie son it oulJ, as dic-
tated by every duty, obey Ibe Commands
oi jus father. , ^


ASimA<lAV*S>KA fARVA


V«iiliampayana aaid-^

n—lo Thus uddresstd RT I?®

Vjssa, Ihst loremosl ol • potls

,ng Ihc Vtdss, Ih.t „„,uuid

S.lied mil. !!?],, 1,50,0

,0 Yodh,.l,.h,ia those words,- q

mtghty armed onel *1 . ? aid aee

Bbaraul Ibis king reap'd old ag*

He IS now in the Usl stage ol kle*

xi. Permuted t«lh by me

this king do wliat be wishes. ^ ^

as an obstacle m lui way. ^ at,.,!,.

IS, This .s the huihesl duty, ov^dh

tS, ,“o'h”.!o‘o,VAho ..ro.t‘^o«»'-“d .0

IhOSC^UIOS.^^^ ,

e! kings, respected this old k g
ciple reveres Ins preceptor.

,4. (At that time^ be J^h

teUsnali m many ,* . *eattli and

Broluse gifts consisting o( b|1 protected

jewels, and ruled the E*«|‘ ^ ,

his subiecii wisely and well

IS Having obtained a he en-

tl ildren and a vears while

l?u‘'‘,f;,"',"‘i"l.,".hd'8... much

Id Yooisoll .IsOj^ o hmf'woolippS

K:-8°..’dtV S'i

lhat ready obedience wlncli a H
to his precepior.

17. Do you Sfa"* him to

filler. The ume lias w™* He

nimd l» Ih^h.r. svsi'A'

does not cherisn» O »u , »

slightest anger against ay 1

VaUliampayanaBaid*— ’ vrat»

18. Having said „ *«,


, - CHAPTER V. ‘

(JASHRAMVASIKA PARVA 1 -.

' Cenlufttti.

VaisTiampayana

;£Sarp-=-

't^'G.udh's.l

.1?; ,h. h.Ehl, by Ihrir

;;;„e‘,uiur.r.»i'so.sUd ,9

,pp.<,.chsd...d-l‘'‘'

7—8 Then *"6 >« ^ ^ha was

seated near h d -always, O

Ins hand, »*’trtcurus. act vigilanily about .
debgWer of ‘be Ku ygjf kingdom

erersibiog *“" *?,* 1, mbs, O/oremosl of

comistidg^ef^e^l'tj the cUjms of virtue


18. Having said YudrfXllVira. Il
soothed the old king g ,j » Ti«
answered *V',"®l,,e palace for pfo

great aseetic then tell 11 e

eeeding to the fdresi Vvasa had de-

ip— 21. After the „hJy sa'd

parted, the royal son , . betiding Him'
these words to ms b^'r ^yas*

sell m liumihty - VV«t IM r
has said, what •» >"0 . wliat

the great bow^n lOip * been asked
Vidura has said. | ,|,.n tp* ckly

lor by Yuyutsu ami Sa • J^espert, lor »« «*
do AH these deserve my f e»V
11 emUre well wishers o _ | be? of you
„ .Tins, howevw. ^ fillet and


I _ apd in WHICH i-r- -

J r«i h= krpl ,„8„d*m.l.

O You are O son n* jo me O
,owHKe"ce"'*d ^lieans are by

kmg > '''i,rof Pandu thekngdom,«

vd r ghfeo'usly protected.^ , ,

capaple of be tg « ^y Y idhtshtbira.

hoI^Or 'ho« persons wl« “J,*;;” Sd

•Ti! Bmun '3„;’':„s,'’;s-h°

ku.,. ,J»I' ’’"C ”ei,ou you should cou-

Ttu'Sl 10 “ rutoodod) oil. , ,

„lllh,ra h 1- O^nowioe


MAHADIIARATA.


't


prova bentHcul to you, IiXo riches thstts
tiot willed,

t4. You should employ only ihose minis*
ten who have pasied the tests of honeiiy,
whoareiiereditaryofHceri of aialc, possessed
^pure conduct, self controlled, expert fn the
dcicharge of business, ind endued Wiih
righteous conduct.

15. You should always gather infer*
(nation through spies in various disguises,
whose faithfulness have been tested, who
■re natives of your kingdom, and who
should not be known to your enctnlet.

16. Your Citadel should be properly
protected with strong walls and »iciicd
gates On every side such walls, with

‘hem standing close to one
■nother, should be made as will admit six
Jiersons walking side by side on their top.

The gates should all be targe and
sufficiently strong. Kept in proper places,
those gates should be carefully guarded,

18—15 Let your purposes be accomplish*
ad through men whose lamihes and cunduct
'^ra-..weU«kuowii, You should always pro*
tect your body also with care in matters
connected with your leod, O Oharata. as
also in the hours of sport and eating and
in matters connected with the garlands

f ’OU wear and the beds you he upon. I he
adies of your household should be properly
protected, looked over by aged and trusted
servitors, of good conduct, well born, and
possessed of learning, U Yudliishlhira.

xo. You should make ministers of
Brshmanas possessed of learning, endued
with humility, well-born, knowing relgion
and profit, and adorned with simplicity of
beliaviour,

SI, You should hold consultations with
them. You should not, however, admit
many persons into your consultations On
particular occasions you may consult with
the whole of your council or willi a portion
of It,

as. Entering a chamber or spot that is
well-protected (from intruders) you should
hold your consultations You may liold
your consultation in a forest that is divested
of grass. You should never consult at
mglic time.

33 Apes and birds and other animals
which can imitate liuman beings alwuld
all be excluded from the council chamber,
as also idiots and lame and palsied indivi*

dualf-

14. 1 think that tl e evils which originate
from the divulgence of the counseli of kings

»rt aucli (hat they cannot be remjdied.


^S- You should repeatedly refer. In tfia
midst of your counsellors to the evils which
arise from the divulgence of counsels, O
I chastiser ef enemies, and to the merits
I which flow from counsels properly kept.

96 You should, O Yudhishthlra, act
: (is such a manner as to determine the laerits
and faults of the ialiabitanis of your city
and (he provinces.

37. Let your laws, O king, be always
administered by trusted judges placed iif
diar>*e (hereof, wlio should also be con*
(eiiled and of good conduct. Iheir acts
should also be asceitained by you through
spies. >

aS. Let your judicial officers, O Vudhish*
thira, mete out punishments, according to
(he law, on ofleiders after careful deter*
raining the gravity of the offences.

35—30 They who take bribes, they wlio
are tlie violaters of the chastily of other
people's wives, (hey who inlf ct heavy
pumsliments, they who are liars, they who
are revilers, they who are stained by
cupidity, they who are murderers, they who
are doers of rash deeds, they who are dis*
turbers of assemblies and the sports of
others, and they who bring about a con*
lus iQii of_c astes. should, according to eon*
sideraiions of time and place, be punishea
with either fines cr death.

31. In the morning you should see those
who are employed in. making your dis*
bursemenis. After that you should look
to your toilet and then to your food.

33. You should next supervise your
arms, pleasing them on every occasion.
You should devote yuur evenings tb envoys
and spies, 1 *

33 The latter end oFi the night should
be devoted by you to settle what acts
should be done by you in (he day. Mid*
nigl ts and middays should be -devoted ,lo
amusements and, sports. At all times,
however, you should tiink of tiie means
for (lie execution your projects.

34 At the proper lime, adornmg your
body, you should sit prepared to -make gifts
in prolusion the turns for different deeds,
O son, ceaselessly revolve like wheels,

35 You should do your best to fill your
treasuries of various kinds by fair means.
You should avoid all unlawful means for
that purpose.

36. Learning through your spijs who
your enemies |are |who are bent on finding
out your sherlcoming, you should, throu>.ri
trusted agents, cause them to be deeiroyed
from a distance.


ASHHAMAVASIKA parva,


oVerp.luater ol IC.iru’s *PP°;;; d„ds
mvaiUs. Vou should c*"*® servuors

lobe accomplished ‘'"‘"''f . \ “ thoie acts

Wheiher li.ey are appoiiUed lor tuoie
of not.

33 Tht cmni.nd.M oI
>ta,.\d be ol firm .f "d“ • j' a,.d

t.p.Me ol boatme Ir.rdib'ps. loya..

devoted to your well-beiog-

al*iis do your acts une K'"':

40 You Sboald al«ays. O

lima, be ‘“| "’e‘ol you?

sboflcommiis aa alst> tlioae y

‘,'''.,s°rzr.u':ryo”«’ooo-=”>--

equally be known. _ , ^

41. rhose men of V^/ ^Mve

ro 7 ii^’S.r;r f

p..roo.4.d '.by you .ub adequale me.

''rr';„.b.o.,o=b....;-;'r;:,i

alweyi see that the accomp would

Snljeci* rni^hl be *"11^ .e/loc that

ihen be firmly devoted to ) .

Uiey did not fall away Irom lh«'f


maroh. halt. eO'*''’? djetemlont, and con-

t, halloo) depend open iheae. ,

0 S'’X" eo“d“oo” ot

be understood, as also

belne stationary. „ j „,chty arms, as

"Sd)r ..-'d”...o’he caielolly under.

’““’■,.1. o«n s le baa become

r T ihe ode ol tbe e.ic uy baa be-
ttrooe aod tbe aide Hat

come weah. u 1 * ihe enemy -ni

Uiekmi! should hg'it ag*”
ifv to acquire victory.

'• 'f-' t'.v"'i"ru’.r;;ari,mp d'
1 ,”,.” ooelhden'-e. t"""* ^

With the enemy.

-) > '■* hls'iomm^saS .

.ceouiit r ,1,^,

Jt, mevr; ..h -.1 f

without (when cbl.jcd to

5, deration. H« ternteries). gwo

r,:.".oe"my S‘ land a. ar. net product...
of a pUultful hifvest.


CHAPTER vt.

(ASllRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)-

DtotarnshttA saia 1^

1. You should -0,1, 10 vOUr

Mao lal.a o'"';; b'ln^f j .ho ...

enemies, to neutrals, a ^ ,

dopo-ed equally leoa'de you a"" J

ol enemies, ol those should

ot allies, null the a'hes crusher ol

be distinguished by >« ■

3. Vou sliouhl see "ar-

Slale. the pr°P’* ',®/(o,ces dlo'emo*^

!.rc’r

4. The tweNe tT.ncMns »(

son ol Kunii. form ihe p

Mlu.‘ut‘.*ror their foremost. slmulJ

belooketlaherbytheW-

e Voliiciaus C.l« tU«


should Kive go . j ^ ,0 surrender a

metal. (Wheu .,,outd grve such

inert as a ireail'S should, whenialtmB

wimHihilled luUean

S'i :hat^?s%«t««d 0. att, .bates thu
eeverse of this.

^VmV.fi.."s'"e nt'.:-'" b"e

coiuracy If , caUmiiy come

wliolesome. O Ye'shouM. nuh kn’wlrd^e

over the I "’*■• iry to I 'j'raie li'in-

of means and r ' » q fonmost of

*'Co«'r m.mtmu tbe cKcrl-* anJ
'*jestitute atnirntj hiS peop *•


,ruid Mh.L- ^ I"

t^m lnd seek fdran their ire-sur,

-ne kme «’■« '‘•sh's •’* *'7”
.'^»r,.nei! sl-oitid never m] .'e I
advan^mr »; «l.a are under H. »*^y

a.d.«.t« c ‘ „.v.r- try yojr

f ttmut. > ^ v..,.. wliiisduirousvf


«reuath -Ih t'
irtutiiog the s


.ijU Garth,


MAHABHARATA.


h)

|6— t?. Yen «1iould Iry to iteol a
march by productn^, with the help your
inunstera, dissensions among his aristo-
cracy and feudatory clnefs. A powerful
I'lng sloilJ never seek to root out weak
kingr, for these do good to tl>e world by
c eri^liing the good and punishing the
wicked. O foremost ol kings ^ou shetild
live, Conducting yourself like a cane

18 If a strong king advances against
a weak one, the latter should ntake him
desist, by adopting conciliatory and other
inodes

19 ff these measures faif, he should,
then, With tlie help of those who are Inter-
ested in Ills welfare fall upon the enemy lor
fighting himeout. Indeed, with his mmls-
lers, treasury and citizens, he should thus
adopt fo ce against tlie invsder,

3o H tlie Issue of the liAvUe turns against
him, he should then, fall, sacrificing ^|| hts
r^roufce# one afeer arroiker.

30 . Renoiinmg his life tn this waj.he
VI ill acquire freedom from all sorrow.


CHAPTER VI!.

(ASHRAAIAVASIRA PARVA)—
Cc/itiriueJ,
Dliritaraslitra said f—

t. O best of kings 30U should, also,
refl-ct properly on war and peace Bach
is of two kinds 1 he means are various,
will tfie circumstances also, under which
war nr pence may be made, are vajious, O
Yudliislittiira,

z, O you of Kuru'j race, you should
V I'h cooln-s 5 , reflect on the (wo , thy
St ergth and weakness) witli regard to your-
self. You slould not suddenly march
against an enemy who has contented and
h-althy tulJfers, and who is gilicd with
intelfigence Un the ether hand, yon should
■ hi ik. carefully of the means «{ defeating
f.mi.

^ Yon should march against an enemy
w>> IS not provided with contented and
I tihh) conibatanls When everything is
favourable the enemy may be beaien
After however, the victor should re-

tire.

4 He should nex* cause Ife enemy (o
be plunged into various calamities, and
spiv d ssensioiis among fiis allies He
slianld 1(1101 the enemy and inspire terror
in I IS I eari, and, attacking him, weaken his
lorccs.


' 5 Tha king, conversant tvJih th« scrip*
lures, who inarches against an enemy,
should think of the three kinds of sfrengtli,
and indeed, reflect on his own strength
and the strengtii of Ins eiieiny

6 Only that king, O Bharata, who 'S
gifted wiifi alacritv, discipline and strengili
of counsels sliould inaich against an eiieniv*
When his position IS oilierwise, lie sliuuld
avoid offensive works.

7 1 he king should provide fiimsetf with
power of wealth, power of allies, power of
foresters power of paid soldiery, and power
of the mechaiucal and trading classes, O
powerful one.

Among all tfiese, power of allies and
power of riches are superior to tl'e lest.
f he power of classes and tliat of tlie stand*
■ng 4 rmy are equal.

9 Ihe power of spies is considered by
the king as equal >n efficacy to either of the
above, OH many occasions, when the lime
comes for applying each.

10 Calamity, O king, wiili which rulers
are ovenalten, i» of many forms Listen O
you of Kuru’s race, as to what those vaiivUt
forms are

t(. Indeed, calamities, O soh of Pandif,
hfe inany You should, always count them,
distinguishing their foiins, O king, and
try to meet them -by applying the well*
known ways of concilialtun and the rest

13 the km)t should, when possessed 0!
a good army, march (one against a loe)i
O Scorcher of enemies He should, alsu/
mark the cousideraiions of time and place,
while preparing ro march, as also tlie forces
he lias collected and Ins own ineriis.

>3 That king who seeks Ins own growlll
and advancement should not march uil<»s
he bas cheerful and liealihy warriors.
When strong, O son of Pandii, he may
march in even an unlavourable season.

14 The king should make a river
liavihg qnvers for its stones, horses and

' cars (or its current, and standards for the
trees vrluch cover its banks, ahd whlcti Is
miry with foot-soldiers and elephants. Such
a river should the king apply for the des-
tructioti of Ins enemy,

*S According to the sefence known lo
l/sbanas arrays called Shakata, Padmai
and Vajra, should be formed, O Oliaraia,
for fighiiiig the enemy.

Knowing every ihrng about thC
eneitiy's strength through spies and
aminmg his owiijsireiigih himself, (he* king
should begin war eiilier wiihnr Ins owi*
terrnorles 01 withm thoie of Ins enemy. 1


ASiraAM*VAS'K» PARVA


body bs ^r,!uS"'*0?c'‘ '“i";
» htgbty beneficial for one both »«
world and m Ihe nexli.

,5. 11„ k,ne, o '’J„,.„..«

properly according to *''***, \,, jubiccl*

lU.ven liereafier, after ruling bw *« 1
pio lily m ibis world.

in, O foremost one of Kum «
llm. lli.tjoiiik.ul'l
being of your subjects for at
the worlds. * . j .« «lt

You have been a"d by

dimes by nUibrna. by ' ( ktogs,

Vilura. I *bould. also. O best
from ll e aRection I hear ytu, g'v y
nmructions-


O 5i»« kl "I'l? ’ v"a

fires, you sboii'd ‘'“'y. j-ar to yonf

• Ifjecti^and “b-PP'-’'** *"

lUat IS equal.


5 And h- sai *. *Mid theie

old "icmS -

portife ’f wt,o res'robed n

to rbat brisband ot ''® „ „l„Ie resting

second got H-e permission rf

on a seail — Vyasa lumself.

that great I, .-..Vo to the forest,

DlmtamhtJA said

8 O Gsndhari. I p,,.

’’""’oTo" V-”'S'"

mission of voo {orest.

sUall soon tell we away some

9 t wish 'be status of

nciies capable of f , ^y,„g w>bo were

Preta. for all ‘''0*e | ndeed. I

l«irto in'a''<''"'bose gilts,, “.viimg >11 tbo

pMple to my psiaee


CHAPTER VfH.

(ASHRAM AVASlKA PARVA.)
Corrtrnnrd.

TnaU.MWra said •-- „

t O king. 1 I .hooUl be liwt*'

OforemoAtot kings, ! sUooi*

mitfHcied by you. Heaven.

, niiisbma VVi/aCbas departed (f»;,
The destroyer of Mad'm.n k

Dwar-kal. .“."/(otri) Wlio else,

accompany you to » ,

Iberelore, save >00, will t<«

• CM1/SW those instniC'
3. I shall. If’ .j»y mvro. dr»rro«i

tu „a winch you have tgrtb. I

el done good to me. .
you assured of this, O 6

ValiiiampayaRasA^J"

I Tl,„. ..I r

leiuent ?'.htM O ehrrferfshe


pep _

Vaisliampayana saw . j,,.,,,,

ll....'S ’“'i, v,.d wal^ra. 11'"
,.,”.i». ""’v i<-'’*',''r*’c.'i" i" Dii.a-

i,.« ..■■""'.‘"'"'Jro

■r.ia " ■' '

"T w .1,' 5 "" ay

.ppo,.""'". a-'.',""?".

‘5i«; .1 111"'

_. _.. r ,


.^ n,v Jerrt

„,V 0 1" ,'■ .'jr «' w ' ""•■

■I-- "-"i"”'

Oo not hesitate m ‘ sni


too


MAHABAllRATA.


l2


1 am worn out wiili age on my head. 1
am destitute of cliildreii.

30 . Yb sinless ones, I am emaciated
sviih fasts, along will) Gandliari the
Icingdom ioviiig passed to Yudhtshlhirai
1 have enjoyed great happiness.

21. Ye foremost of men, I tlunfc that
happiness has been greHteTfilMn tShat I could
expect from Diuyodhana's sovercingty
What other refuge can \ Jiave, old as I am
and destitute of children, except the forest?
Ye highly blessed ones, you should grant
tne the permission [ seek,

32. Hearing these words of his, alt the
residents of Kiirujang’ala bewailed aloud,
O best of the QliarataS, with voices choked
by tears.

33. Desirous of telhng those c*»ef*
stricken people something more, the highly
energetic DliriianishirA once more addies'
sed them and said as fellows. ^


CHAPTER IX,

(ASIlRAMAVASnCA PARVA)—
CoiilinutJ.

DtritaraalityA

t. Shantaiiii duty ruled this E^rih
Likewise, Vichilraviryja also, protected by
Biiishina, ruled you. Forsooth, you know
all this

2 You know also how Pandu, my bro.
ther, was dear 10 me as also to }«u He
alia ruled you duly.

3. Ye sinless ones I have also served
you Wliclher (hose services have come up
to the ideal or fallen short ol it. yoi should
forgive me, (or I have attended to my
dunes carefully,

,4. Diiryodliana also eiijoyei! ftis king,
doux utUiant a thorn in his side, t'oxhsli
ns he • was and possessed of wicked
utiderslaiuling, he did not, liouever, do any
wrong to you.

5 Tl roiigli the fault, however, of that
pimce «f wicked xiiidersiandiug. and
th'Dii,,h Ins pii li*, as also lliroiigli my own
impvihcv. a great destruction of the Kslia.
ttiyas has taken |lace.

6 Whether I have, in (I at msftee acted
ssghdy or wtonglv, I pray you wuh }ui>v«d
li^n.Is to remove all recotlcCtions of it (rum
yo If hearis

7 this one Isold, this o le I as list all

hs ch I lr*n , 1) is one rt air cken Will

lotrtuw.Ahit one was ou< kin^ t Uusene


IS a descendant ol former knlgs | — cishsi-
deraltons like these should induce yon to
forgive me

8 fills Gaitdliari, also, is dispirited and
old She. too, has lost her children and is
helpless Stricken with grief (or llie loss of
her hens, she solicls you with me.

0 Knowing that both of us are old and
afflicted and destitute of children, grant us
the permission we seek. 13 essed be you,
we seek your protection.

10, This Kuru king, Yodhisbitnra the
son of Kunti, should be looked after by yoi^
all, in we,<! and wde.

If. He who has, four such brothers of
abunanr prowess for his counsellors will
1 never fall into distress AiT of them are
convers/tiit with both Virtue and Profit, and
I fesemUe the very guardiaiss of the wotld.

12 L<] e the illustrious Brahman him-

self, the Lord ot llie universe with *1' its
creatures, this Yudhishiliira of great energy
will rule you.

tj i hat which slioiild certainly be sad
IS now said by me. I make over to you (I '*
Yudhishihira here as a charge. 1 entrust
you. also, to i>ie hands of this hero.

14 You shouhl all forget and forgtvs
whatever mjiry has been done to yo t by
those sons of Dime who are no longer alive,
or, indeed, by any une else belonging
to me.

15 Ye never chenshed any anger against
me on any previous occasiuo 1 join mv
hands before yo 1 who are famous lor loyal-
ly. Here, 1 bon to you all

16 Ye sinless one, I, with Gandliari by
my side, beg your p.rdon now for anything
done to you by iliuve sons of mine, of rest-
less understandings, sullied by ciipid ty«
and ever acting as llieir desires prempied

ty. thus addressid by the old king all
(hove ciiiz<-iis and ^Acllers of the proti ces,
filled MilU tears, said notliing but only
looked at one atiuther.


CHAPTCR K.

(ASHRAMAV’ASIKA PARVA. J—

Cvnfi/jiird.

Vishampiyana said

I. Ttus addressed, O you of Knru's
race, by the old king the euiiens •• d ih*
inhaliiiams ol the prenners sioo.1 some-
lime I ke txttn ahoiit of coricduiass*.


*3


ASimAMAVASlKA.PARVA.


D.r,oah.n.n=v.rd,du,

lia^sail ‘*c l».

iirttfUCtoc* ^ ^ „^4n»ll have

long"*ith lh.5 my '.V'rrialier ot my \ ,8 UU by y®**- sorcmv. re-

Igt,....,, d..lk« ol Ito k G„ai„,, I ,Jj>, ,„ k„,g 0"'^",^^“” ,"';’b, Cimraj.-

5 Vca.nl;>a .n« 1 k-- ■“« jl' “li.b.r, O

p,»i.cijj ky p";;;'2„,i,, wt.o «a'

Of by ,„ aU l>»s ‘Je"'**


,_3 King nkrtlaraaklra, nj'l'kE 'k',T_

i,’„,,\,0, lka.t ‘k.oa>' 'k.k«J ky 5 „
jnce more addressed » sooles* *«'«*

besl ol mtti, old as I a V'esrt, bew-*dmg
ll rough theerlessf>«* | ),^ve ob-

slong With lh\5 my wed mallei of my

l»ined ihe petmtssion. m l ^ the

. .lap (nrest. o* mv


1 . will* oa""-"

5 ve sin.«-. — - * ■ . bent h'*®*'

repeatedly solicit Jo' _,Mjoti.

You should all grant us petmiss'®


Va.,tampayawsaid.- ^ ...

6 ffeaniig these P‘l' ^ ihe assembled Yowr son. O in j^pending

aaaap‘i 7 a'^.')j«;»";; 7 ,Vjr"^ “"^'''' l> '« ‘" 7 ", ''’s™''"”” 'f"

mil. gnat. * (,.aa« <kal f. o king.

mail ar. »o..M «««I> ,,p„ wU.cl. S„,,,.a e'"' ''aPP;^” ,h, ,„|. ol KunlH

a naaa.og." Ikaa k'"'Vra.na»«a >"' ..Ua «' 1 .aa«a ana miaa""

every Other tho igl'is had to 4,,, ol g«e»l >”ie g .onled kmg 'vhff

>•->3 Tr, .Ik P'Pkiaa


a naaa.og." Ikaa k'"'Vra'na»«a >"'

leave the wo.ld. they foo^ea Le”^ oT he •oy»\ seK®’®*

}[ consciousness . jne i fnUuws the ,,ee. of merilonoiis

9 ChecUing that eg'ta^i ^ ,„,v,i.>..;. !,';!,■' 7,7 :t ‘i”-'""" '"i

fi iliP announcemei't 0 * _ ^ «a*d(Mlly 1 having IV’''*,.. ...,.iiiu<ent liherat*


9 ChecUing that **lhah®‘p ,,,j„,i,4l)tra’.
lo the a'm®‘‘"®*"?*''io„p«t 0 ey gradiiatly

tra^I=^°:’ 5 aa;;»

mg ilieir wishes ohm*.

10. Setlhng their thef«w“h

they charged a JVw king,

end thus replied ^ .-.na of good

tl That learned ^'*',‘^0,,,’ coi«e-t

conduct, chosen by , „ masier ol all

conversant with . Samba, tried to

the Richs, and named

apeak. _f the whole

ij Taking lh« P7,dl'”'pprohation that

assembly and with “» m" ,.,ielligence.

learned Brahoiana ® j,,. said these

conscious ol h'» ^

^ words to the king* - .

•O n,.n,.cl.. tk.--;: mp


1 shall speak ll out* .

untruth you are our wen

■"'‘"rid .n 11 ... r.-' 'rK'"'
„; 4 ,l:^"irp”pr"kk"k-

‘Tvrmlk.kn


„M k.W.K."» .'"d*'

St’i-ri'S. k'dk'y

.. pp>k.n..

„Men»liv'.''pP'"*‘. 77 u" Pi 'ikk**^ ""‘I

Sd''" 4 ’t»:'»“'

„.pp,..«.. c."™l

Th» BMhmaOT contims

i'.;” ci-kk* “koui kp

. 1 . 3 . k r:K”."-

exettton*


M^HABU^RAtA.


4t

find Droiia and fltliersl and llie great
K^trna, and the heroic Vijyiidhana and
Dlintadyumna, and by the fonr soni of
f'andu, that is, Uhima and Arjnna and
the twins. Tins destruction, O hmif, could
not happen wiihoui the influeitce of
Destiny

33 Forsooth, by Kshatriyas fn particular,
should enemies be hilled and death encoun*
tered in bailie. By those foremost of men,
pitted with science and inikjlit of arms, ^ihe
Earth has been exterminated with 'her
horses and Cars and elephants.

35 Your son was not the cause of that
desiMiciioii of preat kiii^s You ware not
the cause, nor your servants, nor Kama,
tipr Sovala'a son

3fi. Tlie destrnciinn of tliose foa»most
ones of Kuril's race and ni hint's bv thoii.
sands, know, was entrendcred by Destiny
Who can say anyiliiiig else in this.

37, You are regarded as the preceptor
and the master of the whole world W*.
llirrelnre, in your presence, absotve your
righieaus«souled son,

3S Let that king, with al] his associates,
obtain the regions reserved for heroes
Permitted by foremnsc of Urahmanas, let
liitn sport blissfully in the eslestial region.

39 You. also, shall attain to great merit.
Biul unswerving steadiness in virtue O
you of excellent vows, fotl-iw fully the duties
laid down in the Vedas.

40. It is not necessary for either 'you or
OufseUes to look after the Pand^vas they
arc capable of luliot; the very Heavens,
what need than be said of the EartliT

4t. O jeu of great intelligence, in weal
as in woe, the suhjreis of tins kingdom,
O foremost one of Kiiru's race, will obey
the Pendavas who have conduct lor their
ornament.

41. 1 he son of Paiidii makes (hose vahi*
able gifts which are alws)s (a be made to
f ifemosl of twice-born persons ill sacrifices
and III obsequial rites, after the manner of
ail the great kings of yore,

43 1 he great son of Kunit is mild, and
seh-contiolled, and is alwaye *«ltsposed to
spend as if tie were a second Vaisliravana.
ife has great ministers wfiO attend on him.

44 ^ He is compassionate to even his
enemies Intferd. that foremost one of
ni'aiaia’s race is of pure conduct. Gdird
with great intelligence, lie is perfectly
Siraigl iforward m Ins dealings and sules
and protects us like a faihcr hts childran.

4$, From assrxlalion with him who Is
(he son of Dhtrma, O'rojal sage, Blilma


and Arjuna astd oikers will never wronf us
m (lie feast.

46 They are mild, O >ou of Kuril's
race, to them that are mild, and fierce like
snakes of dreadful poison to them who are
fierc*. E'ldiird wiili j,reat energy, those
high sniled ones are always devoted to the
well being of the people

47. Neiilier Kunti, nor your (daughter*
III law) Pancliali, nor Uliipt, nor the
princess of tlie batiwata race, will do tlie
least wrong to these people.

4S. Tlie affrciton winch you have shjwn
towards us mid winch in YtidliislUhira is
seen to exist tit a still larger measure, is
incapable of being forgotten by the people
of the city and the provinces.

49 Those powerful car-warriors, vit ,
the s<ins of Ku»ti, themselves devoted to

the duties of virtue, will protect and cherish

the people even if these happen to be
unrighteous.

50. D > you, therefore, O king, removing
all anxiety of lieait on account of Vudhish*
(hira, set yourself tn the accnmplithme»t
of all meinorious deeds, O foremost of
men.

faisliampayana said

51. Hearing these words, fraught wuh
virtue and merit, of that nrahmaita and
approving of them every person in that
assembly said,>~' Excel! ni, Excelleni* and
•geepted them as his own. «

5». 'bhritarasliira, also, repexledty spsak-
mg hii'lily of iliose words, slo«fy dismissed
(hat assi-mbly of his subjects.

53 Thni honoured by them and looked
upon with ainpiciuiis looks, the old king,
O chief of Rharata's race, j lined hts hands
and honoured them all in return.

54. Hr, tl>en, entered his own palace
with Gsndhari Listen now to w'tat he
did after that night tiaJ passed sway.


CMAPinR XI.

I ASnUAMWASlKA PARVA.}—

'■ Cfi'ihntieii.

Vaiahampayiitn. said *-•

I. After tint night had pssselaway,
Dhtitaraslitra, the svt of Amvtaa, sert
Vadura to Vudtiishthira's palace.

a — 3, Gifted woih great energy and the
foremost of all persons endued wiih luiellr.
geuce, Vidoia. I aving arrived at Vudl.i.b.
Ulus'a palace, addressed that fouianl of


. »«rv m *"

»< - r.o5

tnonili ot KariiUa. . t«io*e *■

1 t nenowsohc.lslrnn'y®*’' itel 19

h«^i Ku.u'. >«'• "r'.S »' •'■• "To.'

v.:si es 10 p«(otm { Offlna *n«i 1 **•'*

K.taisonol ®*;„t l.ueH.*

bomadatta Jii'd VaUn''* ot a>l 1 *•-'

Cc.ce and ol aH |,»ve be*" t‘'elr 1

c\>itf wrtliersol bi4 W>' ,^,cke<l kirtg 1 be e*i

and, il you pertnil *ti 0‘ ^ I io*

ci Ihe Stndbus V.j,,ra bo»h I *«•* '

6 Hearing tb«e«o^ « „V.d^.r^^^ \

YudlusnUiiia. and *nd applaud* -a* I

curly lu.r. became very R'»'» 1 jj

ad iliem Ingl'ly* ertergy d.ve*

y-jj Bhimi. ® A*,oi »««P* *^“!’'

and an ivnappeasab'**"^* • -art iptfit* «* >®“ '

ttinsa words o( ' odi?ana ^ H>‘dej* «3

col acting the acta of Du y d U>e (i.an

Handing 0-« aliuhdy be«d* ,ud

diadtm decked Phatgo 1 lb»* fo»e

Ug his (ace dowowa.di.

(oremosi ol ."{ai.er «bo H *'** 1 i

Bliima, our foya * (ortst. Inol

tMOlveJ 10 retire InW tbe 1

to He erldie'* *“ "J*.'** kin**"*;* 1

rri,r:s.r’:r \o u

“.7.1^'“;:.." •“ ■'T^,

toiqjesl. *".''5 1 ?iii

„_;3 Indeed. O mW „ m<1

H h lor Bhisbma ll.oae K>'}' 1

kuig li desirous of >r\»W
You ahoidd Rrant m,i.l.iy a*"’*' 1

.00,1 locU I. ... O V"“ '":i.,;h ol ... '.'

nirnarasltirato-ilay l' ^ u, JltaiM

Srlio was .^aboui

V.tled by «"«"''* fl^nimd l”« \ ■

views deviate from S 1

asked. • - ., rrfftsa!. Be* (

,4 o yield ‘»5'7"!:

.,5:, b.iname \t\. matter «'0"

theCiing. your “ 1

ef all. ^-instead of »•**”"**?!

t( You sbonld C'*e ‘ .. Vrbfiaiau "he I

OOuelVl *

vr.a say.nR ao •« •?>

.YudbuUtiratle r* • nt^Biase"*

said th«»« •


» o,rfre in llic matter o!
that sBa’* r^rt'iiefasalsoof king boma*

-ol

ttiose bbrnddhss


'':7o.'i‘..!;'»»''' '" ‘ '”°"

,„.,.<.WoP»“‘'“'’' ' „ „,„,0 or.lil...”l /
1 ,^u. „holo E...1. .»/

,\.olr lo.t.tly . 'i l,.«o joi. “'‘'7

1 be of twelve lone )** ,1

1 and of® ^ «,,i ii> Oaiip»di( -

(bat waa ao P*’”!,., ‘ flecuou for us then t

LasDlintar^ deer-sk-n ."d


(liai w*» .flecuon iu>

*as Dl««''a®**'’tra s j^er-skm and


jooTot fo«o>v IhiS k'US J

1.^3. .s-f? Sires’" ia<

Ju .. r “ '*op«S. >''«> ”

V..< 1 H 1 '>"";” I...0 ."4 "■"I

I areal ••••«“ a

llwolloW ..l.»>.


CiI.VPTER Xll.

Aijaoa ■"■ ,1 1,.

^ o B'nma, precep'or. I

; 1 ,1 oj R"*


-3—5 Ileanng tliese words of Ibe
rlisiKii.ia, ihe nalupous-soitled Yudhish.
ll»ra the son „f Ki.iiti, addressed Vid.tta
^id said these words ~ Instructed by me,
U Kshaurl dojoilsay to tlie Kuru ktng
that J shall ulve llin as much wealth Irstit
ttiy treasury as he wishes to j.lve away f.r
the ohs,cj „es of his sons, and of Bhisiiina
and others among 1,1s well wisiters and

•I'lhlr"”'* »Jt»P'riW‘l

Vaishampayaiia saidt—

these words, king
Yudh.shtiura the just highly appUuded
Arju.ia Meanwhil- aHmasena bLah to
Cast angry looks at Onananjaja.

?. 1 hen Yudhishtllifa. gifted wuh great
Imelllgence. oiice more addressed Vidufa
and Said,— Knn; Dlititarashtta should not
he angry wnh Bhimasena.

8 I his Blitma of great lt>tetl(,reitce was
proally afflicted by cold and rain and heat

and by a thousand other griefs tthUelmng

in the forest All this you know. ^

9 Do J oil. however, instrtfcted by me.
*ay to the king, O foremost one of Bharata's
amilj, that he may ixke (roti my house
Whatever articles fie wishes and In what-
ever measure also lie likes.

to You shall also lell Hie kmg that Ik
should not suffer lus liean to remember this

1E4' I,;;.;"'"'

^ «'«d what*
ever Arjuita lias in hjs liouse, the owner
thereof «* ki-g Dhfitaraslitra. this sou
should lellhim. '

tJ. Let (he king make gifts to Brali-
manas I Let him spend .as Urgefy as he
likes Let him liberate himself from tlie
debt he owes to f Is sons and well-wishers.

13 Let lum be told besides.— ‘O monarch
this very body of mine is at )o.ir disposal,
and all jlic riches I have ♦ Know lh» and
let there be no doubt in this '


CIIAPIEU Xfll.

( ASIIRAMAVASIKA PARVA.J—
CeHtiHutJ,
Voisliatzljlay&tla saidf'-*

«— a- 'Ihus addressed by king Yiidhtsh-
■liira, Vidura, that foremost cl intrli gent
persons, returned to Uhruarashira and said
to lum these] words of great Significance —
'* *1 first reported your mgsiage to king
* udhishthira. Rtfircting on your words, i


Yudhlshthira .of great sptendotir spotU
highly of them .

3 Ihe liigliJy energetic Vibhstsu, also,

places all Ills palaces with all tlie iidies
therein, as also lus very lile-bteaths, at
your disposal. ^

4 Your son, ting Yudlushthira» (oo»
offers y ou, O royal sage, )iis kingdom and
life brenihs and riches and all else which
belongs to him

3. Billina, however, of nighty -arms, re-
collecting all his numberless sorrows has
with difflcuhy given his consent, breathing
many heavy sighs.

0 riiat mighty -armed hero, O monarchi
was solicited by tile righteous king as also
by Vibhatsu, and niduced to treat yoil
cordially.

7 — 8- ftihg Yudhislithira the just has
prayed you not to be displeased for the
improper conduct which □luma has shown
at the recollection of former ho<lihties— *

I ins IS generally the conduct of Kshatriyas
In batiiet O king, and Hus Viikodara n
devoted to battle and the practices of
iCshaitiyas.

9— »io Both myself and Arjuita, O kiiigi
repeatedly beg you for pardoning Vnko.
dara Be graciuiis to us You are our
lo»d O king, you can give nway as you
like whatever money we have You O
Bharata. are the master of this Itingdoiil
and oi dll lives in it.

1 1-^17. Let the foremost one of the Kuril
race give away for |ilie| obsequial rues of
his sons, all those foremost of gifts wiilch
ahoiild be given to the Urafimanas Indeed,
let him make tlwse gilts to persons of tlitt
twice-born casie, taking away from our
palaces jewcisi gems, and khie, and slaves
both male and female, and goats and
shoep Let gifts be made to also those
wlio are poor or blind or In great distress,
selecting the objects of iiis charily as he
likes.

ij Let, O Vidura, Urge pavilions be
made, rich wuh food and drink of various
tastes cullpcied In abundance Let reser-
voirs of water be made for enabling kind
10 -drink, and let other meritorious works be
done '

14- Tliese were the words said to tre
fry the king ns alto by Pniha's sort
Dhaniiijayn, Vou should say wliai should
be done nevi.

II After Vidura had said these wonlc,

O Janamejaya, Dliritarashlra expressed hie
satisfaciton at tlwm and made up l>is mind
for making Urge presents on i he ‘day of
fuilmaon in the mouth el Kartika,


ASHRAM&VAillC* PAEVA


ettAPlERJtlV.
t ASHRAMAVASIKA PAEVA*)-*

< Ciniiitlied.

Dtintarasliir* became ^ ji!,,iitWra and
monatch. will the acl ot Vudhislith'^ a


slum.

,-A.

bation, tliousands of ©(

»d ...pcnor lllPd’, ’r“„A.

Ulu.lima, as also pS ® ,f‘iy of food and
end causing a Urge <iua y

tirmk tobeprepated.and cars

vehicles and claibea. and R d
and gems, and slaves boib i.t,nkets »nd

and'Roais and ^a,,j viIUrcs

»,ch IfiWes 10 be to be

and fields, and olher and bor*«*

kept ready, as also «‘*P , bennil*

decked *-111) 0rnRrrenl5. * d^

fill maidens wlio w«f« 'be b a<u»y (or

Watforemoslol Cf* ‘^iTo/ each of

the behoof ol the dead,
them m due order ** '* ® ® Somadatt*.
Naming Orona, and each

Valhika, and Wing j j,u |,(S wef**

one of Ins «hef sons, and on m
%ishe.6 with Jayadraiha as the bfsr.

Sifts were made m due or •
j. With the "PPrf.came marked by

that ShraddhaAsacnftce became

large Rift, _of wealth ."d cl

of jewels 'arid 6"^’ ®"

I'CheS. , j „ ibat

• 8->^ Tellers atd sCn y*jj,„ 5 t,thira.
occasion iilider the o^de s.nff — Do y<»*
Cpas.lessly asked lb« oJJ be

command, O kmS , .®,e ready here I

msde to these. jpoke. they gave

— As soon as the wn'S t'

away what he directed. mhimlh**

to. A thousand *as thousand

wa, to receive » ."'* .L, «,as to receive a

the cloud, refr^hlngthecq

'“l;” Al..r .1. 'J?’'

tnhuled, the kh’C. O y’*' ,„rmWed RumU
Rtnce. then deh.R^ » •« * surges

cfalUhalonr casiM , J„rt.

.‘.A

ij-t* Indeed, the ^,ms


Bids.nd ^illoATkmS

rts verdant b®®?* ,., rich caves,

of pf&ioiK “I'o* , lor ils “"B

elephants and n Mndangas (or tt»

whirlpools, the so d

SArs'.'.--!.' - ..v..,dr...=d.,.

X''u «»■ r'"f tSS”

J,ootG.(t-S.cr,fioo •"■‘■J-

® . . _ j.J ,hat Inn


|9. lhu« t AP.-ice Actors and

celebrate l“* 9.' ‘'^^nerd and sang o" the

mimes w^bnu^'ly, "'bYd\o pi-asure of
occasion and tronmbuted^ of.various

tastes were Riven y

,8 Making I A^nviks, O chief of

d.,,, ih« itorp"'*

1 CdAPTEE liv.

(ASllBAMAVASIKA BAEVAO-

v»i»i(>E'p''j“’''; wii - 0,

,. llavi'C ““'A,,,, the to>al son of

those P^n.ces nav ^ o„,,man,, know-

|1r the Vedas on ll d K„liU,,

d/yoff«nmoon.n the da y

he c*P«d CasliOR ell 1 'S proper

to be taken “P. nf and barks, and

uAnira'by bl* dauKhitrs.in Ur. U

aecompanieu uj

left his paUoc- V.chiiravtry> *

|,dies »s • L-ran to bewail aloud.
Kaur... r" < ,,0. (.

. IT. kid. »a.rr<J ri« r , .terlUnt

n.or-«l '"““"io,: ,au r .1 wr.llh. ...a

SU"'’..-'""'!'-' “■’' °"

: itetiblmg a.I o’.tr, «n*»


MAIIABIIARATA.


iS

te^cs, said llie$e nords tn *i loud voice,
tts O righteous lung, where do you
}>0 7 — and fell down in a swoon

7 Arjinw, burning whli geeat Rfiel,
s, f’ repeatedly lliat foremost of
V ir la pri ces telling VudInslitUira lliat
' e 1 1' Id not bd ave thus stood clieerlessly
I it heart plunged into distress.

? \ rilcodara. the Iktoic Phalgiina the

! c s ns of Madri, Vidiira, Sanja>a
r 1 1 ssl tra s son by Ins Vaishya wife,
Kr pa and Dliaumya and other Brah-
^ ss nl! followed the old king with voices
c> K »1 in grief

o !\unti walked first, carrying on her

* oulders the hand ol Gandhari who walked
^vllh her bandaged e^es King Dhritarash
tra walked confidently behind Gattdiiari,
placing Ins hand on lier shoulder

to Orupada's daughter Kushna she
of the Saitwata race, Uitara il e daughter
1 1 law of the ICturavas who fiad recently
I c lie a mother Cl ilrangada, and <tl>cr

* 1 es aitacled to tie royal house, alltol*
’ wed the old king

It The wail they uttered at that (me,
O king, from sorrow resembled the toud
' nenlaiions ol a swarm ol she ospreys
n the Hives of il e citixens— Brahmanas
o Ks' airiyas and Vaishyas and Shudras
•' i 0 cam' out into tl e streets from all

2 At DhTiurasl tra's departure, O
nil the c lizens of Hasunapore be
"e us <1 Mressed as they liad been O
^ r- cl when ll ey 1 ad seen tl e depaiture
\ »• Ps idavas m former days aflcr their
(e I u tl c match al dice
1$ Lad es who had never eeerr (he sun
the moon came out into the streets on
rr^cision 111 great sorrow, when king
irashtra pioceeded towards the great


CHAPTER XVI

^MiRAMAVASIKA PARVA )—
Covliiiued,

'Vt-i ''^payana said - —

was (he uproar, at that tnne
botli men a id women stand ng
races of palaces or on the Earth
) »d with great inlelligence the
, joined hands and trembling
« passed with d flii-uliy along
i treel w iic « WiS crjwle d
cf t Jlh scx-s


I 3 Me le/t the city of Haslinapiir by
(lie principal gate, and then repeatedly
asked that crowd of people to return (o
I (heir homes

[ 4 Vidura had made up his mind for

j going to the forest with the king Ihe
Suta SaiijiyA also tie son of Grvalgani
I the cl I f mi lister ot Dhritarashtra was of
the same heart

5 King Dhritarashtra however, caused
Kiipa and lie powerful c*r»warrior
Yiiyutsu to reffAiii from followins' hint He
made them over to Yudhishthira's hands

6 After the citizens had ceased follow*
ing the monarch, king Yudhishtlnra, wlilt
the ladies ol hts house, prepared to slop,
at the command of Dhiitaraslitra.

7 Seeing that his motlier Kunti was
desirous of retiring into the forest, the king
said to her •**' 1 sliall follow the old king*

, Do you desist

8 You should O queen return to the
City accompanied by these your daughters*
m law I I Uis king goes to the forest^
determined upon practising penaiTces

p Tl oitgh king Yudhishllura said thesS
words to her, with I is eyes bathed in tears,
Kuili however, without answering hinr,
CO ttmoed to go catching hold of Gandhari*

Knnti said '

10 O king, never neglect Sahadeva He
t$ very much aiiached to me, O motiaich,
and loyoD also always

ri You should always bear in mind
Kama who never retreated from battle
I Ihrough my lolly that hero han betrt killed
I in the heM of battle

JT SwreTy my sorr llm heart of mine
IS made of sceef since it does not break
into a I laidred pieces at not seeing that
I child born of the Sun God.

ij When such 1 as been the case, O
chastiser of enemies wl at can I now doT
I am very mi cN to blame for not liaviig
said the truth about the birth of Surya’s
cl lid

14 O crusher of enemies, I hope you
will with all your brothers, make excellent
C«(ts for the sake of that son ol the Sun*
God.

tS O mower of enemies you should
always do whaiis agreeable to Draupadi.
You should look after < 01 imasena and
Arjuna and Nakiila and Sahadeva. 1 he-
charge ot the Koru race lave now {alien
on you, O king

i 6 I si all live in the forest
dhan, besmeaj^ ^ body w . ^


19


ashramavasika pabva.


anil


paged In tl'C prAclice of m law

bSd 10 ll.o ooc.it. ol my
and ttioO'Ct in law.


. Yodliishdiira's

lifls becoTTie
by power, nas

to-day j,rc ,nlo if'*

lions of licf SO"*


aim inov'io i |oresi«

* it I lions of lier son cfierriess

Vaishampayanasaiii. I lb." Dro»p»J'. "im. wlo«.<l

17 llins ,,o.« under accompanied proceed-

"Ofd. hii


; going into II

”V H».,n, ''miif J/” “ r/ra plmm- Tg ‘mX""’” „ .„.,i i„«.

3. J'- r K “KieS


Viidliiiliibiratlieiiisl. 1"* I'"® ^ ll,c Panda««. "j “"iSS l"'■•

moil er, saying.— . You s,rammg tlieii »'er %”■

19 What, indeed ‘* you 1 Idten in these wo

illri ■'vou diouM dbm, ... m.m,.

*0 Formerly, wlien w® * O you 1


*0 Formerly, w'jen '« q you 1

leave Haslinaporc vo« who «* I

ol agreeable features, « ^ instfoC 1

tuine to us the storv of Vio«'* „,o„ I

tioM 10 her son, stimulated us toe

You should not leave us now _ .


You should not leave us now

21. Having killed ^1'* Jlyf guided tyl
1 have acquired *®''* *,^,,,-ated through
your wise words commumcatea |


CIIAPIEI^ XVll.
,^SlmAM^VAS^CA PAUVA )-


your wise words communica _ „,al,ty.armed son

Vrsudeva. undersUnding 1 Wliai y®‘' ^ ^ O UngSi

as Where now is fr<»-« L,*p,ndii "n'j.souiied, indeed,

of youfi abont winch I to deviate I . when you were all p

VaLdeval Do yon "f^bout wh«h

from those Kshairlya P««"=« 1 that your


■7tZ

ad”'cou 5 “;"-^-''

minds. . encouraged yod

- O fo«"'«^”ATJl'du m'hht not be

-- -r

1 irptidma ”P”'; .;.

- I msl.lled cmirage ^ fo'reniost of all

Ol loiauy .'■■ ■j into your min'* • 1 ihM y““ wlio are eqial to Vasav-i,

has this desire eniere to 1 .iibieous . „,io ilie forest and

26 Why then did ) 0 ‘‘ ,«u I ,ni<U

r;^r.;ra"d':rsMoukeup>on--‘^^^^^ n;''t,t^;:viU"‘ueCe.;^'oe


Leaving ourselves. lave of

and* this inaccessible

yours, how will you live
loresi T Do you relent.

j, Kmm, »id' ‘'‘"J," but comm""'
u,„. ».,d. .1

to go her way. *“
her, saying.


wme for^o" to '"f

acquired by your ch^'^' you «he'««

ol loyalty ew"'* ^ j ,„to your mind I
l,„ih,.d«,r=.m.r.d.m"J““ ^


.7. we "“^’Jf/Jlo'ilieTorest while

iW, did you bring '“f/; n«

we were cl»ldf*nl =

M-do ore overwhoimeo
E»'«l


,o“lhal this. H) '”na’wl.ovc piowts

ten iliousanJ el«P^ widely know", might n-


■;; .p,„m


; into inslgnilicai«.=

•^••1 ‘V' 'a'’!;!; is eq.sl to v.iavs


nna w.... '1 ^%*'*** 1° Vhjvs
t >ui be checiUw


MAItABAIlRATA.


•3 Celt SInlijiipa instructed

Dlintarsst tra iiinlltlieiim oi the forest
mode, at t\>e command oi Vyasi

14. Thus the crest Uhiitaraslitra set
liimseH to the practice of pensi'cea, and all
his followers also to the same course of con*
duct.

<5. Queen Gandhar! also, O monarch,
alonjr witli Kunti, put on barks of trees and
deer.skins, and beRaii to observe the same
vows as her husband.

l6 Restraining their senses in thought,
words, and deeds, as well as by eye, they
began to perform severe austerities.

17. Shorn of all stupefaction of mind
king Dhntarashtra began to practise vows
and penances like a great Rtshi, reducing
Ins body to skin and bones, for Ins flesh
was all dried up, bearing malted locks on
liead, and bis person clad in barks and
skins.

tS Vidura, conversant vviih the (rue
Interpretations of Virtue, and gifted with
grent mtelhgence, as also Sanj^aya. waned
upon the old king with Ins wile Both of
them with souls under control, Vidura and
banjaya alto reduced themselves, and wore
balks and rags.


CHAPIER XX. ,
fASHRAMAVASlUA PARVA^— ’
Canlirttied '

Vaisbampayana said —

I those foremost of ascetics, vtg ,
N^irada, Patvata and Devala o! austere
penances, came there to see king Dlima*
taslilra.

3. Ihe Island.born Vyasa with all Ins
disciples, and otlier persons gifted with
great wisdom and crowned wuh ascetic suc-
cess, and the royal sage Shatayupa oF ad-
vanced years and possessed of great merit,
also came ' 1

3 ' Kiiiti adored them wnti^ue rites, O
king. All those ascetics were highly
pleased with the adorations offered (o them

4 1 hose great Ri<l IS pleased the high-

souled king Ohrtiaraslitra' wuh discourses
on religion and virtue. > *

5 At ihe conclusion ol their crinverse.

the celestial Rtslii Narada, seeing all things
asi objects of direct perception, said the
following words. 1

Narada flaid:— " ’ "

I 6 1 here was a* king of ihe Kefcayas.

possessed of gieat prospeniy and peiiectly


fearfess IIu name wts SahasracI ilya'
and he was the grandfather of this Shata*
yupa

7 Resigning his kingdom to his highly
virtuous eldest son, the virtuous king
Saliasrachiiya retired into the forest.

8 Reaching Ue other end of blazing
penances, that king, gifted with great splen-
dour, ntiained la Die renion of Purandara
where he conimued to live in his com-
pany.

9 On many occasions, while visiting the-
region of Indra O king, I saw that mon-
arch, whose sms had all been consumed by
penances, living in Indra's palace

10. Similarly, king Shailalaya, the
grandfather of Bhagadatta, attained to the
region of Indra by the power alone of his
penances.

1 1. *1 here was another king, O monarch,
of tbe name of Pnsliadhra who resembled
Ihe holder ol the thunder-bolt himself.
That king also by his penances proceeded
from the banh to the celestial region

ta In ihis very forest, O king, that
king, Vi* , Purukutsa, the sen of Mandhatri,
acquired great success,

13. Tliai foremost of rivers, tnV, Nar-
mada, became Ihe consort of that king.
Having practised penances in this very
forest, that king proceeded to the celestial
region. ,

14 There was another king, highly
righteous, of the name of Shashaloman.
He, loo, performed severe austerities in this
forest and then ascended to the celestial
region.

15 You also, O monarch, having ar-
rived at tins forest, shall, through the grace
ol the Island born attain to a very high
end and which is difficult of altainment.

16 You also, O foremost of kings, at the
termination of your penances, shall become
gifted wilh great prospenly and accom-
panied by Gandhan, attain to the end
reached by those great ones,

17 Living m the presence of the des-

troyer of Vala, Pandu thinks of you always.
He will, O monarch certainly assist you
in the attainment of prosperity. ’

18 Ti rough serving you and Gandhan,
this daughter in-Iaw ol yours possessed of
great lame, will attain to residence wuh her
liusband in the other world.


>19 'She IS the mollier of Yudl^ishtlnra
wiwj IS ithe eternal Oharma \Ve see afl
tins, O king, wuh our spi ' vision.

Vidura ^11 e' If e high-


ASHRAMAVASIKA parva.


w.ilas«ndffom tl»s world InW

iPecelesiial region. j

VaUlampayanasaid:— ^

lionofs. .u...

a. Taaasa.™bly o! Brab™"” '""J
pwenl became ,nlliirai O

desirous of pleasing king Dbri Marada

monarch ihemseWcs worshipped Naraaa
ttlih great respecli .

aj-14 Tboia lotjmast «! '"S'rada
atiMiis also landed ^^Vriavuna adbes-
II ta Iht rojal ajS' T a.H l-a’

Sing Narada, said.-*Vour ho V ^
li creased the devotion of the .i
ol all those people here, and of mjseU also.

0 you of great splendour.

55 1 *ish to ask you D 'nta*

to me as I say it ‘V*i ^ rhaJ are adored
rishtra. Oeelesltal Rtsliii
el all the worlds j

Id Vsu know lh« troth ot o

Billed with celcsual vieion, Jo ^

l.ice born Rl.1.1, what lh« '

are e( human beings. ,

17 You hate said ’'’'*‘.{ 1 ’* .

been of the kings AVi «lesilals.

aswaation wiih the king
You liave not, however, ^ ^ ,gjj will
declared what those regions are
U acquired by this king.

s3 O powerful one, 1 wish ^

JOU what region will be ,j igU me

royal DtiTiiarashira ^‘’“,,*’ ',11 be h»

truly the kind of region
and the time when be will attaint
p Tl.oiaddr.oiod hT hj";^

Ctlesiial vision and ^ assemWf

penances, said m Ibe midst of the «
these words biglly agreeable to

cl all.

KMadasaid:— , ... -r

Sjchi , and Iherei O royal sage,
king Vandu ^

31. There Isa talk *ro”* P.^'J^b.gWjr
*'«Hit ih«a Dhritarashirt _

»nletc peninces which be is perlorminn

s. There 1

Shikf* l.mself that there are »

yet «f( the period cl » «« ol ‘I’*’ I'* _

3 t Alltr Ibir. V.-i:
u ’is""i,.Sli 'el Ku«i» »"'* ’"“'‘'r


(ronorrf b, Hvl '‘"’B “;J‘';5’i,„"'ll, br'l

3^-35, "5;’hl"i:°,"«l.»uS'r.ll bn

highly b)'***** * ^ 0,{[ed with a nghie-

silts by »f *o,nr at will through the

ous soul, he «l , Jl,j Oandharvxs,

regions of »>»« tetcsli • ‘ ^ j you

„.'d Ur. R’W'”” , '"*,“,.7; .0 ihO kod.
5“b“,.8Kf.lIo".-'«'r«d, lb.ro rord
this higb ^ealih

..3j,,,rjs,T./=ir;'dri.b.b,

your penances. .

bW."i''”'ro klog Dhn»rl..b.r.. bro-ro

greatly pleased.


really p ease • nhritarashira of

3S Having lh<y left •*'«

r'VlS.fS .rofro'wb.d -'ll


CHAPTER X'Hr

(ashramavasika parva.)-
Con^fiiuri/.

VbislianlpjyanA ^

• Vpo" "" rCto." lb. Prod.;-,
the Kurus into on account

0 kmit. ftn dispirited 1

01 Iheir mother, became ver^ Vladhupnee

Tlie ciuren* fhe Drab-

we'* possessed by deep

roanas always laiaeu fc.ng, whohas

3 **'*’,„ ^’iw soMary IweslT

become old. Ji« Ganfari. and

KX. Ibi drollb;.. "I

■''r'nroroi.lrok.brojl-rr.f.

-rC'x.'4b.rl:"r.-^'.b"-H

He deep fore it. wh , mho is.

«I that ,r,„ 7

.^,m bereft 0

- t>fh«n’* l^rseh from ' **■

toT*!

,.ms ft'*' . jhe ijrni,
.iLbrn..".' t, nndrfc,. Cl

e y\h.r. •I’X.ri rlrror'd ■»

i-.t«.l’r.HV'b.»lro' 11- *'ro 1*


S4


mamabaxhata:


“•riSuffn' '"'•S ■’

faster t *>'«


7* Ttift cll5i«ns, Intludlrtg ‘ev^tt iKe


ttilh »TL( j slfld'en

wiin grief, bewailerl for the,r old molfter,
and could nol lire 1 „ ,|,eir |o„g. '

, 9 Thlnlcing also of ihifir i old sirs.

tffi 'n” I'l"* 'tnMrtar and

toe hrglily blessed Qandhari, and VidUra


n.‘°‘ "" pleasure In soverelgntv.

Veda's "" of “a


It. despair entered their saoli


as they


ft ij f ’’® youthful Abhimanyu on the
fi^eld of battle* of Iheraen.ghty armed KiSa
^en, fight, of Ihe

Bf ?h^ll of other friends

plrited. ' ^ *»'


Upon repeatedly thinking that the Barth
!l« r^dhef^ tl*Msted Ci both her heroes and


children,

^ ‘oo* '^etc of Cheerless

nearts and grieved greatly.

fS Seeing, horvever, the Son ol Virau's

daughter, vtt , your sire Patikjhif, yotlr
Srandsires somehow lived.


CHAPTER XXir.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA)—

Continued.


Valshampayana said •—

t. Those foremost of men (he hcroc
pandavas,— ‘those del ghter* of their mother
.^became greatly stricken with grief,

3 They who had formerly been ~aIw3)S
engaged in royal offices, did not at that
time attend to those deeds at all in their
capital.

n. Stricken with deep sorrow, llicy could
not find pleasure from anything. If any
body asked them, they never lionorcd bun
with an answer.


4. Ahhoilgh llijse lirfeststlbte hefetS
tfrere grave like the ocean* yet the> were
now depriired of there knourledge alid theiP
very senses by the grief they felt
3 Thmtihig of their mother, the sons ol
Pandu became anftious as to how t! eir
emabiated mother svas sefl-iitg the old
pair.

fl. HoW, indeed* Is that king* tvlusc
sons have all been killed and who is witliout^
Cefuge, living alone* with only Ins wife, in
(he forest haunted by beasts of prey ?

J, Alas* how does that highly blessed
queen. Oandhan* whose dear ones have all
beert killed, follow her blind husband in thd
solitary forest

8 I Su*h Was the ahkiety shown by (he
Pandavas when (hey talked with one another.
They then set their hearts upon beholding
the king In Ins forest asylum.

* 9 Then bowing down to the king, Salrrt*
deva said.'^B' J tkmlt you trisli to see ouf
site. I

i«. Prom my respect for yoU, howeverj
I could not speedily speak en (he subject of
our journey to the forest, Jhe time fof'^
that sojourn is now come
ft By good luck I shall see Kuntl per* "
(ormhig penances with matted locks on hef
head practising severe austerities and emi*
ciated by sleeping on blades of Kusha and
Kasha.

t She Was brought up in palaces arnf
nursed In every comfort a id luJiury Aias,
when shall I see my mother who is new toil*
worn and plunged into great misery.

ij Forsooth, O chief of Qhvrata^s race,
the ends of melt are exceedingly uncertain,
since Kunti, wl o is a princess by birth, is
now living tn misery m the forest *


Hearing these words of Saliadevii
queew Dranpadi tl at foremost of all women
duly honoring the king, said, with proper
salutations — *


*3 Alas, when shall 1 see queen Prilha,
<f, indeed she is alive I I shall consider
mv hfe as not passed In v« n if 1 succeed in
seeing her once more, O king.


l0« Let this sort of understanding hr
ever firm In yon f et your mind always
take a pleasure m such virtne as is involved,
O king of kings m your desire of giant*
>ng suck a I igh boon on us.


ly. Know Okmg that all lhrte*l»des
•r yo.m house are stajlng with nl cir feet
relsod for the Jsurney, from desire of seeiow
Kunti J, fatlier-io*


ftSU


3 , Som.

'“r

»■■-»»"“ “;'rti;,* biiL-* •" >"«


,9 ii..«''n«up.a..

tie king, OcltieJ of his

h.o.td ,11 It.e leaders of »«!* ^r.ny

i ° r-^s 5

?,7rA,Sa™:tr,s' ■■■ "-^,Tr"" ”" .


■7

'”r.“MS‘’;:’= ...... «" "*™“ .""’f


in ToO'e officers iti various

»»,J ll.= kme B«” „Voo«ly «1'''P‘

, BS also all my dosed liuers
llioOsands ....i. and

2 j Let carnages and ^nd

Wardrobes, ami ireasurie , have d'*

Ordered ont, and let , h, charge

command to mardli ool. Veadn'g l®

of ireas .nes go mil on i Jj^j/sheua.

Ule Bscelic hermitage o» i . «o,«he» i.’U- of I3fal>in*>ia *■ j

„ Nv„.,.« -p»"yr;:'SoT»””« r'ss'r .“lifi.

to too the hiiiB, proceeJ, ptopet'y '^7otttias ootT and 6Ufton"‘r"

j .noetlnteada"'?.,”' .0 by . ra.B« , ' , p. <


°‘ 6 “Ti?e P'hceptor rtr.P*

command o I'm »■ , ' -

king’s bermiiag . aiudlnsbtl'ifa-

7-gd surrou tried by

* of ICuru nraises


23 Let coolts ®“i^*ary*e4iabhsh-

k icliens, and the wl"'e edibles and

meiu. and vanous ^''ds carts

Via ids be ordered to bo bo

and conveyances march

24 L-t It be procU.med tl^

oniiomirriw Indeed, .-jt.ng houses

JiUce Let an I've "ay

Dl various kind! be erect which

• »5 these -‘h his

the eldest son of I O monarch,

lioihers When nutni' h lotlo'Ving <>1

lie king started w.Ch a U«g«

Women ami old men li..* V.rdH*'''

,6 a=...pb'b”>rr't''^«S

ll.rra waned fiveda)* lot w«,U to-

rn ght accompany hin
waids the forest.


eiiAPir.n HXi"
(AStiitAMAVA-rritA PAnvA)-

ConUuiifi

Vtttsliamptjanb »i >4 ' 7 nt,.r.i.‘.

ll.euni\«r»e. tom* , »'«'*

3 ln\m*di»trly " , ^ I up Vqrpt

cd’s.u.tr of

b» hn.se rrsrn.O unara

png then »o«»e*.


by a i-.K-- ' \ M ¥

Vcllod»'»' tb' s' .'I'b ‘"'.■"‘’i

='-»!2r ^"r“

'', jVo'upt tvbb bsii'ts'*’ .
1.11 p-.t«:..d, - "> '7,.,, tvltb «««•

‘"t,, IS «1.»"

’ „ Ibs'»i;n»f,77,7“7,,dby .1<
^' 7 'bsbbbt."' rr‘'

sho-ers.f elephsms*

•3., ■‘r’ahd^eSoh:;

„tH nioi^ei. a m , y,„at .

ipetsanJthe n „ il. hiCa;

„,,A artij. h» mo
beauty. riCe rtn*

n 77/773 by".-'''-"'-"-*"-’

rf,.trdV.us., tyb..».«b ^


Sf7S“Sb>S?

7 ::7 ;s 7 r:r, -‘tri

ii7.v:.;'d™:.7.'r'u....t


^ i8. Then all ihe men became filled willi
loy and quickly entered the forest, rdiing
It with loud sounds of joy, O chief of
Bharata’s race.


CHAPTER XXIV.

( ASHRAM AVASIKA PARVA.)—
Contmueii,
Vaishampayana said:—

I. The Pandavas got down at a distance,
from their cars and proceeded on foot to
the hermitage of the king, bending them*
selves in humility.

a. All the combatants also, and the
citizens and the wives of the Kuru chiefs,
followed them on foot.

3 The Pandavas then reached the sacred
hermitage of Dhnlarashira whicli abounded
with herds of deer and which was adorned
with plantain plants.

4 Many ascetics of rigid vows, filled
With curiosity, came there for seeing the
Pandavas who had arrived at the liermt.
tage.

S* The king, with tears in his ejee,
asked them, saying,.— 'Where has my eldest
sire the perpetuater of Kuru’s race,
gene ?

6 They answered, O monarch, telling
him that he had gone to the Yamuna, for
his ablutions, as also for fetching flowers
and waters,

7* Proceeding quickly on fool along the
path pointed out by them, tlie Pandavas
saw all of them from a distance

8. Desirous of meeting witli their sire
they walked rapidly. Then Sahadeva ran
quickly towards the spot where Piitha
was.

<). Touching the feet of his mother, he
began to weep aloud With tears running
down her cheeks, she saw her darhne
child. ®

to Raising her son up and embracing
him with her arms, she Tnlormed Gandban
of Sahadeva's arrival

II. Then seeing the king Bhimasena,
Arjuna, and Nakula, Pritlia tried to ad
Vance quickly towards them

12 She was walking m advance of the
childless old pair, and was dragging them
lorward. Seeing her, the Pandavas fell
down on the earth.

• 3 The powerful and the great monarch,
gifted with great intelligence, recognising


I them by their volcee and also by loucbj
comforted them one after another.

I 14. Shedding tears, those great princes,
j with due formalities, approached llie oil
: king and Gandliari, as also their own
' motlier,

15. Indeed, regaining their senses, and
once more consoled by their moltierr H e
Pandavas took away Irom the king and
llieiraunt and mother the jars full of water
which they had been carrying.

16 Ihe ladies of those leading men,
and all the women of the royal household,
as also all the iiihabttanls of the city and
the provinces, then saw the old ki ig.

17. King Yudliishthira presented all
those individuals one after another to the
old king, repealing their names and fami-
lies and then himself adored his eldest
sire with respect.

18. Surrounded by them all, the old
monaich, with c) es bathed in tears of joj,
considered himself as once more staying in
the midst of the city of Hasiinapore.

19 Saluted with respect hy all his
daughters in law headed by Krishna, king
Dliritarashtra. gifted with great intelli-
vense, with Gandhan and Kunti became
filled with joy, ,

30 He then readied his forest retreat
which was higl ly spoken of by Siddhas
and Charanas and lh.4t then was filled up
with vast crowds of men all desirous of
seeing I im tike the sky teeming willi ■»>*
riads of stars.


CHAPIER XKV.
(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA )—
CoAtiiiiicl, *

Vsisbampayana said —

I 1 1 e king, O chief of Bl irata's race,
with those foremost of men vts Ins bro-
thers who all had eyes resembling lotus-
petals took his seal in the hermitage of fiis
eldest sire.

a I'here sat around him many highly-
blessed ascetics coming from various re-
gions from desire of seeing the sons of that
lord of Kuru s race, rfs , the Pandavas of
wide chests

3 They Slid — 'We wish to know who
amongst lhe*e is Vudhisi t1 ira, who are
Bhama and Arjuna wl o l1 e twinsf-and who
IS the (ilusirious Draupadi 7 ’


, Tl.tn ll« S..U, Sa"i>V?'
l,c,r UtaupsJ' W»


Banjaya said *-


,„d,,rf„ll.a bod) wl..pl' a

a lull grovvn lion, w*'® ' expan-

large aqmline nose, ai j Ku»u

- ,y?s Ol » C«PP"y


king


6 Tins one whose ‘® .omplU«on «
n infuriate \'' ' M wltLe frame

,s fair as that of heated j;;;;,,,. and

s of large and expansire P'®P ,5 VriWo-

^hose arms arc long and stout,
dara. See him well. . -


dara. See him well. l.,

7 The powerful *'j jouthfu

sdes l.m, of darkish CO or *nd )
l,.m. «,l n re.emhles the leader Ol a


lim.'of darkish color

e, who resemhles the l„gh

pliai tine herd whose shon'd a ^ ^ j,„g
as those ol a lion, who expan*'''*

elephant, and whose eyes called

as the petals ol a lotus, ts the
Arjiina


8. Those two tor-imost of

iitmg beside Kunti "/Vxfa In the ennre
)hng Vishnu and ,u m beauty

.0, Id. they have nut

»nd strength and excellence ..


nij strength and excellence u* as

g Tina lady having eyes jj»uched
olus.petals. who seems i complex'®"

he middle age ®‘ f ' lotua. and who
resembles that of '» * the embo-

looks like a goddess. ^ , prosperity-

died form ol the g® possessed ®l

to. She who sits h«s“*',V'*,;Uo looks I he
the complexion ol pure ^ojd.
the embodied rajs ol t * ^ i«,ce-born

=„”,.=.rb..8"«l '.I

ol that monarch, t ' j^f,st,na. Sb*

used to always ‘*"S ^ ^ara.

the loremosl wile ot vr

of '


„rth. “’’ll”'”'!'" '

lotus petals, she ^

son ol , complexion is as

,e This lady '" 1 *“?® old and who sits
t , M that ol heated g daughter

^*1*1 t.rr child on her Up, ' , ol

S.5 . ;,Sp «'» b.v=b«b

&'brb--

order V o,a(,naana 5 , th® -„.r« kind

„rc.o.k.‘>‘'“\,l^rp""p''i '’r k;'-

i ‘"'r '-li^"'*" '

lliese P^ queries.

,q .nsreet 10 lO"' 1

Vaishampiy^* ,jce,

,8 sins cl b""

n- f'"., T'ch tig no'y ""rs-

(juines.


,e loremosii - ^^5„_ ol

^3 llns IS the daufi^M of n,rneol
Ma^adha who was h5‘»'^,

Urasandha P®***,* »hc is lU*

of anassemblageol f .jravaU-

wife ol the youngest so dark -

t4 *Uo*scssed •^®°J"[’n?'theie on the
Ibc blue Utui, she wno


CHAPfER XXVI.

„5„aaMavas..ra rARVA.>-

' Conlt'iUKi'

nliritara.btTa p-ace and

I O ''odbr.bl'"'"; „ 'l.rerliere a'; J

bapp-oss. “"a,;<l lb. pro.."«> '

"•h.' fo".'”"'”™ '

"•r‘'>^„.b..eo|soibo....^;;-i-i'"£


2?


MAtlABilASATA.


4 * Is }Our treasury filled niihout dis-
regarding tUe restranns imposed by jmitce
suid eqiiitj ? Do you behave as you should
towards foes, neutrals, and allies ?

5—6 Do >ou duly took after the Brah>
manas, alviays makvng them the fitsl siflst
Wliat need 1 *av of the ciltzens, and your i
servants, and lonsmen, are your foes, O
chief of Bliarats’s race pleased vvilh your
conduct? Do you, O Umg ol kings, adore
with devotion the Pitris and the deities?

7. Do you I adore guests with food and
drinfc, O Dliarata 7 Do ihe Brahmanas in
your kingdom perform the duties of their
order, walk ahng the psth of virtue?

8 Do the KsliatriyaS and Vaishyas and

Sliudras also within your kinkdim, and all
your relatives, perforin their respective
duties 7 1 hope the women, the children,

and tie old, among \our suhjei-ts, d 1 not
grieve (under distress) and not beg (the
»<cessaries of life).

9 Are l\<e ladies nl your hoiiseliold duly
1 onoured in yoiir house. O best of men?

? hope, O kng that tins race of royM
sages havtnt! got yoii for their king, have
not fallen away from fame and glory ?

Vftisliampftyana said -■

I 10 In the old king who sard so, Yiidhrsli'
Ihlra. knowing rnoraliiy and ynstice and
welNskilled in acts and «reech, spoke as
follows, pulling some questions about Ins
well being.

Tudliistthira said--7 ,

>1. Does your peace O king, Joiirself
Control, your tranquillity of heart, ?

Is this my mother able to serve you witlioui
fatigue and trouble. •

13 — 13 Will, O king, her residence m :
the forest y leld ftuu 7 1 tope this queen I

who IS my eldest moiher, who is emaciated
With (exposure to cold and wind and tlie
toil of walking and wlve^s now gtven to the
practice of severe aiisirriiies no longer
yields to grief lor her children of great
energy, all of whonf performing (he duties
of the Kvhatriyas, (lavc been kUled on tlie
field of battle

(4 Does she accuse us sinful wretches,
wlio are lespniisihle for llieir devlruclion?
Where 14 Vidur*, O Ul iK 7 We do not see
)tim here I hop* thu Sai'jaya, performing
pehrtiices, 1$ in peace aiid happiness,

Vaishampayana said —

15—16 riius addressed Dhriiarishtra
aniwrred king Yudhishlliira, saying— O
son Vidiira IS well. He is practising aus*
tere penances, living on air aleiie* for ho


I abstains from all other food. He eim*
aated and his arteries and nerves have
lircoifie visible Sometimes he is seen m
I this empty forest by Brahmanas.

17. While Diintarasl tra was saying this
I Vidura was seen at a distance He had
! matted locks on Ins head, and gravels in Ins
I nvoulli, and was greatly emaciated. He
I was perfectly naked His body was be-
smeared all over with filth, and wiih the
dust of various wild flowers.

tS Whew Kshatlii, was seen from a
distance, the fact was communicated to
Yitdliishlhtra Vidura suddenly stopped,
O king, looking towards the retreat

t9 King Vudluslitliira pursued him
aloiie,as he ran and entered tl edeep forest,
sometimes seen and sometimes not seen by
the pursuer.

20 He said afoud — *0 Vidura, O
Vidura I am king Yndhishthira, )Our
favourite' — rxclaniiiiig thus Yudlnshlhira,
with great exertion, followed Vidura
31 . Having reached a solitary spot m
the forest that foremost of intelligent men,
t>ie , Vidura, stood still, leaning against ft
tree.

33 He was greatly emaetated. He te«
tamed only the shape of a human bring,
Yndl ishthira of great mlelli|t«uce reeog*
Hi>ed him, however

7 \ Standing before him, Yudlnshthirft
addressed »>im saving— ‘I am Yudnsh-
ihira ' Indeed aduring Vidura properly,
YttdtmtutMra said these words m the
fiearntg of Vidnra *

34 hJeanwhile Vidura looked at the
king steadfastly Casing his Ionic thus on
ilie king, he <tood motionless in Yoga

3$ Fndii-d with great intelhgciKe, he
tWn (by Ins Yoga power) entered the body
of Yndhishlliira, limb by lirnb. He innied
ins vital airs wiili those of the king, and
Ins senses with the king’s senses.

SG Indeed xvith the help of Yoga pp»er,
Vidura, burning with e> ergy, tliiis entered
the body ftf king Yiidhishthira the (Ust. ^
37 Meanwl lie the body of Vidura con-
tiimed to lean against the tree, with eyes
fixed the king soon saw that life had
fled out ol It.

38—20 At the same lime, he felt that he
I nnself had become stronger than before
and that lie had ganCed rnaiiv additional
virtues and accoinplislimenis Gifted with
great learning and energy, O nionarcti.
Pandu 8 son king Y.idhiililhv* ll e ^ust.

1 ilien recollected his own stale be*8*e I is
1 btrib among men. Fo»s*>*ed of miglny


ftSllRAMiVASlKA MnVA


„„jy, 1,e tad htatd d Vog. ptad'C
''3^',,. K»g i“:;:

Mdued wall RTest learninc. ,%acly »»

cus ol dmuR tUe U.t r»«

Vidura. and 10 cremate

,nm,ble vo.ce waa U.en »«,n

king, this hodtf wl.icb „,‘d. In

called Vidora should not be etetn*l

him IS )our body also He t*
deity of Virtue. ,

3! Tl.os- l..ppy

tl e name of baiitaniW* will yaiis

rata lUs performed the ^o*' . ,,-,„,es

You should not. O scorcher ol encmie
inevc lor Inm at all. ..... ...

33 ihu, .dd,„..d

men, and Uhimasena and others, o
filled with wonder. . _

3J. Ht.nng wl.»t "'J'j '’.Ja ’ I'"..
Dnriurashtra became satd.— ‘P’

addressmR the son of <,{ water

>ou auept from me ines b
and roots and frU'ts “ m take wl'»»
OVmg, that one’s guest

one takes himself.', • , ..

36 Thus addressed. Ihe

answered the king, »*y‘'’8 , and coots
itiiRhty.arined king ate the Uu‘” “ ^

tvlDch he gave. s '

37. Ihen they al* V'^hai night O'US
..ndera tree ani drunk

having eaten fruits *!’ jd, had g»»e"
the water that lUe
llicni.


and roots of the forest, ia,,fifd bolter

flowers T’' 1.^ l^y


HoJ' ol <!"' '1 li.r. C...11I-

,4 h... ...d 111.'.. I..

1 ,;, bicd. .!•» ‘ o k.ta '

..ta.ii'ii Ita" •»"' ° ' * ,,„„„d

..ng,^.. 0.1-

warblers ,

. eehoerl will' the

sCorVuS'^d",:... go..-.' .

K,ogV.d.,i.l.,.,.r. ...on/'."-'

copper jvrs which I blankets and

and many «nd Kama-dalus

wooden sacrlfici . _ pans,


CHAPTER XXVII.

(ASHRAMAVASIRA PARVA)—

Vaishampayana s»'^ “

1 lliey posMd *.'0. 'c(,nsif1l.t'0

”.S'o tog."-’'.'" ^

ascetics. ^ pl,c« was

3 The conversation I' morality

marked by ,:*?* d dehebtful ,

and wealth Consisii.K ,, varioos I ^ e„e.

»«.d> .. ta—g

citations from the , leavme cosily \ riehieotis souled monarch be-

. A, di«: ji J. a.. ™‘

,;'itar. oa..,= ...bed .......


O Bharaia.

V.nou. Uind. it “'■>* ;!

,™n. ."A .«>> .'"

torita V-“"“ .'"'"A

as many as he liked. ,

o .. Vmir Yudhishthira having

.„;f ....d

S'.?r.-™d.o "■

*"”■ n. ..w U.ng Dlir.tarail.tr.. seat.d
” .ah G..rdhar, b..,d,....m..ta'


MAtlADllARATA. '


mwcJi remote from llial place, tilce a diiciple j
wiOi bcttl li*ad, )*iUed wnb tiumilny. * |

t8 He saluted tlie old kin$; Riving liis
name 'Sit dawn,’ were the words ihfe old '
kiitg said VVi’h Dlintaraslitn's per/nis* j
sioi), Yudliishthira sdl liinuelf down on a
mat of Kuslid grass.

ig 1 hen the Ollier sons of Pandn with
Dlimia among them, O ^ou of Bliarala'^
race, saluted the luni' and touched his teet
and sat themselves down, witli his order.

20 1 he old Kuru king, surrounded by

them looked highly beautiful, Indeed, he
blazed with a Vedic splendour like Vrihas*
pall 111 the midst of the celestials.

21, After they had sat themselves down,
many great Itishis, vis , Sh-itajupa, and
others, who were inhabitants of ICuiukshetra
came there.

22. The illusinous and learned Vyasa,

gilted with great energy and respected
by even liie celestial Rishia, sliowed Inmseif
at the head of his numerous disciples to
Vudlnshthira ^ ^

''23 The Kuru king DitriUrashtra^
Ku Ill's son Yudliishthira of great energy,
and Bhimasena and others, stood up and
going a lew steps, saluted those guests. ,

34. Approaching near, Vyasa, surround*
ed by Shatayupa and others, addressed
king Ohnirashtra, saying,— '8e sealed.'

35 "ilie illustrious Vyasa then look an
excellent seat made of Kusha grass placed
upon a black deer-skin «nd covered with
a piece of silken cloth. Ihey had reserved
that seat for liim.

36 After Vyasa had been sealed ail those
foremost of twice*born persons, e'fted with
profuse energy, sat themselves down, with
the permission of Krishna-Owaipayana.


CHAPTER XXVllI.

(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.}—
ConlmueJ.

Vaialiampayaiia Ba,ld' — ,

t— 2 After ihe noble Pandavas had all
been seated. Satyavati's son Vyasa said,—
'O Dliritarashtra of miglity^arpis, have you
been able to achieve peimnces? Is your
mind, O king, pleased with your (mng in
the forest I "

3 Has your grief begotten of the des>
truction of your sons in brittle, disappeared
Irom your heart T Are all your percep
tions, Q sinless one, no>v clear 7


4. Dj you practise the ordinances of
forest'hfe alter having made yo<dr heart
firm 7 Dies my dauglUer-in-lawT Gm-
dhari, sufler hetself to be overwhelmed by
grief T

5. She IS endued with great wisdom.
Ciidued with iiitetligence, that queen under*
stands both virtue and profit She is welt
conversant with the truths which relate to
both prosperity and adversity. Does she
still grieve 7

6 Does Kunii, O king, who for her
devotion to the service of her seniors, left
her cintdren, attend to your wants and
I serve you with alt humility?

I 7 Have the htgh>minded and great
I king Yudliishthira, the son of Dharma, and
Bhima and Aijima, and the twins, been
sufficiently comforted 7

8 Do you feel delight at seeing them?
Has your mind become freed from every
strain? Has your di'^pisiiion, O king be*
come pure on account of the increase of
your knowledge 7

9 These three, O king, are the fore-
most of all concerns, O Dhardta, via 1
abstension from injury to any creation,
truth, and freedom irom anger,

to. Does your forest life any longe**
prove painful to you? Are you able tu
acqiire with your own exertiois the pro-
ducts of the forest for your food 7 Do
fasts pain you now 7

t». Have you learnt 'O king, l»ow the
great Vidiira, wiio was Dharma's' self, left
tliiswoild? ,

13 Through the curse of' Mandavya,
the deity^if Virtue became born as Viduri.
He was gifted with great intelligence.
Endued with high penances, he was great
and high minded

*3 Even. Vrvhaspali among the ceUs*
lials, and Shokra among the Asuras, had
not intelligence like that foremost of persons.

14. Tlie eternal deity of Virtue was
stupefied by lie Rislu Mandavya with an
expenditure of ins penances acquired for a
long tune with great care.

15, At the command of the grandfather
and through my own energy, the highly
intelligent Vidura was procreated by me
upon a soil owned by Vichitraviryya

16 A deity of denies, and eternal, he
was, O king, your brolher I lie learned
know hmi to be Dharm* on acc unt of
his practices of concenir.ilion and abstrac-
tion. '

ry He grows '\iih iruih, scUer^Jtraint,
tranquility of heart, mercy, and gifts. He


ASUnAMAVASfRA fARVA.


1* 3lit'i5'S engaged In penances, ancf «
eternal.

jS. From that dcjty of Virtue, through
Yogi*Poiver, {lie Kuril kiiii* Vndliislithira
also took lits birth, Vudhislitliira, there*
fore, O ktng, is Dharma of great wisdom
and irnmeasuraole intelltgence.

Oharma exists both in this world
and m the next, and is (ike fire or wmd or
water or earth or space.

30. He IS, O king of kings, capable ot
going everywhere and exists, pervadtug the
enure universe. He is capable of being
Seen by only those who are the foremost of
the deui's and itiose who are purged of
every sm and crowned with ascetic success.

2f, He who IS Oharma, is Vidiira , and
ne who is Vidiira 13 the (eldest) son of
Pandii. Hial san of Pandit, O king, is
capable of being perceived by you fie is
before jQu as your servitor,

2* G fted with great Yoga- Power, your
f"gli*SQuled brother, lliai foremost of in*
Ulhgent men, seeing the Ingh smiled
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti has Entered
into his body,

23 O chief of Oharata's race, I shall
Oni(e you also with great benefit Know. O
son, tnat t am come here for removing your
doubts

04, 1 shall show you some feat which has
never been accomplished before by any of
Ihe great Fishts-~some wondecful effect of
tny p*iianees.

33 Wliai object is that. O king, whose
accofnph»hfn<*nt you wish from me 7 lei)
me ivhat is that which you wish to see or
ask or hear? O sinless one, ( shaH accom-
phsh ic.


CHAPTER XXIX.
(PUrRADARSH\NA PARVA).
Janatoejayasaid — ■

I — 3 lelltne O learned Drahman, what
that wondeifiit feat was, which the great
Ristu Vyasa of great energy accomplished
after tie had his made promise to theptd iiing,
wtien Dhritarashtra, that foremost one of
I^uru's race had taken up his residence 10
the forest wiili tns wile and w th lus daogh*
ter-in law Kunli ; and after, indeed, Vidura
had left his own body and entered into
Yudhislilhira, ami at the time wfien alt the
sons of Pandu were living i » the hermitage
4 Fir how many days did the Kuru
king Yiwibrshtliira of undecaying glorj, stay
with fus men III ilie focesti


5 Of what food O pnivcrfit! one, did the
great Pandsvas Support themselves wiib
their men, and wives, white they lived in tlie
forest? O sinless one, do you tell me tins.

Vaishampayana said

d— 7 With the permission of the Kuril
king, the P,4ndavas, O monarch, wnli tneir
troops and the ladies oi t>ieir liousehold,
hired on various Irmds ol food and drink
and passed about a month in great liappi*
ness m (hat forest, luwards (he close of
(hat period, O sinless one, Yyasa came
there. < f '

8. While all those princes sat nround
Vyasa, engaged in coiTversatioii on various
(Opics, other Kishis came (here,

p They were Narada, Parvata, Devala
ol ausrere penances. Visliwavasu, J umvuru,
and Chitrasena, O Bhara(a.

to. Gifted ^*tth severe penances, the

Kuril king Viidliislithira, with (he permis-*
Sion of Dbrjiarashlra, adored then) accord*

jng to due'rjies,

II. Having gm that worship from

Yudhishthira, si) of them sat down orj
aacted seats (made of Kusha grass as also
on eaceUent seals made of peacock featliers,

11. After they had alt been seated, the
Kuril king ol^ great intelhgence took his
seat Oiere, surrounded by l)ie sons of
Pandu.

13 Candban Kunt) and Draupadi, an i
sheof the Sailwaia race, and oibrr lad) s
of the royal household also sat down,

14 The conversation winch then arose
was excellent and had reference to subjedo,
connected wiih piety and the Rishis ol old,
and the celestials and (he Asuras,

t5*»2[. At tbeclose of (hat eonvertalion
(he (iighiy , energetic Vyasa that foremost
of eloquent men <lat first of all persons
knowing ,the Vedas hrgtfy pleased, ad*
dressed ih'* blind monarch and once more
I said,— Burning as you are with gnel on
I account of your children, [ know, O ki ig of
I kings what object is cheristied by you in
I your heart I know the sorrow wlncK
I always exists in the heart of G m ilian, ihst
; winch ex sts III the heart of niti and ihat
also which IS cherished by Draupsdi in her
heart, and that burning gnet. on account of
the death ol her son, which Krishm's sister
^ubhadra also cherislies Hearing of this
meting O kiig ol yours wiili all these
princes and princesses o) your house, I have
come here, O dehgliter of Ih- KaunVas, for
removiig jour doubts f.e( the celestials
and Gandhxrvas and all these great Rishis
see to day the energy of (bass penances


MAttABAtIRATA.


wImcIi 1 1uu« acqdlred for ilisse io'’i! yean.
therefore, O hing, (ell me wliat wislt of
3 oiir& 1 shall graiu to-Uay.

3 j— ‘ aj I am powerful enotiijh to (;rant
Jou a boon, bee ihc fiuii of my penances.*
ihiis addressed by Vyasa of preat under*
standing, king Dhritarashira llio«,eh( for
a moment and (hen prepared to speak
He said, — '{ am (treatly fortunate. Lucky
nm I in obtaining your favour. My life
U crowned with success to day,— smce this
meeting has taken place between me and
you all of great piety. I'o day 1 shall attain
la that highly happy end which Is reserved
for me, slnCe, ye ascetics who have
penances for wealth, ye who are equal to
Brahm « himself, 1 have succeeded In
obtaining this meetin,; with you all 'there
Is not the least doubt that this sight that
1 have obtained of you all has purged me
of every sin.

36—2^. O sinless ones, 1 have no longer
any (ear about my end in the next world,
hull as I aiti of love for my cbildicn, I
always remember tliem My mind,
however, is always pained by (he recollec*
tton of the various acts ol wrong winch my
Wicked son of eticeednigly evil understand*
Ing perpetrated HevI ig a sinful under*
standing, he always persecuted the iniio*
cent Paiidavas,

28—30 AUs, the whole fiarlli has been
devastated by him, with her horses,
elephanls and men Many great ‘-kings,
rulers uf various kingdoms, came fur help.
>ng iny son and succumbed to death
Alis, leaving llieir beloved father and
svives and ihelr very life-breaths, all (hose
heroes have become guests of (be king of
the dead. What end, O twice-born one,
has been attained by those men '»!«> have
killed, for (he sake of their friend, in battief
What end also has attained by my sons and
grandsons who have fallen til the battle f
My heart Is always pained at the thought
of my having brought about llie desttuC
(Ion of the powerful Bhishma, the son of
fahaiitanu, and of Dioiia Hiat foremost of
Bralimaiias, through my foolish and sinful
sun wliu was an injuier of ins friends.

33 Desirous of gelling the sovereignty
of (he Barib, he caused the Kuiu race,
blaring wiiSi prospeniy, to be annihilated
1 hulking of dll tins, 1 burn day and night
will) grief,

3t Deeply afflicted with pam and grief,
1 am unable to get peace of mmd Indeed
O sire thinking of all tins, I have no peace
of m n '•

Vishampayatia said

33 Hearing these Umenfatiofls expres*


I ted in vnrlrttis wiy s, of ihat toyal ssg^ l)l
grief, OJsnamejiya of Odiidhtn, becairt

I fresh.

I 36. Ifie grief, also, of Knnit, of ikS
daughter of Drupada, of Snbhadra, and
of the other members, male and female,
and the dai>gli|ers-ni«law,^of the royal huu'S
of Kuru became eqnaliy green.

3/-39 g teen Oandliari, wilh bands'
g-d eyes, j nning her hi»n Is addressed her
fatlier-in-law Deeply sfliicted with gtief
on account of the tiesiriiciiun of lier sons,
she said — • O foreiriost of a^Celics, tins king
has passed sixteen years grieving (or the
death of Ins sons and shorn of peace of
mind,

ig Afftcled wllli grief on account of
the desliuction of Uis children, this king

I Ohritarasliira, always breathes heavilyi

I and never sleeps at night, O great Rislii.

! 40. 1 hrongh the power of j our penances

you are competent to create new worlds.
What need 1 say (hen about showing this
king Ins children who are now in the o(l>ef
world 7

4 t. *lhts Kttshnx, Ike daiigkler ef
Drnpada, has lost all her kinsmen and
children, 1 berelore, sl>e who n the dearest
of niy daugl ters-ln law grieves greatly.

43. Ihe sister of Krishna, «i4 , Snbha*
dra of sweet words, burning with the loss
of her son, grieves as deeply,

43 this lady who is respected by ali«
wlio IS (he wife n( BHunskravas, stncUeit
with grief on account of the fate of hre
husband, always i,idulges In heart rending
lamentations

44 Her father. In taw was tile Intelligent
Valinka of Kuril’s race. AUs, boinadatia
also was killed, along with lits lullier, in
the great battle.

43 « Alas, a hundred sons, heroes who
never retreated froiil battle, bilongmg to
this son of yours, this kiug of great iiitelH*
eence aitd great prosperity, has been
killed in b«(ile.

46 Hie hundred wives of those sons
ate all gnevtiig and repeatedly increasing
the grief of both tlie king and myself. O
great ascetic, stricken by that great
onslaught, they have gatliered rou 1 J ni.

4f, AUs lliose great lieroes, those great
car-wartiorSf iny fallters in. law SomaJatla
and others —alas, What end lias been (licirS,

O powerful one.

oS. Through yoUr favour, O holy cue,
that will take place lor winch this kii>,r, my,
scK and this daughterin law ol ,

Kunti, vhall all become freed from our guel.


33


AsllRA^tJ^VASlKA PARVA.


is After G.n-lharl ftad s=..d ^

t*« I.Ad become wasted ‘’'^R

.bservance of many hard ^ows. b»«a« w
.fm,k of her secret-botn son glitod WU«‘
solar elTiilgence.

50. He boon-civms
Mpeble of both ,ow ibot


ft»kphceHls remote diStai
he royal mother of Arjuna
Kith grief.


,d hearing what

^u>

»fil tied


o..’to her Vyasa

ot««d one. what Is m yoOr mind. »«

»ihat you wish to say.*


say. .

52.' A.lhl,, Kooli, b.nj'.oc

. her.falher.ln.Uw. and

asWulness. said these words
ounlmg the past incidents of he


CHAPTER XXX.

itUTRBOARSHANA PARVA.)

’ Cdnitnuid.

Sunti said — . , .u , law

1. Oholyone, joiiaremyfatby

»nd, (liereforei my deity of of

■re my god of gods. Hoaf

hulh. . rt..r.

3—3. A twice-born ascetic ,ny

vssas. who Is full of anger, I

u!^,^^tl.m bVlh^ P^*'y ^\Zl


, fiouse for begging aims

eded m pleasing by^efosmg

onduct and of my minds as I

0 notice the many wrong much

lot yield to anger , eaciimg “‘-t

n his conduct quite capable ol e»c“ K

lassion.


, w..ho»t .«y "IS”"; d”
f.,Tll 1 “"T'"' •■fb. dif.y, of a"-""-

jl. He told me. ^ Do you ask a

1 asked »i«m to leave me. ^
not bear the idea of coming a, also that

"«■ >, ”tJbi,“r"S !.'rd»=

entered me with me,— Votf

S.'S r.o’i.’i'd p’"" "‘“'""i ■»

»pa«mems 5 *Vc«t mlo Hi*

: -S K..". "">•

into the world secieily.

K?; V.r.«" "

said 10


".V" ' r'

did not try to {,*„ellknown la

„ barns me. O RIs ,

mmm

° "’®' .. I answered _ . .... .t lit ihi* king

5-6. Fearing n’.g R.slii once

me -• O btelsed damsel. O
nore said to me, , ..,,11 become lie

you of beautiful face, denies whom

mother of Dharma ihose

you will -ummon will obey y l*,ce-

became filled with ^,e |,as lived m

however, which the Kism g

my rtlemoty at all limes. chamber

8. On^jJa^-shtinKWiihm my

1 saw the son fis*' g* | recvUeeted

the maker of day before me,
the words of the Uishi.


iliaison of mine.

I also. O s«’’‘*** ,„s which he cherishes in

ibd «b..b b*. •>«“„. U„.»n .0

’°r tbd. .dd(.>''d bp X,P"S

^ r of all persons, said lo her m

“■*! '"?S“i.d b' >“■

n..-.bb-pp'- _ „ .

You are not to blame at all. Ym
* 1. the denies are

-".«dSlVo..fp"*-' P»2P-*b<=

inter human bodies.


■34


ItAIIAPMirATA.


II riierc arf miny dotiri. U>e} lif*

Ctl {> liy iSongtit ii1 mo [W waul,

l» tik'l I. ti> (o(ic>', and tiy utiioit,

»lt> ihry l><^hCt cliilJren. llirte ni« t!>«
fue nicllmili

H Vou hflonjj to tlmonlrrol l•otrt1t tty
Van liy\o no ('ult. Itiiow (hit, O Ivimtl I
1 el t'le lever rt )Oiir lic^rt be fein'>vrj.

74 Kverjilinjj It heei'ntni; for
»ba »tc tn i itj i» P'»fn lor

tbn<rtli»t life II>er>lbmu tt men-

torictut lor ibote (hat are Kvf'y*

Ooni; It tlietr OAii for iboie wtia arc
miKblj.’


CHAP! HR XNXf. I

{PUrRADAkbUANA PARVA.J— j

CtntimiiJ.

VyasVsaid •—

I. U'etsed be jeii, O Gindbtri, yen
•ball ite ) oiir « mt rod brolliert and Iriendt
and ktovmeii nH ^ wiili your •ite< tbit
ni,iil 1 let men riteo Irorn tieep.

3 Kunil aUo ib'll <«e (Oroa. and sbe
ol Yadu's race shall sre < er sen Abhimanyii
D'tiipadi sImII s*e tier live sens, Iter fathers
and her brelhert also

3 Even befnre ton bad asked me. (hit
tvat the Iheuithi in my mmd. I enter*
tamed (Ins purpose when I w»t tir(;ed (O
tha( elTect by the king, by you, O Candhtii.
and liy Kunli !

4 You should not grieve for lliose fore-
most oilmen. Iliey met with death on
account of tlicir devotion to the practices of
KshatrijdS.

5 O laiildrst one, the w rh of the gods
• could not hut be done It «ts (or accom*

phshing that object lliat those heroes ctme
donn on earth. Ihey were all portions of
(be celestials.

6—7. Gindharvas, Aptaras, Pishadiat,
Guhyakas at>d Uakshatas, many pure
persons many inditiduals crowned with
, success (ol penances), celestial Kishis, deities
and Dniavas, and heavenly Rislnsof spat*
less character, met with death on the battle*

' field ol Kuruksiietra

S It IS heard tint he who was the In-
lelligenl king of tl e Gendharvas, and named
Uhruarashtia, iooit hirth n (he woildef
men as your lord Ohritarasiitra

Q Know tl at Panda of unfading g^ory
arid distinguished above all others origi-
nated (rom the Maruts JCshattri and
YudhisI tliira are both portions of the deity
ol Viilue.


lit Kntw iiitt Dirjollitni wit }
,«liil ^htiiiini u It D-vapira (J )o« of gnsi! ’
fcaiurrs knmv ihai Dutihataiit and oi!i(r>'
wrre all ll-tkt* atat.

II, IJliintscin of grett purer that |
fbvttiter «f ritemirt, it bi m llir M,iH.tt )
K.riw Ihit lilt 1)1 tntuj.tt, the son of ^
I'rilba, 1. the tncirni llttl 1 Nara

ir— H lln-liiiet's IS Naraitni, snd /
tlietwintAre (I v Athnins. lint t>rcmott|
of ea(*c«vin4 onet, vir, Snrj s, linmfl
divided lit btJy in t*o psrti coiilx'ii'l
with one portion to give lirat to tlie worldt
and with anniher to live as Kariit Mo
who was bom at the son of Ar jun'.
gladdcner of all. lliat heir of ihc priperues
of the I'rffidavat whs vrat kil'ed b) sif
Ctr-vrtriinrt (h^bliiig togrthrr) was Sona. •
lie was of (Mill SiihhtdiA i liriHi<h YoR*’
power be htd rlivitUd hunselt in two ps'is*

• S J^hrishladj u nm wh t nrigintted with j

Dratipadi from ihs sicrificial fire, was ^
art antpicioiit poriioii of the deity cf
blikhaiidin was A Itakslusa

tO. Know that Dronn w’sapOTlion off
Viuiitpsii and that Drom's v » rt born j
of a p nlinn of Itujra Know that Gtnc* * /
son IHiithina wit one of (he Vasui »h« j
becsine born as a iniii.

ty. Tint, O yon of great wisdom, ih*
dei tes bad taken birth at luirnsn beit'g*'
nnd after iiavmg accomplished iheir p«f
l>o%es have returned to the Celestitl region.

iS. 1 shall to diy, dispel tint serro'*
wbicti ism thelieirisol you all, about the
(-turn ol these to the oti er world.

ig Dutouall go towards the Dhac'*
rnihi Vo ]will ih-nseeall iliose who hate
been killed on the field of bitile,

Vaisliainpiyana said

ao AH the persons there present having
br>ard the ndrdi of VyaSi, raised a fj"d
leniunc shout and then went towards the
Uhagirnihi.

3 t Dhniarashtra with all his ministers
Slid the rAiiilavas is also with all lho«e
(irefoost of Rithis and Gandharvas who
I ad come there, started at directed.

32 Anived at the banks of Gangar
that set of men took up their abode as
pleased them

23 The king, endued with great intsfh-
gence with tl e Pandavas, took up hiS
abode m i desirable spat, along with the
ladies and the aged ones of I household.

24 They p''5sed tint d ay as * if it were a
whole year, waning for ihe approach of the
night when they would see the deceased
princes.


A 5 Jm^M^VA 5 I^*^ PARVA.


t" The 5 «'’ lh»n lf»e %%ereii

ii?in(3ii! in ihe *tfM nnd all p"r*

5 i h^vinjj liMlifd in the stcrcd mer


CII\l*rPfl NNN'II.
(PUTRADARSIIANA TARVA.)—

C^’ihnutJ,

Vaisbarapayaui. said

I. \Vli»n jiijilii came, all ih'v'e
haMng fn iMied ilujr cycning t»U*, appfo*
#d«J Vja<-».

5 Dhiiiyraaliira, wall punfifd bcdy an 4
»a'i mu'll sM'ly tlirerj»n toward* «, tit
H’rre wiiJi the i^irxliias and {> e Itithiy m
Ini Ciimpanj,

, 3 The rn)al IitJiM «yl w‘ll* Gi^dhit^
lu H teelailed «pot. /ij ti,e cii^'iji »i»d ihc
mhiliilann o( jtie pioMT'cn ranged tliem*
sOvej accnrdini; to tlieir jean.

4*“5 'H'«n tl«e Rten aieel'C, \'jrn*«, of
prrat en«rg), tiailiKiK I'l (tie i*cf«d wiien
r>l Die mfnmniiei] all the drcci*

■ed warrior* rit , iliotr wh> liad lonxtit on
the «i<le ot the PAnJtva*, ttm** who had
laiteht /nr the Riurevi*. inehid«>ir hifihl)
bbjted king* hetong'n,; «« the varhiu*

6 At thl«, O Jinirnrjtje. n deafemne

Uproir Uni (lord 19 ar)t» Uem wiUnn the
loafer*, i/ »h»t which had tormer/y ,

he*n tieerd o{ me atinit* of toe Kurus •iid
the Pendave*.

5 . Then those kms*. h-aded h> Rhishm*
end Drone, wuli nH toeir nrinie*. arose hy
('•oiisaiid* ham the water* of tlie Bhaj,!-
rathi,

8 There were Vrrata and Drupsd*, with
their <011* and force*' 1 liere were the ton*
of Draupadi and llie son of butihadra, and
ItaUstiasa Glta(o(kach«.

9 i here were Kama, nurymlhana and
the pnwrrtiil car*warriir Strakum and the
otf rr efntdren, possessed of treat 9lreoj;tf»,
of Dhii'arashtra, f coded b> Ousshasana

10. T here were I’le son of Jarasandha,
Rhagadaua, Jarasandtia of Rreat energy,
Dhurishrava*, tiliala Shelyaand Vnshaseira
willi his younger brolher.

If fherc Here pr<i?<y* L;»)r»hw»»a, A»»f
•he son of JM'ns'iladyuniii* and alt the
children o( S kti-nidin, and Dhcishtakeiu
with Ins jour'ger broltier.

li There were Acliala Vrrshalea, the
JlakW^a Alajiid'ia, Valbika Somadatu,
and the king Chek'iana.


5:}‘

13 These nnd innnnierahfe others,
tpye-ired oi ihtt occesiin All of llimt
efl«r front the n v.r* of the Dhagirethi, with
*hr/Mffjj bat} et.

*4 Tlia*e kmc* rtpiesred. etch c?»d m
thildrr** «"f cq iipt with that standard
and that tohfcle which he had while fighting
<M> ifte fi'lil.

J5 AH «f fheri were drf*trd mcelesitat
srstmecit* and nil fnd firiffitnt rarrnu;*.
Ihej *i*se free from *11 amnusny and pride
and dnesltd of anger aid j«»fou«y,

t6 Gandharra* sang their praite*. and
hirri* willed on them, cliauiilinj' tJieir
rlred*. llobrd with celestial raimeni* and
weirrng celestiif cirfritd*. each ol litem « is
«>K<d upon b) binds of Apssra*.

tj. At Ill'll lime ihroiigh Ihe power of
hi* priiances, the gfeit a*eetie, the «Ofi of
Sat} ivsii. Gratified with Dhrrtaras ra, g^ee
. htm c<.t<stf<J firion.

l 5 - Cified with Crfrstiaf inswfedge nnd

strrnctb. the dhistrisii* Gindhart b-iield *11
her children a* also all ihofe who had been
killed m bailie.

19 AH prrson* aijemhtrd there *»w with
«(»»(ifist gar* and heart* filled with wonder
|tur iinaeing *nd mronreivale >:ene winch
made (he hairs *t3iid erect.

3*. it liMlied hke a liiph carnival oF
p)'a*ed men and noman fiiat W'lidrotif
seme Ixiked like a picture painted on the
canvas*.

?i. Dbrifarashira speioff atl these t'ernes
Witt' their cell stui vision ol sined through
t'e l^voirot ttist esge. btcamft fu’loflO},
O chief of tiharela's race.


CffAPrCR KKKltt.
(PUTRADARSlfANA PAUVA.)—
CsmVvrwsd.

Vftisitampayana said •—

t— a Ihen those foremost of irrn, sliarci
of anger and jealoiis}, and purged of every
sm met wUh another arrording (o lhos«
Ih 4I» and ampicious firdmiiice* which hav^
been laid <1 > n by regei '•laie Ris) i* AH
of ih-m VI re h'ppy of I -art* and looked
hk** celeitiils movi ig lu cule*ti*l ret.ions.

7 So' m»t with father or moiJfr wive*
wetn hiisban Is hroiher with brotiier, and
friend with Inend, O king.

4 lliePaodrfva* full of pj , tnet with
the powerful bowmin Kama as aiss wilh
the sow <f buhhadra, and the clnljren Of
Oraupadi.


MAHABHARATA.


5 WitU tiearls the ton of }*andii

tippronctied Knrna, O anJ became

teconciJed wiih Inm.

6 . All tJiotc uarriOM. O c^ief of Di>ar«>
(a’s race, meetini; wuh one another through
llie favour of ||,e yrcat atcetic, became re»
conctled viiili one anoilier*

7. Renoiincni^ all unfriendlinee^, Utey
became eilabli^lied on ainit} and peace. U
vaf thus that all thote foreinoit u( men,
vie, tlie Kauravat and oiber kinsmen of
Ilieirs as also with their cb'ldrrn, ‘Ihey
passed in great happiness the whole of that
night.

Indeed, the Kshalriya warriors,
Cn account of the happiness they experten*
ced, considered that pUce as Hraven itscU.
'ihere was no giief, no fear, no suspicion,
s^o discontent, nu teproach in that region,
as those wautots, O hmi;, met with one
another on that nigtit. Meeting wiili their
wires and Ibroiheia and husbands and
sons, the ladies renounced all ptwf and felt
great ]oy, Havmg spoiled .with me an®.
Ilicr thus for one those heroes and !

these ladies, embtaemg one another taking '
one another's leave, came back to the '
plices they had come from. Indeed, that
foremost of ascetics dismissed that colleciion
of warriors.

13—ts. Widiifi the twinkling ol an eje
that large crowd disappeared in the very
sight oi all those persons, 'those great
persons, plunging into tlie sacred river
Uhaviratht, proceeded, with tlieir cais and
Standards to their respective abodes. *^oine
went to the regions of the gods, some to U e
legion of Drahman, some to llie region oi
Varuna, and some to the region of Ivnvera.
Some among those kings went to the region
of Surja.

16 Amongst ihe Riikshasas and Tisha*
chas. some proceeded to llip country ol
the lJUaia>Kiirus Others, moving delight*
fully, went 111 the company oi llw celes*
tials.

17— JO. Thus did all chose great persons
disappear wiiti iheir vthictes and animals
and with all tlieir followers. After all of
them had departed, the great sage, who was
siandixg in the waters of ihe sacred rivers,
vtx.Vjasaof great virtue and energy that
benefacior of )ihe Kurus, then addressed
those Kshacri^a ladies who had become
Widows, and said these words.—' Let those
amongst ihese foremost of women wlio are
desirous of attaining to the regions acqiured
by tlieir husbands cast away ail idleness and
quick! V phuige into the Sacred Bhagtraihi
He.i'ing Ihese words of I’is, (hose foremost
ladies, placing faiili in them, look the per-


mission of their faiher*in-}aiv, and then
plunged iiiCD [tie waiers of tfie Hhagiratln.

3 C. Fieed from human bodies, (hose
chaste ladies then went, O king, wilh Heir
husbands to ihe tcgions acquired by the
fatter.

ai. 'thus, tliore (ladies of variout coo.
duct.' devoted to their husbands, entfiing
Ihe svateis of the (Ihagirathi. became freed
from their mortal bodies and attained to
the companionship of llieir husbands in the
regions acquired by lliem.

03. Possessed of celestial form, -and
ndotned wuh ccleMial ornaments, and we*r«
tog Celestial garments and garUndt they
pioceedrd to t(>ose regions wliete tlieir
husbands were living,

» 4 . r.ndued wiih escellenl conduct and
many viiiurr, iheir anxieties all removed,
they were seen to riJe on excellent cars,
and gilled wii'i every accomplishment, they
found those rrgiuna oS (ehciiy which wete
theiis by tight.

35 Devoted to the duiies of piety,
Vyusa, at that time, becoming a giver of
boons, fvranied 10 alt the men there collect*
ed the fi union oi (he desires they respec*
lively cheiislied.

26 People of various kindems, hearing
oi Hut meeting beiueen Hie liallowed dead
and living. human beings, became highly
pleased.

27. That man who duly listens to this
discourse nieeis wiih everytiung H'ac >s
dear ID him _ Indeed, he obtains all agree*
able objects both in tins world and in >ho
r»ext.

2&^29 *1 hat man of learning and science
that foremost of pious persons, who recites
this narrative for the hearing of oHiers
wins great fame here and an aiispciouf
end hereafter, as also a union with kins-
men and ail desirable objects Such a mvn
lias not to work hard for his mamienance
and meets with all 'sorts ol auspcuus ob-
jects in hie. fl'itse are the rewaro's reaperf
by a person who gifted wi h devotion to
Vedtc studies and wiH> penances, recKCl
tins narrative m llie itearing of olliers.

30—31, q hose persons wl o endued with
good conduct, devoted to self -conitol, purged
of all sms by (he gifis H «y make, endued
with smceiUj, having uanqiul , souls, freed
from falsehood and the desire of in)nrii'g
Qllters, adorned with faiili, belief in Hie
scriptures, and intelligence, hsien to Hus
wonderful book, surely attain to the highest
end hereafter.


ASURAMAVAiiKA PARVA


CHAPTER XXXIV.

(PUIRADARSHANA PARVA)—

CcrtfirtiteJ,

Sauti said —

1 He>irin(' (iii5 story of tfie reappearance
atrd depaiture of f\is forefathers, the t ighfy
ntelligeiit king Janamejaya became greatly
>Ieased

2 Filled with joy, Vie once more asVed
i/aistiampayana on the subject of iVie re-
ippearance of dead men, 8ajtiiK>~~ How is
t possible for persons whose bodies have
lern destroyed to reappear in those very
ormsT

3 Tims asked iViat foremost of twice*
’orn persoris. eiz, the disciple of Vyasa,
bat first of speakers possessed of gieai
"*’’gy> answered J«name]aya

iTaiahampayanasaid:'- ’

4> this IS certain, viz, that acts are
lever destroyed. Bodies U king, are born
){ acts , so also are features.

5< 1 be great primal elemenrs are eternal ,
>n account of the union with them of the ,
-ord of all beings Ihey exist with what ,
1 eternal Accordingly, they have no
lesirueiion when the non eternal aie des*
royed.

6 Acts done witliout ex'rdon are true,
nd foremost, and yield real fruit I be
out united, however, with such acts as i«*
|uire exernoii for (leir performance, enjoys
iteasure and pain.

7 T Itftogh imifrd so yet it is » certain
nierence that the smil is never modified by
)>em, like the rrilection of creatures in a
nirror. It IS never destroyed.

8 As long as one's deeds are not rx^
lauited /by eniojnient or endurance of
heir fruits good and bad), so fnng does I e
•onsider the body to be his ownsell Hie
uan, howrver, whose *cis fiave been ea*
isiisieA wiihooX coTisideTTfiR WAy \w fcv
lelf, takes the self to be something other*
riiie.

9 Vafious existent objects, ailainiog to
» bod>, becnnie united as one 1 1 ose very
s' jecis become eternal io m»n ol knowledge
who uiideislaiid the d Rerei'CC

10 111 the Horse. Sacrifice, this Shruti IS
heard in the mailer ol tie killi.Bol Ihe
horse Ihe certain possessions of embodied
creaiiires. ei# , H eir vital airs (and the
lenses eic ) exist elernaltv even when tley
are boine to Ihe other world

II, I shall, you what is beneficial »f n
be agreeable to you, O lung Vtvilwse,


wViife employed in your sacrifices, heard of
the celestui} paths.

13. When preparations were tnade for
any sacrifice of yours the celestials became
bensficiaffy inclined to you When, indeed,
the celestuls were ifius disposed and came
to your sacrifice, (hey were fords in liie
matter of the passage.

l‘( llierefore, the eternal ones (vi'r.,
Jivas), by adoring the denies in sacrifices,
succeed m attah tug to exceUeiit ends.
When the five primal clemeiits are eternal,
when the soul also is eternal, he called
Purusha is equally so,

14 When such is the case, he who sees
a Cieaturc as disposed Io take various forms,

1$ considered as having an erroneous Uii*
derstanding He who indulges in too }
•iiiicli R'trf at separation, is, 1 think, a I
(oohsU pecson.

15 He who secs evil in teparatiorrf
should five up tmien By stsodmg aloof, f
no unions are formed, and sorrow ts re*!
nounced for Svrroiv >/) the world is born of/
separation

16 Only he who understands (he dti«
(inction between body and self, and not
another, becomes freed from (he erroneous
belief. He who knows (he (other err self)
attains to the highest urtdersunding and
become* freed from error.

17 As regards creatures, (hey appear
from an invisible state, and once more dis*
appear into invisibleness 1 do not know
him He 'a)ao does not kiroiv me As
regards myself, renunciation » not yet
mine

iS He, who It not postested of power,
eojoje or endures the frutit of alM is deed*
in tl ose bodies in which he dees them.

19 tf tf e act be a mentaf one. its fruits
are enjiyed or endured mentally, if k be
done wmIi ((le body its resulcs ate to be
enjoyed or endured in the body.


. CflAPTER XXXV.

(PUrRADAUSHAN\ PARVAt)—
Continaid,

Vai8hR0ipa.yana said

t. i^i'ifi Uhritarashtra had never srei*
h» own sous. GeiiloR cye.sizht through
the favour of the Rishi, he saw for me
first time. O perpetualer cf Kuiu's race,
cfosecfnfdren cf hi* who were veryftte liis*
own self.


, PtAtlApKARATA.


2. Thai foremost of men, via, 0>e
K^iru king had learnt all ilie rojal duller
** y*'’® the Vedas and the Upanjshadas,
and had acquired certitude of undersland-
mg.

3 * Hig! Ij wise Vidura acquired ^reat
success thn mill thepnver of In* penances
LJnriiarasliIra also acq iired great success
tor having met the ascetic Vyasa.

Janamejaya said: —

4 ' If ^Vyasa, disposed to grant me a
boon, kindly shew me mj father in that
form which he had, clad as he used to be
clad, and as old as he was when he
left this wo’ld, 1 may then believe all that
you have told me


have been reduced into a3h»s and have
followed the footsteps of your father.

I4r IhroHgh your Inithfulness, O king.
Takslial a has will) difficulty escaped a pain*
fut Jfate. 1 he iRishis have b»eii all adored.
You liave seen also the end that has been
acquired by jour great father.]

15 Having heard this sin cleansing

history you liave acquired abundant merii.

I he knots of your heart have been iunlied
through seeing this foremost of persons.

16 Tliey who are tlife supporters of the
wings of Virtue, they who are of good con-
duct and excellent dispositinn, they on
seeing wfioni sins disappear, we should all
bow to tlieni.


5 Such a sight will be most agreeable
to. me Indeed, 1 shall cmisider myself
Clowned with suecess I sh dl have gained
a certainty of conctnsifin. O lei roy wish
be satisfied through the favour of lliai
foremast otf Rishis’’

Sauti said —

6 After king Janamejaya had said
these wo^ds, the highly energetic and nUelli
gent Vyasa, showed liis favour and brought
Hariksliit.

7. King Janamejaya saw Ins roaat
fajher pataessed of great beauty, brought
down from the celestial region, tn the same
form that he had and of the same age as
he was (at the time of leaving this wotid)

'm 6 . IheXgreat Shsmilca also and his son
Shringin, were similarly broug In there All
the counsellers and iniuisCers of the king
saw them

9 King Janamejaya, performing tlie
final bath m his s.acrifice became highiv
pleased He poured ilie sacred water on his
father even as he caused it to be poured
on himselL

JO— t!. Hiving performed the final bath,
the king addres eii Che twice-born Asuka
w^io had onginsud .from the race of the
Yayavaras and wl o _was the ..on of Jarat-
karu, and sal) Ihes- words — O Asiika,
tins sacrifice of mii«» is fraught wnh many
wonderful incidents, since tins mjr sire •
has been seen by me, lie who has removed
all ipj sorrows.

Astika said:—

IS. llie performer of that sacrifice in
winch thejancient Kill I, IJwsipajana V'yasa,
tlilit vast receptacle of penances is present,
is sure. O toremost one of Kuru’s race, to
conquer I oih the worlds.

' O son of the Pandavas >00 have

heard n wondeiful Insiory. the snakes


Sauti said :—

17. Having heard this from that fore-
most of twice*born ones, king JinamejHja
adored that Uishi, repeatedly honouring
him in every waye.

18 Knowing all duties, he Ihen asked
the Rislu Vaishampay sna of undecaving
glory |ahoni ifie sequel, O best ol atceiics,
of king Ohiitarssliira’s residence in the
forest.


CHAPTER XXKVI.
(PUFRADARSHANA PARVA.)-
CoHfi/itrerf.


Jnnamejaya said :—

I H sving seen Ilfs sons and grandsons
wuh all Ifieir friends and followers what,
Indeed, did that king, vis , Dhniarashtra,
and king Yudlusihira also, do T


VaUhampayant said

a Seeing that liighly wonderful spec-
tacle, via . the re-appearance of Ins chitdreiif
the royal save, Diintarasira renounced liis
grief and returned to Ins hermitage.

3 The common people and all the great
Risliis sent pw«y by Durilarashtra, came
back to the places they respectively wished.

4 pie great Pandavas laccompitiied hy
tlieir wives and with a small reliniie, went
10 llie hermitage of the great monarch.


5—7 I lien Svtyavali's s.
lOiiOured by twice.born ftishis
aersoiis, arrived at the lierinita
Diirilvrvshira, ssying,— 'O 1
Dhritarasinra. O son of Kurn


and all od e
;e, 'addresser
uglily qrmei
* lister


O Wliat I say 1 V.'ii litre iir«t i ram, ns
liscourses from Itislns ef g'tat kncwlcrJge


o< cV...,

pcffonnancc Unchfi***!

to aaspicio..s e"^ i»>e>

by -...pons, V"'' l“pP-”’-

move about at will R ,ni»J1i-

pence is awaitmi! your p i,,,,-rj,gn.

|,„ brail, .-3 and ,v,.a. and bins'"'"-

II. Da yon a'nd 1 Ibay

itlurn IP monlb m ll'”'

have passed more iiian
hvmg in the forest. g„ty sl'O.ild

,2. 'Ihe OyoMci

plwa>s be has many eiie«n‘«*

Kuru'a race, kingdom has ma y
,,_n IhP. »dd".«d by

incomparable energy. * ^ YoJhishihira
versed m .n".Tiravmtf no

blessings O”. >** , ,. V l hrough your grace.

wnli all i ands^n* wy «*y*

O kins, grief rto O son. sv.lh

,5 I am 1ivm« «’ *’A'],Vcny of
\ou here as if I nrn'ectof. O learned

pore. Wall yon as "/' P e objects.

,0 1 ,S,1 ■

services which a . g,, I hav.-

1 am highly plmsed w th > ^ ,y.

,i,r i„.. d—

armed one yo ■

mg here any loni,er. „,n»nc»s are

bi:ip 'X

,8 These 1*0 '"“ „f ,*es. »»d
now upon will "ot >■“'


achwvemenis, and Jhe (amdy^ entirely. O

„..on. “""/X dpiyoP III'" K" '"'"J

;;tr™Mb» «.yi>"y- «»"«• -y

“ ^r’ O cb»( »f BI.PIPI*'*

,.p=»l.dly l."•■d ‘^'r. 1 p.,. ..y I"

kilims ‘ pny nccoilly «lll>

I have no longer a y

O you of S">‘ P"""-

the


cth


We havr


-- of"'

who ■!-«- ol VyasaS

l‘.»rtlnn‘''Sr Tlh'

my meeting will' y®'*' g^med the oJ»*

, 0 . o th to practise th*

;.ct ot my hi'* * You should era”*

iTitsierest ol penances. ^0“

^ernusvion. |,me«t.d

• 21 . The obseqnul cake,


yo... O you of P“"''

to t..

23 King '^‘“\'”!'’‘Ji\me.-‘Oyo.iwho

' (old) kini? »‘>® *f 'v„i ... lyou should not
cast meoR ‘O*'"*

fiiir-T-p™-.!""

Kiiru I* '’ow faiher-ln-UW

ob«q'".l "o.p.'t Ibf". ° ' I,

4 epenJs on yoo r honoured

w.b.v.b"V';f J, „h,.

Vaisliampayann k,„a

Thus address^ by «h,ch were

Yudhishilnra. adsclion. ssid these

batheil "t ‘ ®,

wo.dsb«*-i‘"'My- me. a*at»

,t.e dlustnous Gsndl ^rh ^ n y^^^^ su.clcen

I- .b>;iu« > ;■" P„„„g IMS".; "■«"

ousladyl ^1' ^^ penances that one ac

5tim> "" l,.,.l no Ions”

„T.om3n"d;%d- My -d ..

upon . o

.olJkio-Vd,

any lonR'r Lr. Quf. sttength is, i«>
dueed *” , „.j helore. ,

The PanchaUs have

3* . ,. Only nominally they * * .

,OO.ed ° j do not see any one who

Bvispicious louy. ,e.eji,bh»hment snv

nny a»s>»t at i le


KtAHACttAl^AtA


were killed by Drona‘s

34 The Cliedn and the Matsya* «ho

UiV t C,° •• Only

Ihe tHbes of il,e Vrishms are all ih^t re-
Vasudeva having kept ihein up

iJJ only the Vr.shim I wish to

live. My desire, f life, however. Is due In
I my wish of acquiring merit and not riches
fril, a.«pic.ous

Umo .Tjou"’ '* I".

3^—3/. Ths king mil commence (n
& o™.n omi imbeef.hle

k r,' He.nn,.

mih •m'Bhly-inmed S.k.dev.

V hVi.V.i “ddreised

r.™ i ’■ O cl'nl oI Bharnia

race, I dare not leave my mother.

eom~^’ 1,0° r""'"'"™ '0 llio cnpd.l
’0? o„l i n '''° c'” P"'*"'". O power-
Body by penances engaged m servmo (h*
..r .lie kioB ,„d 0l .lie®;. m,“m^ "••
la Kuini, after embracing that m.


, tf . '' *** ■"/ mochers ■’

arm.i 1' ' *^'5''. that mighty.

oTon • V *■ him thus.— Depart.

U son ' Do not say so ’


i.elr; '"y of yo« eo


4t. By 3 our stay here, our aenances
Peltered Lv (he ties of my

<*lL" pe'’e.'„°;„l°“' ' ''■""'I.OP.b.y


..Vu O son, leave US. Short

8rea,'pow"l-° °' ° rbi. «f


u*’*” ‘*5’^ varloin other speeches
VuthJ'h Sahadevaand k„.g

Yudhtshthira were composed I hose fore-
most ones of Kurus race, having received
! mother as also of the

(old) monarch, saluted tlie falter and began
to take ids leave, *


47* Embracing Arjitril and tfaspirld
those foremost of men tiii , the (1*101 p!so|
*od blessing them repeatedly, the Kuril
king gave tliem permission to go.

48 — 49 They adored ihe feet of Gan.
dhatt and received her blessings also 1 ne P
mother Kunti then s nelt their heads, and
dismissed lliem I hey then went round ilie
king like calves, when prevented from suck-
ing their dains Indeed they repeatedly
wnlked round him, loolimg sieadfastlv at
him

So Then all the ladies of the Kaiirav*
household, headed by Draiipadi, adored
their father in law according to the rues
laid down in the scriptures, and de-
parted.

Sf* Gandhari and Kunti embraced each
of them, and blessing them bade them go.

I heir mnthers-m law instructed them as to
ho* (hey should behave themselves Get-
ting leave, they then, departed, *ub theif
liusband

5* sounds were heardi

clianoteers that said,— 'Voker
camels iliat grunted aloud
and of horses that nei ghed br iskJ7
S3 King YudhishilT!ra7*witK his wives
muj troops and all his kinsmen, started lot
(iastNidpora.


CHAPTER XXJCVII.


Yndhislxthira said ••


we ^..?"® by auspicious blessing,.
h.r,«. .. I. ““f'ewP'tal Indeed, d

le ^shalt permission

every „n * ‘^eed from


by the great king

Yudhishthira the just, that ro>al sage,

dm,,. Y udl„.MI„;.’ .ij

gave him permission


"mforted Dhima, that
If";"*!* *' • * persons gifted with great
Strength. Gifted with great energy and
great mtelligence. Dhima shosred lus aub-
misiiveneii to tlie Img.


( NARADAGAMANA FARVA.)--

Vnishanlpayaaa said

I. After two years, had passed front the
date of the return of the Pandava, (froiW


.w w. ..1C ie.iirii 01 me t'andavas (Irom

the retreat of their siref, the celesiial Rislil,
Narada. O king, came to Yiidhishihira.


, *~3 The mighty.armed Knru king, that
loreinost of speakers, rie , Vuiilushthira,
having duly adored I im, made I inr lalie
A seit After the Rishi had rest'd awhile,
Ihe king 'asked him ^saying, — ‘ft is alter x
kmg lime that Iseejour holy sell arrived
at my court. Are you in peace and happi-
ness, O learned Bhimasena 7

4 What are those cnuniries which jnir
have pa-sed lliroughT W'hat can I du (nt
yon? Do you (ell me You are il.e fnre-
most of twice born ones, and you are oar
higliest Tcliige.

Narada said

5 I have not teen you ft. _ —

Hence tl II tliai I liave come to you frooy
my asylum, f have seen many saersd


A.%'tl^AiiAVA51KA PArVA.


ind iW sacred rivers teangai »)s>»
Vadiisliiiiira said :—

6 People Iivjrg oi» j)ie hanUs of Ganga
report (1 at tin preat Dhritaraslilra is prac*
tisiKg (he aUsleresi of penances
7. Have vou seen him there? tsihSl

g rpetnater of Kuru’s race. <n peace ? Are
andtian and Tritha. ana tiic Suta’aSoit
Sanfaya also, in peace?

f^ow, indend, |s ithat royal sire
0! mine doing 7 f wish to hear this, O holy
one if you have seen Ihh king,

Karada Said —

9 Listen, O kinc, with calmness to me
Qs t tell you what 1 haVe heard and seen in
that asylum. .

to After yofir retdrn frdrn Knrdl<jhe(ra.
O dehthteV ol the Kiirns, yo»ir sire, O hing,
proceeded towards Gangadwara,

. rr That ihtelh^ent kinp look with him
his (sacerr!) fire 04<idhariAiidhis<Iaai.t>(er«
III law Kuntj as aIsd Sanlaya of (lie Suta
taste, and all the Vajakss,
ti, Haviitfv penances for svea/ih. yocir
aire set himself <0 the practice of severe
austerities He held prbhles ol stone in
Ins noulb and had air atone for Ins food,
*nd ahktamed altogetl «r from speecli,

<3 Engaged In severe penances, he was
adored by alt tlte ascetics in the forest
In Bis hionllis the king was reduced to
Only a skeleton.

>4 GandhSil lived on water alone
while Kunti loots a liiiie fond vt Intervals
oi a monili San]aya. O Bharata. liVed,
eating a little every sixth ddy.

J5 The sacred fire 0 monarch, fb*
longing to the Kurd Vine) Kas duly adored
by the sacrificing assistante who were with
I im, with hhatfnni of clarifird hittter poured
On It 1 hey did this sithetl er the king saw
tl e tUe or Hot,

»G The king had no fiarci dwell ng
He became a wmderer throiii;li ilxive 1
forests I he two queens, as aUd Santava,
followed li.m

17 ^snjvya acted as the b ilde on even
and uneven land 1 1 e fanhless Fiilha, O
king, became the eye of OandiMri

)3 One dXy, tl at best of kings went to
a spot on l> e margin of Ganga He den
bathed 1 > the sacied river and ft >ish>i«g ) »
ablui om iuiiied his face towardi hiS lier-

fniUge

19 Tie wind rosellxk. A fierce wdd


.lire set in. It began ta burn that forest all
around.

»o. \Vhen the herd* of animals were
being burnt all around, as also the snake*
w)>ic)i tnliaCltcd that region^ herds of wild
boars began to take themselves to ike
nearest nfarshes add waters.

21 When that forest was thus al^ cled
on aff side* and such distress came upon
\ aff the living creatures living there, (he king,
who had taken no lood. fvas incapabfe
moving or ekertlng himself at dlL

22—23. Voof {wo modiers a?so exceed*
tngly emaciated could not mofre The lung,
seeing Ibe fire approach him from all sides,
addressed the Suia Sanjaya, lhat foremost
of slcill/dl charioteers, saying,— ' Go, O
Sai ]aya, to such A place where the fire
may not biirn yoil.

I 24. 25 As regard* ourselves, we shall
\ allow our bodies to be descroyed by thi*
fire and attain to the greatest end. lo hinf,
San1ay2. thitt foreibost of speakers, said —

• O King ihl* death, brouglU oh bv a fire
that IS isnt sacred, will prove ealamiten*
to you I do not, however, see any meads
by which you c*h escape from tht* fire,

76— ii *1 hat wli eh should next h4
done should be marked hy you Th i*
addressed ty Sanjaya the long once
more said,—* This death cannn{ be calx*
miious to us, for we hwe left rmr home
of our o*ii^ accord Water, fire wind*
and (absteniSen from food are laiidabtd
for oseeiic*. Do von therefore, leave us.

O Sanjeya, forlhwilh ' Having sai I ll eso
words to Ssnjsja, tlie king concedtrated
hi* mind.

2p Facing the east I e sat down widi.
Gandbar, and ICimli See ng him in that
attitude Sanjayt wafltedroind him

30 Gifted with mtellieence Sanjav*
«»id — • Cfo yon concentrate fyn ir imnd,

G powerful one )’ He son of a itisi ■ and
tiiiuself vIhI led wiih.ereat Wiidom the
king acted as lie ws* fold

3! Gnvernlng all the <ensea he re.
mained I ke n post of wnod Tl e t lehlv
blessed Gandhan and yo ir rroil er Pritli.*
too, rensained In Ibe same aiiinfile

31 rVen vour royal sire was overiak'u
ty |bv wild fire Sanjaya (is mn isirr,
succeeded in escaping (ro rl tllal fire

3J I taw hifri en ih. banW nl Ganga
in the midst of ate*tic< G he I widi
great ene'iry Brest f irllii*.iee (rt
bade them farrWrb and then Starved fur
(I e itiountahis of ifiibavat

31 fhus the itreat Ki.ru k ng ni*t «.>(t
tie death, afid ft was it uv tl at Gai di an


MAIIABIIARATA.


42


and Kunii, your iwo "mol hers, also* met
with death, O monarch.

35. In course of my wanderings at will,

! saw the Jodies of that king and those
ino queens, O Bharsta.

IVsfi Many ascetics’came to that asylum,
having heard of the end of king Dhnia*
raslilra. They did not at aU grieve for
that end of theirs.

37. Ihere, O best ,«f I heard all
the d'tvts of how th« k'ng tmd the \flio
gne'ns^ O son of Pandu, had been burnt.

33 O king of kings, you should not
gne.e for him. Ihe monarch, of his own
w H, as also Gandhari and^ouf mother,
get that contact with

Vaisbampayana said *—

39 Hearing of tf\e departure of DhtUa*
rsshtra frOm this world, the grCf^l Paitdavas
all bewailed.

4a. Loud sounds ol wailing were heard
within tile] inner apartments of the palace
Ihe cKuens also, hearing of the end of tha
old king, bewailed aloud. 1 / r

41. *0 fie,’ cried kirrg Yudhishthira In
great agony, raising his arms alofu lhhi1<>
mr* of his mother, he wept hee a c* ild
AH Ills brothers loo, headed by Ohimasena,
did the same.

* 43 . Hearing that Prilha had met with
such a fate, the r^al ladies bewai'ed ahiud
mgriM 'I ' «

43. All (he people 'grieved uprin hearing
tlut the old Viitff, who had beeome child
le>s hid heen bnrni to death .4r>d lint the
I Gai dhari (no li-id shared his faie

44 W If 1 lliose soiindsol wailing <;eas»<^
‘or 1 w( Ilf king Yiidhtrhlliira (he Ji«i
«t 1( ig li lean bv siimmomr^ at) Ins
,:.9.i«ii e, sard these words.


cuapier'xxxviil

{XARADAGSAIANA parva >—
Con (Antied,

Tndhisbtbira said'—

I — 2. Wlieiv such a (ate overtonk ihet
great king who was engaged i» auslere pe«
naivces despite the (act of his having pitch
Kuismcn as o irseUei all alive, it seems 10
me O twice horn'one, ihal the end of human
bones IS difh III to gi’*ss. Alas, who
wn lid I av' ih iiiehl that the «ni> 0! Vi»’,i.
’ 'wi'v* % • 1 1 thuH^ » hnrn* to de itf .


3. He had a hundred sOh» feadt gtried
with mighty-arms and possessed of great
prosperity' Ihe king liimsel| ,had the
strength of ten thousand elephants Al^s,
even lie has been burnt to death m a wild
fire, r r I ^

4 Alas, "he ttfio had formerly been
fanned with palm leaves by the fair hands
of beautiful women, was fanned by vultures
Wiih their wings alter lie had been burnt
to death in a wild fire.

5 t He xvas formerly reused from sleep
every I tnorhing by bands of Sutas and
Magadhas had to sleep on the naked earth
through the acts of my shiftil self.

6 1 do not grieve for the famous Gan*

dliari'who had been deprived of all her
children. Observing the- same vows as her
husband, she has acquired those Very
regions which liave become his. >

7 1 grieve, however, for Prilha who re-
nouncing the blaZmg prisperhy of her 5ons<
became desirous of living in Ihe forest

’S Fie on this 'sovereignty of ours, P*
on our prowess, fie on the pracnees of
Kshalriyas ’ 1 hough ai(t'i<<'*we are rtally

dead. t

p. O foremost df superior Brahmaiiae,
Ihe course of limeisverj -subtle and diffl*
enit 10 imrfvrsiand. inasmuch as Kuni'i
casting off soveieignty, became desirous of
living >n the forest.

to. How »s It that «hB*wl>8 xvai th*
mother ol YuJhishcInra, of Cimna of Vi/a}»r
was burnt to death like a hepless' creatine f
rhinking of this { become ttupenedi

II In va n MBi Ihe god of fire pleased
al LhandaVa by Arfiuia t Tngmle thaf he
IS foccetting that service, he has burnt (O’
dealli ii>e mother of his benefactor.

17 Alas how cnul 1 thac deny burn the
inottier «f Aijuna f Puilmg* on the gotse
of (trahmam he had foimeilv comp to
Atjuiia. for begging a favour I Fie on the
deny « f fi<e ' Fie on the celebrated success
rA PastV-VstaiTows.

13 — 14 '1 his IS mother incident, O loly

one, which appears to me to he producCve

of gteaier nn-ery, fur that king, met nith
death by union wnh a fire llial was
sacred’’ How coull such a deilh overiaice
lhat royal sage of K urn's family who, a’tr*
having governed the eliolc I ailh, was- eu*
gaged ni It e practice of penances ! In lh«l
great fo<esl there were fires lh»| had been
sanctified wilh Mantras Alas, my father
has loade his deparliire from this world,
coming contact wiili an unsancilfied fire.-

15. I siippme that Pnl’ia^ enjicialej
•-id reduced to • form in her


AsHrAMaVAsika


bffiajhe vjs^faW, rrtust ?jave WfembM
fn /ear and ctied afoud, saytni;, — O sort
Yudbtsblhira'— ant) awaited IhelternMe
epproacli of {)ie fire. i . ,

i6 Sbe must have aI$o said, — O dhiiAa,
save me from this danger ^wlien she. tny
hiolher, was surroUnded on all aldel by that
■dreadful fue. , . «

17, Ainorig all her sons, Sah^deva was
her darfm^. Alas, that fierojc son ol
Madtavau did noi Rescue her 1'

»8. Hearing these faeiVailtngs of Ihfc
*mg, all those persons whd \Vere present
Inere began 10 weep, embracing each othbr.
an fact, the five sons of f^andu were so
k'ftcken wuh grief that Ihey resembled
hying treaiiires at lite lime of tlie dissofutton
Ol the universe, 1

19 The SQiihd of lamenfaliohs iKtired
by those weeping heroes, filling ihc spat«olls
thambersof the palace, escaped thercitom
*l>d penetirated the Very sky.


CHAPTER XXXlJC.

INARADAGAMANA PARVA)
Cobcfui/rd.

ifarada said

1. llie king has rot breh burnt to death
by an unsancufied fire I have heard this
Ihere I tell you. O Dhatata, juch has hot
been (he fate of Vaithiiraviryja.

3. We have heard that when the old
king gdted With greK intelhgence and
living on air atone entered Tifie forest (after
his return from Oangadwara), he caused
his sac'ifiei'yl fires 10 be (july igniied.
H.<virig performed f Is Sacredittet fibre'
wiih, he abandoned tficm all

3 Tlien the Yajaka Brahmsrias he had
with him cast eff those fires m a solitary
part of the foresi and went away as itwy
iked, O foremost one of Bharat.* 'a race.

4, the Fire that Cast rff grew in the
Iore<l. Ittlen produced a general co/tlfa-
jrraiian in the forest, this is what t have
heard ffom the ascetics living on the banks
of Gangs.

5 United with (hat (sacredi fire of I is
fimn, O cht'f ol the Bhsralas. the kn g, as
1 have already said to you, met with death
on the banks of Ganga.

6 O SIT less one, this n wl at the as*
eetici have tr>!d me, tl’O'e, err. whom I
saw on tho banks of sacted iJhagiratlitr,
rs 'i?,idljst I’litc.


y. Tims, O lord cl Earth, king tihrita'
rashtra coming info contact with hisowd
sacred fire, ‘ departed from this world and
■Uained to that High end that has been his.

8 TliroiJgh Service rendered by her id
her Seniors, yocif mother, O king. Has ac*
(juired very great siiccesS. Tfiere iS not the
slightest doubt of this.

9 Yoit shoiild, C kirig df kiogS, novi
perform the rit»« of (tiaier td their honour;
witli ail yoiir brothers Let, (tierefot’e, tile
necessary Steps be lakeit.

raisBampayaua said

Id. Then ihit lord ol EariH, that forc3
irtost ct Hen, that tlpholder of the burthens
of the Pandavas. went out, sicconfpanted
by all his brolhers as Well as the ladies ot
his househdid.

ti. Die inhabitants of tile city ds also
(hose of (he provinces, actusted tfy (heir
loyalty, also went out. They all proceeded
towards the banks of Oanga, every one
clad m only a single piece of clotH.

li. Then all thoie forenfo^t of meni
iiaving plunged info (he river, placed
Yuyuisu at their head, add began to offer
obUtionsol water Id the great king. And
(hey alto get’e tlmilar obiatiodi toOtd*
dhan and Prillia, namine each separately
and mentioning their Families.

13 Having finished lf<e<e rites wfucK
putily the living, they returned biit without
entering iheir Aapiia) lived outside ol it.

I hey also sent a number of (riAted people
well conversant with the ordinances relating
to ilie tremation of the dead, to Gariga*
dwara where the old king had beers bUrrit to
deatlii

14. Tile ting, (laying rewarded (Ifostf
men b'Forehand. commanded tlieiri tn per*
form ihosr nies ol cremation whicTi il.o
bodies of Ohritarasiitra and Gandharl and
Ku»tt std( awaittd.

15. On the twelfth da^. (he king, pro*
perry pnriBed, duly performed the Slira*
ddtias of Iris deefcased relattons, whiclV
were marked by pfofuse gifts.

16. RefeSifng (<f DhniarasFitra, Vndht*
shit ira made many cifls ol gold aird silver,
of kine and corfijr beds

ly. Uilering the names el Gandharr
and IVitha*, (he kinir. gifred with great
energy, made rnany excelfent gifts.

l3 Every man received what thing
he wished and as irmcli of it as he wished,
Beds and foods, andcarsandeonrejanc'*.
and (ewefi and gem*, and other wethh
wete given away profnefy.


MAMAfinARAtA.


liideed, ()ie Uin^, rfchrriint; lo lut
Ko inotliers. gave away cars and mnvev
dresses itid tovcrl<>t5, vanoiia kiitd.
of fo(^t and temafe allVes ddoiticd iVitli
variuui ornatneati

3d Havldc; iMi made iViany
pill la f>rofi)s)o I iliat king Hied enteied Ilia
capital named Hatiinapiire.

21 llo^e men met) tVhn liad pbne to
H>e banks fit Oaiiga at Hie ko'bmaiid of
Hte king haVing dUpoted of (by ciemalion)
It e remains oi I'le king and tile two t}ucens,
Veluriied lo tbe biiyt

23 tfavinp ddly fionoiirkd Hose re*
hlains witti garlands and scetils ol varxSds
ki ids ind disposed of Iheiil, Hiej laloifned
YudI ul Hiira o! Ihe akcomplislimeitt of
H eir task.

33. Ihk great RUtii Narada, tiavmg


comforted kmg YiidliSslitktra ot ri^hltdui
Soul svent away to where be liked.

34 rinls did kiiSf Obfitarasbtri mike
Ins de|iarture from (ins world after bavi tg
passed Ibtee ) ears ill the forest and fifiee i
years in the city.

35 Haiinplost all Ini cbildren m baltle,
he liad niade many gifts i 1 lidiiniir of Ini
kinsmen, relat ivci, and ii lends. Ins bred en
and own people

3d Kitp ViitfliUbllnra, after llis dealH
of I IS uncle became Very cliee'less. Dr*
piived of ills kinsmen and rrlsUvrs f>i
somehow bork the burti en of sovereignty.

37. Une si oiltd listen with liltenlton to
tUs Ashramavasika Parvan, and having
heard It recited one shotiM feed Orahmanai
wiili llabiilya iionodring them vlith itelPi

and gatlahds '


Finis AhsramaSasikA ParvA.


A PROSn ENGLISH TRANSLATtON


OF

THE MAFUBHARATA.

ffftANSWlCO LI rElUU.Y FROM tll£ ORIGINAL SANSKRIl lEKt)


MATJS^LA OPAIiVA.

VOL. XVK


tOlTeO Sc rUBUSHED BY*

KANMATKA NATH DCTTT, masinj JSI.A., ME A.S.

Rector, Kesuoiv Acaoemv.

Author of the English Translation of the Eamayana^ Vtshnu Puranam,
Srtniad-Bkagavatam, Kamandakiyix N'llisara, Bhagavad-Gita,
aad many other -mrks^

40, Nayan Chand Dutt's Etreef% Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:

PRIKTED BT H. C. D*Ss, EtYSIWJJ PRESS,
40, Hoyan Chand Dntt » Strtsi.


190S.


„Tr or CONTENTS.
T AD ^ ^


»l*itK U— Va»‘« ,««.«*«»♦

Jyf '


-I’ ••
fTt*


141 ll*lt '•••

,„ dootn— p' 3 , Y«ui3c»a

r-Tcn l\.—


,,,, Vf.kn'" •"'* '''■


0 U -i li -

Cuirr'' V.—'""

D.—o— P- .u.i. i» •" '*

."J

„C .h. 1 ^

J I.' '»»•


’ar'ins MAHiLBHARATA.

(IN EKOtlSH,)

MAUSALA PAnVA.


saluted Nurayana and ffara the
test 3f K lie he/rtfe ot alee
the GodUess of Ltarntng, let us cry
success,

’^'aishampayaAa said t—

« Wlieti tJie (flirty smch your (»Uer ih«
hA(it«} xriwed i( e dcfixliier of lf>e Kurus,
tms , VudhislilhifH, SAW (naity unusual f><>r>
leiHs ,

i Winds, dry And stronfi’, «nd sKo«>cf>
lbt( K'uvsls, bUw from All sides Buds
bsKArt lu wlieel, iisaktn^ cirties IroiA (lultt
loUlt.

i t lift grest rivers ran in apposKe
tuiirses 1 he tiotis ut on every side seemed
tn be always covered with fo^. Meteors,
showeniii' coelf, dropped un (lie E irili fiom
tile stcy.

4 i he Sun's disc, O kinft, seemed to be
nlways covered with dust. At ns rtte. tie
Su I was shorn nf sple idour and seemed lo
be crossed by headless trunks^

5 I errible circles of lltjl't were seen
every dsy srotind both the bun and the
^}u(>n these circles showed three culisrs
i heir edt;es seemed to be blavk and rou^h
and ashy red I'l color,

6 Ihet* and many other omens, (ore*
SlMitowiii^ fear and dAii^er, were seen, O
kii>«r, and struck the hearts of men wiih
aiiKiety.

7 A little while after the Kuru king
Vudbishthiia heard ot the wholesale des«
liuciinn vl tlie VnshiMs o > aCCvoni of the
Sroti bole,

8 lie son of Pandu, hearing that only
Vasudeva and llama had eu.'aped alive,
suminmed his brothers and consulted with
them at to wliat they should da

9 Meeiing with one anoilirr, they be.
came giestly stricken with sorrow upon
beadiiK that It e Vrishnii had met with
ctrsrn.ct^t through tile Orahmana'a rod el
puniUiineni.


CEB 1*

10, Those heroes could not believe the
death of VatdJ'va, like the drying up of
(he ocean fit fact, they could not believe'
the destruction of (he hoMer of SharngB,
it. loformed of (he loeident about the
iron bolt, tfie Pandavae became stnclcert
with grm/ and sorrow In /asf, they sat
down, utterly ctieerless and iinchen with
blank despair.

Janamejaya saidf—

1} Indeed, 0 holy nne, how was it (fiat
the Andhakas along with the Vciihnia,
and those great car. warrior*, pis, tha
Bhojes met wiili detliuctioii before the vary
eyes of Vatudevaf

iTaUhatapajraaa eaid i—
ij When the ihiriy.tiaih year arrived
(after tiie great hattie) a greet Cefemity
overtook the Vmhnis Afived by Time,
they •(! met With destmcttuii on account of
(he non bolt.

Jaoaiuejaya said •—

(4 Cms'd by whont did those heroes,
VIS , the Vrishnis, AiidhMkas and (h«
Bhnjss met with destruction T O foiemoit
ol twice-born persons, do you fully explain
•II Uiis to me

ITajabaxopayaxia said
15 O »e day, the Vrishni heroes nuni«

benng Sa'ans amongst them, saw Vishwa*
■natra and Kenwa and Narada arrived at
Dwaraka

id'.— 1| Aflticted by (he rod of punish*
■nent held by the celettisli, t> ose h'loes,
Causing Sliaiava to be disguised like a
woman, approached those ascetics arid
said— 'Ills one 11 llie wife of Vabhro of
great energy who is desirous of having a
tow Ye Hishis do you Itnoiv for ettiein
wfial this one will produce 7 ’

tS— 19 (fear now, O king, what those
ascettes, attempted to be thus imposed on.


MAliABIlARATA


I said,—' Tilts heir of Vi«nd<?va, lij iiame
) Shamva, uill ptiiduce a drradful iron ImiU
/ (or the destiiution of the Viishiiis a»d the
Andliakds. *

20 O wicked and critel ones, intoxicated
wall piiJe, tliiout’li tliHt iron boll y >u will
beCDiiie lie exterininators ul >our iainil)
witli the exception of H4in4 and Janardddiia
21. *lhe blessed lieru afmed wiilt the
ploii^li will enter the ocean, renouncing bis
body, wliih a buotet of the name nf Jar*
will pieice the great Knslina while lying
on the ground.'

32 Attempted to be deceived by those
wicked ones, ttiose ascetics, with eyes red
in nnger, looked at each other and littered
those words Having said SO they then
‘went to see Kesliava,

S3 I he destroyer of Madlni, informed
of what had occinred, summoned all Uie '
Vrishnis and I lid them of tt. Gified with
Rfe«l tnteihgence and folly acqiMinied with
what the end of Ins family w< iild be, he
simply s-iid iImi that whivh was destined
would suiely t<ihe place.

34 Hridiikesha having sat I so entered

fits palace, i he Lord of the universe did
not wish to ordain otherwise ''

35 When the next da) came, SfiamvA
actually produced no iron bolt lUroneh
which all the indivniusis in the family of
the Vrislinis and (he Andhakas became
reduced to esites.

3d. Indeed, (or the desintctlen of lit*
Vrishnis and the Andliakas. Shamvas
brnuktht torlli, through that curse, a dread-
ful iroir boll llial looked like a huge mes-
senger of death. Hie fact was duly le-
ported to the king.

27, In great distress of mind, the king
(Ugrasena) caused that iron hole to be re.
duced into fine powder Men tvere engaged,

0 king, to cast dial powder into tl>c sea.
28—30. At the command of Ahirka, of

Janardoana, of Kama, and of great Vabliru
It was, again, proclaimed throughout the
City, that from that day, among all the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas no one should
maniitaciiire wines and inioxtcatmg liqiors
of any kind, and that whoever would secretly
maniilaciure wines and spirits should be im*
paled alive with alt his kinsmen.

31. 'Ilirough fear ol the king, and
knowing that 11 was the order of Kama also

01 unimpeachable deeds, all the citiaens
bound ittemsefvcs by a rule and abstained
jruiii manufacturing wines and spirits.


CHAPIEU II.

(MAUSAIA PARVA.)—
CoiiiiitiieJ,

Vaisliampayana said

t. While ihe Viishnis and the An iliaksf
were llius trying (U> avoid the hnpending
calamity), the einbudied form ol lime
(Death) every day wandered about their
liouscs.

3 He 1 inked like a rnail of terrible and
fierce aspect. Of bald head, he was bUclt
and of iwany color. Someiimes he was
beheld by Hie Viishnrs as he peeicd mia
their houses.

3 The powerful bowmen among the
Vttdinls shot hundreds and thousands of
arrows at him but none of these succeefed
Ul pieri.nig him, lor tie was none else than
the Deslro)er <iT rill cealtires.

4 Day by day strong wmds blew, and
many w«ie the evil omens which arose,
awful an I foreboding the destruction of the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas

5. Ihe streets swarmed with rats and
mice Eaitheii p-ns showed cracks «f
broveii from no visible ctiite At ntghb
the rats and in>ce ale away the liat^ and
nails of sleeping men. •

6 Sharikas chirped sitting wiiliiti the
louses wl Hie Vri.iuiis Ihe noise made
by those I trds ceased not for even a short
■Nlttle bv day or by tnghi.

7. I he Sxrashas were heard to nmtale
the hootinii of the owl, and goatk imitated
the cries, O Bliarata, of j-tckals,

8 Many birds appeared, moved by
Death, wlich were pale *>f “color, but lhat
liad lees red of hue Pigeons were seen
trv always dispuiV ’tu llie houses of the
Vr'shirb.

9 Asses were born of kme, and ele»
pliahts of mules Cats were born 't>f
bitches, and mouse of llie mungoose.

JO The Vrrshnrs, commitirng .rnful deeds,
were not seen to feel imy shame I hey
showed disregard for Brahmanas and the
departed manes and the celestials.

II, They insiihed and hiimihaled thrrr
preceptors and elders Only Kama anrl
Janarrlrlana acted differenily Wives de»
wverl their husbands, and husbands de«
ceived wives,

tl Fire*, when ignited, cast tireir flimev
towards the left 'jomelime* they ll rew
out flames whose color was blue and red.

13 The Sun. whether when osmcc: of
seiung over that city, seemed 10 be sue*


MAU^ALA PARVA.


3


mtndeJ Uy tieadtesi trunks of Roman
btings. ,

14 In Conk room*,' upn-i f\o<t that was

clem and nell b nted, wfTO Men, nlteo it
served out for eating, iimumeraUe
warms of various kinds,

*5 Wiien nr^bmanas, receiving g>ft*a
Idesseil tfie dsy or tfie fiour fiaed lor tins
f>r tliat tot fertAkfdg) or wfien great ineii
urre engaged in silent recitailons, (Uelieavy
treinh was Itesrd of many iti-n eiHinrng
fmt *10 one could h- seen to wt«»»n tlic
sound of such sound could be ascrtlied.

16 !(ie eonstellalions were repeatedly
sten to be sttnclt by the planets. None
"mongst the Yadavij eoutd, however, see
Ibe Caiistellatiaii of Ins iiitth

*7 When the Panclxjmya was Llturn
in llieie (iruiaes, aasrs > I distooAnl a»d
awful voice, hra^'ed aloud from all sides.

>3 S-fwg these signs winch Showed
the perverse course of rim'*, and seeing
that the day nl the n*w moon comaded
with the (hiiteenlh (and the fourteenth)
liinatiisn, Hiishikeiha, siKiunouing the
Vadavae, said tu them dxie words t"

19 'Pie fniirieenlh hiuattm has been
made the rtfueiich by Xalm once more.
Rnch a day had appaired a( Iheiinieuf
the great battle of tue • Uharaus. (t has
nnee more appsaied, it seems, (or our
desiriictioii.',

so— >21. the destroyer of (Cesln, ri> ( 1
Jai<ard>f.4iia, lUinki ig dpuii the omens that
time allowed, tinJerstood that the ih»iy«

sixth year had come, and {tut wtut G<n«
d'lait, buriimg widi gnel on account ot the
death of her sons, and d-'pnved of all litr
htnsinen, had said was about to take place.

22 ‘ ihe present is ex-ictfy similar to
that time which Yudliishihira had inaiked
el sight of those dreadful omens which
appeared when tlie two armies were arrnit^
ged III battle-order

23 Vasiideva, having said so Iriet) to
bring about those occurrences which w, uJd
make G-nuthart’s words true. I hat chas-
tiser ol enemies coiiiiriaiided the Viisiinis
to make a pilgumage to some sacred water

24 the wesseiiRers iiiiniediafely pro-
claimed at the comiuiiid of Kesliava that
the Vrjshius should mike a ) lurney 10 lh«

sea-coast for bailimg in ihe sacred walcts
of (lie ocean.


CfiAPrnn nr.

(M \U 3 Af.\ PAHVA.)

CoHtinited.

Vatshampayan'i «aid

I, At iJiai time ihe Vrislmi Isdies
drwunr every nijjht that a woman of bf^le
colaf AttJ white teeth, entering their abode*,
tangled aloud and ran through Owaraka,
snatching from them the auspicious (lireads
Ilf (heir wrists,

3 The men dreamt that dreadful
vnldfres, entering tlieir fmuies and fire,
chamber*, gorged themslves on their
bodies,

3 (heir ornammeiits and timlirelfas
and standards and armniir were seen to be
taken away by dreadful llaksluisas

4 Before the very ejes of the Vrishnls,
the discus of Knsliua, given hy Agnl,
made uf iron and having 11$ nave com-
posed of hardest adamant, ascended into
the sky.

5 In the very vight of DtrnVa, (lie
exceifent car ol Yasii leva, effulgent file
the sun, and piDp*ily cqnipt, was taken
away by the liurscs yoked to it. llioio
fortmo«t of horses, niimbertug four, and

I fleet like (he mind, fl-ii aws}, draRgiiig ti e
car after them along the surface u{ the
ocean,

6 The two great standards of Krishna’i
car and VaUdeva's ear, having t(ie
emblems of Crruda and palmtra, which
were reverently adored those (wo heroes,
were t iken avvsy by Aptar is who, day nint
nigli, called i.pin (lie Vrishuis and ti,e
AndliAkas to start on a pilgiiiiiage to some
saord water.

7 . When tliese ornens were seen and
heard those fureniusc uf nini, «<* . the
powerful car. warriors of (lie Vrishmi and
ti>e Aiidhakas. became desirous ,<f selling
out. with their whole families, on a pilgn-
mage to some sacred water,

I 8 Uiey prepared van ur kind* 0/

I viands am) edibles and various kinds of
' wines and meat.

g Ihe troops of the Vri.Iims and the
Aiidhakas. bUsing with beauty and gifted
Willi fierce eiiera), theu set out from the
City CHI cars and I ones and elrphaots

10 ) he YaHavas Itieii, vilti tlieir

proceeded (o Prabhava and to tie op (hxr
cesfdeiice there eac'i lu fl'e fteuiporar) )
hahiiatioii whiOu wa aiugned to iiun and
all laving profuse lOvlSluUs COli»i»liiig of
edjides and dunk


4


MAHABHARATA.


U HeM'ng Oiat they liad taUen up
tfieir abode on ilie sea coast, Uddliava, the
wisest of men, wlio was, besidrs, well versed
in Yoga, went there and took tlieir leave
(for departing)

t2 Krishna, with joined hands, saluted
Uddliava, and seeing Inm bent on depail-
ing (from the world) and linowing that the
destruction o{ the Vrishiiis was uigh, did
not feel any disposition to prevent him.

13 Ihe powerful car>warnors among
the Vnstmis and the Andlukas, wliose
hour had come, then saw Uddhava proceed
on Ins great journey, filling the enluc sky
with Ins cflulgeiice.

14 llie Vtisitnis, mixing with wine the
food dial had heeri cooked lor great Brah*
nianas, gave it away to monkeys and apes.

15 ’those heroes of fierce energy iheo
beg-in to revel with drink, at Prabhasa
'1 he enure Held echoed wilh^the blare of
hundreds of tiumpets and abounded wivti
actors and dancers.

16, In the very sight of Krishna, Rama
bcvan to dunk, witn isritavarinait. Yuyu*
dliana and Gada an d Vabhiu aijg did the

aauie.

t7— tS. Then Yuyndhani, inebrtaled
wiih wiue, decisively Uu^limg aland iii«
suliiiig Kcttavaiman t>i Uie midst of that
assembly, said,~* Wiiat Ksliatnya 1$ there
‘who, armed with weapons, will kill men
! Isckcd vn the embraces of sleep aisd, there*
pore, already dead? Hence, O son of
f liridika, the Yadavos will never toieiale
^ wliat you iisve dune.*

19 \Vl<eii Yu)udhana lud said these
Words, PradyuiRiia, lliat foremost of car-
Warriors, applauded them expressing Ins
disregard lor tl>e son of Hridika.

20. Greatly enraged at this, ICritavar.
in tn, emphasising I is disregard for batjraki
by poiniiog to him with ins fell hand, said
tlwse words —

at. ‘Professing yourself (o be a hero,
low could you so cruelty kill il e arrnirss
lliiUiislitavas who, on (he fb.ld of battle, sat
fasting.

a j. Hearing these words of hn, Keshava,
that desiroyer of liosiife liciurs, eiving
way lo anger, cast an angiy kn/k at Kriia-
\aiman

S3 Then Salyaki informed the destroyer
of .Madliii as to II iw K'ilavarm.,n had in:-
Imved towards Satiapt to* tahrng away
lioni inm the Cclcbfated gtni Syainaniaka.

24 lleaimg (I « nirrative, Saiyahhama.
ttsinit way lo anaer and leHis, af pr iael ed f
Ivc.t Bva. and sill tig »,) Ins lap taciCaSed |
lnsa<g«i('oi IsiiUvafUian). i


*5 — 27 I hen ris’mg up Jo inger, Stlyak*
said,-— I swe^r lo you by Irulli l'n»l I
soon cause this one tu follow the Hve sons
of Oranpadi, and of DbrishtHclyiutina and
Si iktwndin,— they , fte . who were killed by
(his sinful wcetcli, while (hey wcte asUep,
with the help of Diona*^ son Uyuimf
slender vvais , Kniavarman's period of hfe
^ knd fame has curne to an end '

28 Having said these words, Satyaki
rushed at Kr4iavariis-,ii and ctu oR hjs

; head with a sword in the very sight ol
Keshava

29 Yuyudhans, having performed ihls
(cat. began to siiiice down others Iheie
piesent IlnshikesliH ran to- prevent hun

I (torn doing further mischiet.

I 30 At (hat lime, however, O king, the
! Bliuyas and Andhaeas moved by the per-
verseness of the hour that iiad pome upon
them, all htcaiite as one maiv and sur-
, rounded tlie son of bhini

31 JtiMrddanaof great energy, know*
M'g the character of the hniif vtood »'»•
moved without giving way to aiiger,^ seeing
ttiose heroes rusliiiig in anger dt batyakv
from every side

3* Urged by faie and inebrialed wilb
dti ik, they began tu s’rike YuyiidiMiia wills
ttie pots fioirs whicii they had been eating.

33. Wien (he son ol Shim was being
(hits assaulted, Knein m's son becante great-
ly enraged He rushed forward fur res-
cuing Satyaki who was engaged with iIm
0 »o)asaiid the Andhakas.

34 Gifted with might of arms and
weaidi ol eiiarBy., tliose two lieroes acted
w«h great co irage. Ihit as tlie odds were
overwiielming both of them were killed
before t)>e very eyes of Kci-hna

35 beentg Ins own son, and the lOri of
Shi M (on, killed tlie tiehglilcr ol the Y td ts
tooK up. Ill auger, a iundful of the Lraka
grass wtnen g>ew tliere.

36 that handful of grass beesme a
tertible bolt oi iron gt(ie<t wiHi tne ene'cy
of in« tliiaider-boli Witli it Kiishna
destroyed all iliose who came before tiiin.

37 rtieii the Andiialcs and the Uh'jss,
lie bhaineya* ail (he Vri.tims, urgvJ Uy
lime, struck one aturther 1 1 mat ilieadm)

baht


38 Infeed, O king
(twin took up in anger a (i
Brake grass, these, in I
•iMn convcrtcil Into a
powerful one.


sviMever amongst
cw tiUdes ut the
Ills htniis, became
tiiunder-boK. O


i


39 pverj blade of grass llwai«w- 5 * ‘"n
to tre cwnt«i(d Into a liiiitis trail In>(


SfAUS^LA FARVA


5


Alt tliU, know. O Iting, w^s dusto tlJe cufsft
tinpiecaitd i>y

4'! He wHo liiirled a liUde of grass
saw iliat (( pierced tFir4<i.>h eve» such
liiings as were «it«-Tly impeiielrabte In
fact, every hUde w^s seen to liccome a
dreadful bolt iiaviiig tile farce of Ihunder

4I< S}n kill'd fylker, and falher killed
sw O iif srata I /rtew/ated fvith wtae, tUty
rushed and fell upon one anoll er.

42 the l^tiWuras and the Andhakas
nset with desifbci) »> lixe iiisecis ruslititit at ;
a burnt ig ft e As (hey were thus beutg
destroyed nn one atngng tivein tliou^bt of
escaping by fli^bl.

4J Kiowm.* lhat the tiour of destruc*
lion bad come, (lie inigti(y*^rnteii KesUav^
stood there, seeing everydimg. Indeed,
(he desuoyer of Madhit stood, raisnig »
boll uf Iron foritied of a blade of grass

44 Seeing that Shamva wxs kilte f, as
also rturuJesbna ««d Pradjumna and
Aniruddlia, Madluva became fiUed widt
anger.

45 Seeing G-tda lying dead on (be
giuuiid, his auger uec»<ne enhanced lUe
holder of Sluriig* and me d'scut and ihe
iiwce then rooted the Vrishni* and (lie
Aiidhakas.

46 Heir, O king, viflut tliat eonqierer
el ho-aiilo iswns, «is , Vahhiu ot great
eiierg) and Hrruka, then laiJ lo Krishna,

4^ • O huly one, a very Urge number

<1 me I ha> been killed by you turn now
( 1 whe'c Kxmt Ims gone f \V« wisii to go
Iheic vrheie tie has gune.*


CliAPlEK IV.

<m\usala HaKVA

CaniiisutJ,

Valahatopayana said

t. I iie» Dxru IS, Keshi va and Vabhru
Un ihti pUce loUjwt ig Uam* Iheyeew
ihat hero ol greei energy snii»g thooglit.
fu (y, rechui^ his bevg a,C«iiis< a tree, in

a. { in line 14* na of greet <oitl, Krrshna
eidrted nxiuee, S4>liig,~''Goi<«g 10 the
Kurut. infu'tti I’erihe ul (Ills great Car>
lix^e of (he Yxdur.

3 Let Arj I •» com* here speeddv. hear-
■ ol ihe desrrncir m of the Vadavas
th’i'Ujh (he |{ra<iinenas' curse' IhueJ
add(r}4<e I OeruUs, deprived of hrs tmscsl
by ^es'owrpinceediJ on a cat to the Cap (all
of ire Kuiui. [


4 After Oaruka tt*(! departed, Keshava.
eeniig Vabhru waning on turn told tuna
(liese words sr— ' Do yon go sp'edriy for
protecung the Udws Let not robbers do
iticm any iny try, tnopied by the riches.

5 «l bus ordereded by Keshava, Vabhfia,
SIill helpless will] wine but cheerless at Ihe
destruction of his kinsmen, wen' away,
lie hnd rested for a while by the side of
Kesf>-<va, but as soon asjhe h.td gone to a
dMance, (he iroit'bolt, attached to a mullet
m il>« Itands of a lionter, suddenly sp ang
uf Kself upon lliat solitary survivor oi ilie
Vadava fatmly aiid kilted him who also
had been included us the curse of the
Brahmauas.

6. Seeing Vabliru killed, Keskaya of
great energy aJdiessed lus elder brother
and Said,-'*' Do yon, O Kama, wan fur me 4
licre nil 1 put the Udics under the care of ^
kinsmen. -- *

7 Eniermg Ihe city of Ikiyaravaii,
Jaitarddaiia said these words (a hit father,

— . Do you protect all ifie ladtsi of oiK
hou>e, (lU UluiMiiyaya comes,

8. At (lie skirts of ll>c forest (laiD* i&
Wailing for me. 1 shsU meet him 10 day.
lilts great deitructtun of (he Vadus hat
been seen by me even as I beheld befor*
Ihe Carnage of those Kshatiiyas w|ia were
(he loreinuvt ones of ICuru’t race,

9, It IS ifopossible for me to see tins
CUy of the Yadavas without the Vadul be*
side me Knjw iliat going to it>e forest i
shall practise penances wiih Kaihg m my
company.*

so Havmi; said these words, Krishna
(ouched tlte leet of hu faiher with fiii iiead,
and q nckly left film thcnaluud wai{ of
svirsw Biure from the Udies and crUJren
ol Ins hpu>C.

It Hearing that loud sound of waiting
uttered by the weeping ladies, Kesliava
returned and said to lhem~Aipi,ia will
come here. Hiat (oceinost of men will
relieve you ol yuur suriuw.

12 Proceeding then to ibe forest, 5
Keshava saw Kama sitting m a sohury i
place He aUo saw tl<al lUina had srI hiina 1
self to Yoga and (hat from out 1 1> mouili ]
was tssumg a powerful snake.

13 Jite color of that snake was w) ita.
Leaving the human body, lliat gieat Naga,
et a thousand heads and having a loim as
large «i It at of a mouni.m, end„e<}
side* wi(i, red ryes procaedtd alwig the
way leading to llw ocean.

14—16 Oera I hi»n*e!/. and many celt*.

Isal snakes, and many *ac<rd Ktvert weie
thctr, l»r rtceiving I mi wnh Ivonor,
Ibste Wtic Kaikotaka, VaSuVi, iak»1iak«,


6


XtAtlARllARATA


P«illMistirav^s. and Varum. Kmj-<ra,
Shankln and iCunnl* and
Pu»H^rika, and the great I) intara^litra.

llrada and iCrnOia and titUia

ol fi-rcf energy, and C'>akraina nU and
Aii^nanU. an.l iImi f.>rein>« M N .«aa [
c-tlled Dirinikht, and A>nv»r«^h-», and |
kin< Vatiim liiinf>‘ir, O king. Adwancinp
forward and off nng him tha A'gli\a and
water to wash »»« (eet, and with vartom
Other rite*, thej all adored llic p > eerinl
N iga and sainted him by niaving the uitial
tnq lines.

17 After Ills brother had ihns gone from
the (Iniinan) world, Vasiideva of Celestial
Vision, who was fully auq Minted with the
end of all things, wandered for aoin'time
in that sohlary forest thouglitfnUy. G«l«*e«l
svnh great energy he then sat down on tlie
naked earth.

t8 He had thought before this of every
thing which Itad been fores'Mdoived by the
words uttered by Gandhari in lurmer days.
He aUo recollected the words that Dorv «s «s
had spoken ot tlie time liis body was
ameaied by that Kishi witli the residue of
the Puyita he had eaten.

>9 Ihe high>saiited one, thinking of
(he destruction of the Vrislnus and the
Andhaeas, as also of the previous desiruc*
non of the |(urus, coKClnded ihat the lionr
(for Ills own departure from the v.o td)
liad come. He llieii controlled his senses
(III Yojia)

30 ICiiowmg the truth of every topic, [
VasuJeva, though he was llie Supreme
Dviiy, wisiied to die for removing all uouhis :
and establishing a certainly uf results, '
simply for upholding the three worlds and
tor iiiaxtiig the words of Aui s sou true.

21 Having controlled all In* senses,
speech, and iitind, Krishna Uid lilinself
down in high Yoga A fierce liu iter of
the name ot Jaid tiicu came iheftf, for find*
liig a deer.

22 " T fie hunter mistaking Kesfiava, who
was stretclicd on the earth in high Yoga,
tor a deer, pierced at hfm at the tieel with
an arrow and q nckly came to (l>al spot for
capiuiing his prey.

23 Coming up Jars saw a m*n dressed
in yellow robes, rapt m Voga, and giiied
will many arms Considering Innselfan
offender, and filled with fear, he touched
t^ie feet uf Keshava

24 1 he Iiigh.souled one coinfnrted hiin
and then ascended upwards, hlhng the
uuiresky willi splendour.

25 Wlieii he reached the celestial re-
£101^ Wsava and (he twin .Astiwiiis and


Rw lr» and the Adit) as and dw V'esti* and
the Vishwedrvas, and AJiini* and bi hh>as
and many foremost ones among ilw G’n»
dhsrvss, with the Apsaras, advanced to
receive him.

26 then O king, |he lUustnans Nira*
Sana of dreadful energy, He Creator and
Hesiroyer of all, —that preceptor of Ynr»— '
filltiig Heaven wiili Ins splendour, reached
Ins own inconceivable region.

*7 Krishna then ni»t the denies and
(celestial; Kishis and Charanas, O kme,
and the foremost ones among the Gm*
dharvasand many beatitifid Apsaras and
Sidditas and baiidh) as All of them bend*
ing Ml iiiimiht) , adored him,

.28 the celestials all saluted him. O
monarch, and miny foremost of a'Cehes
and Rishis idored him ;t$ tlie Lord of all|
1 he G indharvas wailed on him singing h^
praises, and Indra also jo)fulIy praised
him.


CHAPIEU V.

(MkUp\L\ PARVV)—
Ccnltuiieii

Yaishampayana said •—

I. Meanwhile Dimka, going lo l'»®
Kurus and seeing (hose powerful car*
warriors, vtt , the sons Priilia, informed
them of how the Vrislnus liad killed one
another with iron bolts,

i Hearing that fhe Vrislnus along with
the Buvjas and Andhakas and KueurH*
had all been killed, the Handavas, burning
with goef, became highly moved.

3 1 lien the ArjuiM, the dear fiiend of
Keshava, bidding them farewell, started
lor seeing Ins iiid'ernal u icle, Ife said

. that desltuctun would soon uveitake every

Uiiiig

4 Proceeding fo the city of the Vii»hni 9
wuit Daruk k in his cumpanj. O puweriul
king, that heio siw lliat the city of
Uwaraka looked liked a woman loit ul her
husband.

5 lliose latiies who had before this,
the very Lord of the universe for their pro*
lector, were now lot dies* Seeing iliat
Partlvk, had come for pioiecimg tliem, they
all bewailed aloud

6 Sixteen ihjusand Udies had been

wedded 10 Vasiidevj. Indeed, soon as
tliey beheld A.j ma arrive, they uttered a
loud cry ol sorrow. ^

7 As soon as the Kuru prince JpeU'“’»«
bMuufui ladies deprived ol the pro.eci(on


(lAVTAl* P*»VA


tibsiiocud by ie-*fs* , ,

1 oi»rS lof R'' '** B«d ibe »»»!*«

»oui>J i*{ inuviCH* m»trumen U,4HSio«»

ca.s loc ».s waves. - -


WrtW »«"'5


«l ca.s loc i>s waves, Omw,

s,.d public ,no»s. , l»«

«iid precious Slone* omtand* «*

walls ol adamaiil w«»® tiic sl»e<‘> *“'*
Rower* Ibal fi »»»•■“ ®" ^tunimiB «•»

loads we.elbe sironi! a,e4l open

eddies alums »* ‘‘'ukes in course,

squate* were l> e UiK* initsbty

U4...4 and Knsbna •«« ‘J‘J

‘b. Lf'fie Va.iaf»*‘l

bound up wilb little » •'*** y^jaVa, gUied

ll. Indeed, H'b soil “ . jj ,1,^ ciy to
wuti pieal ‘'‘I’'"'*''"”' «( ilie Vtubui

look even OiU*.

Sl»tn

--I

tliat UwatfcUa P'«''^*,V„a. A.iu««- »»«;
iiiineretiv «tve« . t,aili«d m «*'* I

lell down on i»ie «»» '• Satf»l». i

,3, U.en Saly* tie J««R' ‘ j Uc

’'~r £ ;i:rr;» vrJ


to llieii leeling** talkmu

15. Ftaisii'iS J„ coioforled lUeUi


■tot die i


n«, de-p’y


4 llieol I mm of minlit)'’

"iiii

<ilei>il*«


n lliose i*n heroes who were the dear

®* .* r A.l....a and w'lo weremidi
disciples ol AiJ I p ,^1,4, throuisli

uutedc


,_s. Tto>= t-- «'“> '”'’’"';i'‘',i"

ol coiiver.sil •“ y“J' *,* , , Ku.u'# race,

U\ prnle. and ,„.Vell.— ft.,

were ever 1 maul ly-t. b«'‘ ihd

ii.=

VrisUiiix


m“ li.” Ite K-"") '■

sole cause


CHAl’ lEU VI.


(MAUSALA PAIlVAl-


VaisliampAyAiiA said ^

1 1 •• Kiuii prince s I .round
,rl;.lAnaUadnnd^'» ;;-«„ .ne

4„d burning w'tn K

’“"3* ll.ebroiid iha" ’>•«

oi P'"'” "’S 15 ic-t.. l«.tl.rf l.»
5 ,'X 5 *r”"o'ul....>«- ft„V.dandabl;.

s!"Ai;-‘ca:;rnor' 5 o A. o do™.. -

enemies.


How Is It Ihattliatlirdor the
‘j-sirnyBrot Madltu, wh I

nfowe.sNcr Killing 1{<%U»U

”"t'

belonisiiK ,,,.,u.iiainoos reismu.--

I Snaiiy Knut* ul , ,|,d.n«r.ni to

''"ll”'.' f, Ih.

sucll « C»l»'n “7

uy the It'S'"* f , ,,

mp »ir Narada, and the Mnoi*,

p 1 ..

&lr.UD=..yc<w''W,.,.slorr.

■A "r

les-w wnl'out |„„„

My s


i« allowed -11 tins « ImPP*'*-

.5 the Lord of the
He'^didi'-ot howeve


S"AX""d.ir'H»i,i.. o j..-

troyer oi enemies.

fllXr*”* >=»‘».d U.ro.EU 1 ..,


8


MAltABlIAnATA.


1^— iS Tlial ftienj 1 to»\cv»r, of yoiirs
dui ■ ut wish to proicLi Ills kiiisirteit
log Ins sons f^iid grandsons nnii tiiothers
Mild friends lyini; dead, lie Said to irte
lliese Winds, U Bliarnia’s race, — IhedrS*
ti action of tins our family lias at last come.

19 Vibliaisu will ci'il^ ( > tins city, its ,
D vafavati I ell linn wliat lias taken pUcfl
vxt , vIms great, d«i.vi«ct»on of llie Vivsbms
io 1 have no doubt that aS soon as lie
will hear of the destrliLtidn df the VadnS,
that hero of mighty eitergy will come hc^e
foiihwith. <

it. Know, O father, that I am Arjmta
and A'jnna is mysetf. 1 hat should be i
done by )OU wlncti he woUld say.

22 the son of Pandu will do what ts
beSt for the women and the children. £ven
he Will perfunn jour (iiiieral rhes.

23 Itnscityof Qwaravati, after Ar]'t>\a'»
deparldre wilt, with its Walls and edifices,
be speedily Swallowed up by (lie oceart

H As for myself, retirintf to some
sacred place] I shall pass trty tune with ihe
iiUelligent Uaina in my company, observing
Strict vows rill the while.

25 ftaving Said these ^ords t<$ me,
Hrivhikesha of inconceivable prowess,
leaving me will) the ciutdreil, has gone
away some where iVhicIt I do not know.

2d lliinking of those two great
brothers of yoiiri as also of (he dreadful
destrUi,tlaii ul my kinsmen, t liave abstained
from all food, and am emaciated with
grief.

3J 1 shall neither eat, nor live By
good luck you meet iile, O son of Pandu
Do you Mccumptisti all, O Partha, that
Kiislma hae srild

2S this kingdornt witli all these Woitien,
and all the wealth here, is your now. O
son of Pritha I As for myself. O destroyer
of foes, 1 shall renounce my life however
dear It may be.

CMAPrElt VII.

{MAUS\LA PARVA.)—
ContiHueJt

VaUliampayana aaid

1—2. Hiat scorcher of enemies, via ,
VibiMtsu, thus addirssed by h» malenial
uncle, replied, with gresl chccrlessness of
heart, to Vasudeva who was equally efeer-
less, saying,—' O uncle, I am unable to
look at this Earth when slie IS reft of that
heio of Vtiihnt's race and those my Other
kinsnieh.


3 The kiitff And Bhirrtsrenit jtflii

SaiisdeVi and NakiiU and VajiMS'iii, are
ol tl'o mind with myself, in tins

nkattci’.

4 1 hr* tinte has come fdr the depirtiire
of the kiiii; also, , Know this tliaC the hour
of opr deparinre (no is near Vnn are the
foreiil rst of tliose who are well cunvi.rsaiit
With the course of tinW.

j I shall, however, O chastiser of
ciieiitie^. first rem ive to InJrap a^tha the
wonieif of the VriShni race aS also the
Children and the ajied '

6 Havingkaid so td his dncle, Arjiiua,
next addressed Oanika sayng — ' f wish
to see forthwiih the chief officers of the
Vrishni hero“».’

j Having uttered these words, thd
herotC Arjnna, grtsviitg far those great
c<r>warrior$, enieied the great lull of the
Yadavas, called SUdharina. '

8 When lie had taken Ins seat therej
all tiie citizens, inclddi'n; the Brahirtaius,
Mild all the ministers of state, cainerilid
stood surrounding him.

9 I hen Pririha, nlohe grieved lhail
they, addressed those grieving and cheer*
less citizen* and uffleers whu wereimore
dead then alive, Hiid said these words

I WUvcb weie well suited 10 the occasion. ^

! to M Shall take away with me the rein*
iixiiis of the Vruhnis and the AnJIukas •
the sea will soon engulf this city.

It. np all yoUr cars and place od
them all your ric'ies lliU Vajra will bd
your king at bhakraprastha.

12, On the seventh day from this 2f
sunrise. We shall start Aleke your pre-
parations iininediately.'

ij Thus addressed by Prilha's sort of
pure deeds all of them hastened (heir pre*
parations with eagerness (or securing Hieft
salteMf

• 4 Arjnna passed lhat bight m the
Drilsces of KesiMva H*' was suddenly
overwlielmed with ^reac sorrow and slope*
factioit.

13 When morning dawned Vasndiv*
of great energy and prawe-is atial led.
through the help of Yoga, (o the highest
end

Its A loild and heart-rendering aennd
of wailing was heard in Vastideva's pilaee.
Uttered by the weeping ladies.

ly. They were seen with dishevelled hair
and divested of oiitaments and gSxilandt.
Beating iheir breasts with tlieiiwharrus, they
liidulg^ in liearl lendeiing lamenUU


^tXuSALX pa^IVA.


5


l8 ThfiBV cf wowfn, vts,

n^valti anrf nlisrfra arid ftohiat *nd Madtr^
revt tliemsefvei od iTje bodies of ttieir
lord '

^ 19 Tlien Parllifl pSuscd ibe Rody of his
imcU to b»- ci'""'d not on R rich Vehicle
bmne on liie shotil l#rs of m^n
20 It was foTIow(»d by all thr ciOzens of
Dwiratisi and tlip n^ople of tfio prrtviiices
all of wlioiTj jjreaflv 'tricl<*'i withgnel, had
boon well disposed towards llie deceased,
hero ’

2f Before that v»h c)e \v*re home the
Umbrella wb'ch bad been lirlrf over JllS head
at (le cooej jsjon of tlie horse sacrifice he
bad oerTornted wl le 1“vin^ and Also'lfe
b irniny fires be bad rfaily adored with the
priests who bad used to attend to them

2J The body o^ the hero was followed
hv J s w ives drrhed in ornaroeots and
V'rrounrjed bv ibnii«ands of women *nd
Ibniisands of tbeir datiebters m law
at The fast t tes W»r« then performed
at that spot liihicb be 1 Iced while be was
ahve

H The fouf wives cf tbst bero'e son of
SI lira ascended tl e f in»ral pvre and were
consumed with the body of tleir h<i<band
Ail of tbeAi attAmed to those ha^py regions
twhlch were hlf '

as The sni of Pandii burnt the body
of t IS uncle togeiljer with those Iohs wives
nl 1 1« irsmi^ V'arfods fcmdt of scents and
perfuibrd wood” ’

36 As ihe fmeral pvre hUrei^ up a
loud soemd was 1 eard nf tl e b iming wnnri
and niber eombilstihle materials alnny with
Ihe clear cbailnf of Samai s and the la«ned«
fatioi) of jhe cilkzens and oilers who iaw
ihe rite ' ^ '

57 Afterlt was all over the hnjs of the
Vrishiiis add' Andhaha race*, bead'd by
Vsjra ai also the ladies offered oblations
of water la the feVeAt hero
’ Plialeiina win was csrelfil in nb^

Smv ng every d ity I tvi 15 caused il is dniv
to he performed went O d* ef of B* arala's
rare, jnrxi to the placA wt ere the Vrislmis
were hilled.

29 The K'lfii prince seeing them Iriog
hilUd all al-nlnd became eseeelnelv
tf eer?e« He however d d whaj rftf t red
to be done in view of (hat wl leh bad tskeit
plate

30 The last riles were performed ac*

cording to ll e order of seninrifv (q ilm
bodies of lho*e berOes killed by tl e irori

bolls bnin by virtue of tt e c<l»«e denn ■ ic'd
by ilie Orahmenas, cf llie blades of Srakt
ttau


I 31 Sesrcbine rtuf the bcdie? then at
t Kama And Vasndeva Arjuna caused Ihern
: to be burnt by expert persons,

32 The son Ilf Pandu having next p*rf
I formed diry those rvtes that uri done to Ihr*

' manes nf the dead ^ iicftfv started on tha
I seventh day, lAounting on bis car,

I 3^ Th* ntidoivs of the Vrislim heroea
' wAifing afoiid foUowed the great son of
Paiidii rts , rtban%o_jaya on cars drawn
bybdlocksand rtlules and camels

3t Aff were '*1 deep sorrow The
servants of llie Vnsnis, their horsemen*
and iheif car warriors too, followed the
procession.

35 The citizens and the mbabitsnf^ nf
the dOirttry, at the command of Priiba'e
son started St Ihe same pme and proceeded,
s irroiinding that cavalcade destitiire of
berOes and numbering only women and tha
aged and Ibe children.

The warriors who foiigbt from th*
backs of elephanis proreeded nn eleplianfv
as huge 4« 1 ills The infanty alio set out,
togelber wiib the reserves

The ehifiren of flie Andhska,
and the Vrubni races aff fnffowerf Arpna.
lb# Brabmanas and ICshatrivas and
Vaishyas and rich ^hudras started keepm/j
before (hem ’the sttfeen thoisand women
who bad formed' Vasiideva s harerp and
Va)ra, Ihe grai^dson ot Ibe intelligent
Krishna ‘

f 39 The w flows of the olbef heroes of
the riho}s the V»isl ni and lb» Andbakai
races lordless now that started witlf
ArtuiM ntimhererf man9 millions

40 Tliat foremost of car warriors fliac
cooq leror of hostile towns s«ir (lie son of
Pr iha eeCnrIecf Ills huge process 00 of
Vrislmis which »t 11 AboiloHed with weat'h,
and which looked like a veritaW* ocean

4< After all the people had started the
ocean tlatlome of sharks and alligafnrs,
rt ind'd Owsreka wl leli tri/I teemed With
eicf es of every kind, M-ffli its w4ferr

42 tVbafever portion of Ibe ground was
p4ssed over ocesn immediately (IjoJed
over s*,(b bis wafers

43 Seeing this wonrlerf I spectacle the

ml abiianfs of Dwirsta walked faster a itf

fasier, saying tVonderful is the course of
fate *

it nbanantars afterahandnoiri'r f>wa«
taka proceeded by s'ow marries raising
(lie Vrisf ni women in ml ti charmime
forests and mo intalns and by the sides of
delft, htftil t vers

4S .Arrived at Ite conntrv of the five
mtiefSi the pswcrlul Obanai jaya encamped


^0


MAlfABnARATA.


in tl>e midst of a land that abounded with
corn and kine and otlier anima!s<

46. Setmg lA»ose '^dows escorted by
Prulia’s son alon^, O Bharata, tlie robbers
felt a great templdtion, .

47> Tlien those <inFal wreteheSi wttli
hearts possessed by cupidiiy, ina « those
Abl tras of ill omen, assembled together and
held a consultation.

4S. "Ihev said,— ‘Here thrrc Is only one
bowman, viV ■ Aijuna. Ihe party consists
of c> ildren and the old. He escorts them,
ahne. The warriors <of the Vttshms) arc
niiliout energy.'

' 4g Then those robbers, numbering by
thousands, and armed with clubs, rushed
towards the procession o! the Vrishnis lor
looiing them.

50. Uiged by the perverse cAiirse of
line, ihpj fill upon that parly, frit'liieniny
It with loud leonine shouts and desirous of
slaugliter.

51—5*. The son of Ktinil, suddenly
CMS Mg tn advance along the path, tnrned,
with h's fnllo vers, tbwards the place where
the robbers had attacked the party. Smil*
mg the while, tliat miglity<armed wareior
addressed tl e assailants, saying,— 'Ve sin*
fill wretches, slop, if ye love your h\esl
Ye will rue this wlrcn 1 cut your bodies
With my arrows and take your lives '

53. 1 hough thus addressed by that hero,
they disregarded Ins words, and thongli
lepeatedly dissuaded, they Fell upon
Aryuna.

54 Then Aejuna tried to string his
large, indestructible, celestial bow with
some effort.

55 He succeeded usih great difticuily
I stringing it. when (lie bailie had liceome
irinus He then began to think of his '
ilestial weapons but they would rot come I
I his mind.

56 Seeing that furious battle, Ihe loss I
I the might of his atm, and the non* |
prearance ol his celestial weapons, Ai|una
ecame grea ly ashamed.

57. Ite Vtishni warcinrs including ll« 1
ilaniiy, ih» elepliani>wafiiir<, ami the I
ar.tnen, failed io rcKue (hose VrisJ.nt
rnrn“M wtio were being iiiMicticd away by
le robber*

jS. Tlw conemitse was very large. The
It .rare aiiackrd 11 at difTeicnl pnitits
I'lnna liu I his best 10 protect il, but
■nil.f not toccced.

59 Bstore Ihe eyes of all the warriera.
lany foremosi of ladirs were dragged away,
iinW Mliett went away with tlie rcbbcra
f It, air own accutd.


fe. 1 he powerful Arjitna, supported liy
tile servants of the Vrishnis, struck Utt
robbers wrh arrows shot off Gaodiva.

< 5 t. Soon, however, O king, his arroa* \
were rxliaosted. In former djys Ids arrows I
liad been inexhaustible. Now, however, I
they proved otherwise.

<j. Finding his arrows cxhatisled. f'C 1
became deeply afflicted with grief. The |
son of Indra then began to strike the rob* |
bers (Vitli the horns of his bow. *

,( 5 ^ Those MIechcchas, however, O Jsna*f
mriaya, m (he very sight of Pailha, rc«J
I treated, tatiiiig away with them many fore*

^ most ladies of the Vrishnis and Ardfiakas. >

64—85 The poiverfni Hhananyaya con* j
sidered it all as the work of destiny. Filled i
with sorrow he breathed heavy sighs at I
(lie thought of the non^appeirance of his^
(celestial) weapons, the loss of tfie might
I of lus arms, the refusal of Ins bow to obey
; him; and the exhaustion of ins arrows.

66 Considering ft all as Ihe work cf
' destiny, he became preally cheerless flo
then ceased, O king, to mike further efloHsi
saying, he had net (he power which ha
bad befow. ,

6?. The hfph>)oiiUd one, taking wilH /
him (he residue of the Vrishni women, and ■
(lie weahh that was still with them, reached ^
KuruksVeira.

65 Thus brrngmp with him U e remnant
of the Vrishnis, he established them at
different places, ^

69 He established the son of fvniavar*
man nt (he ciiy called Afartiikavat. with
rlie remnant of the women of the Bho{a
king.

70 Fscortlnp the remainder, wlih rhildren
and old men, and women, the son of Pandil
esiabiiahed them, whn were reft of heiorr,
m the city of Indrnprastha.

7t. Tlie dear son of Vuyudhana, with
a Kwmber t>( old men and rluldren and
women, (he iighteoui'soultd Ai{>ii>a tstab*
fished on the banks of il>e Saraswati.

7a The rule of ludraprasih* was given
Io Va] a. the wtdiws of Akiiira (Iren
wished to retire Into the forest. Vaj'A
asked them repeatedly to desist, but tlicy
<Ik] not hear hint.

HiiVmini tie princess of Osr>dh«ra,|

St aivya Haimavaii, an t qiieen Jsinvaratl, |
aictnded ihn funeral pyre. e

74 Saivahharna and Ihe f>|hee t!*er
wives of K<i\t <ia entered (Iw forest, U kviif,
resolved to practi'O penances.

7 5 Tl-ey (•eyaii (n live O** fruus and |«MfS
and fvtss (heir lane in the coolcmyeti^-t ol


WA’OSA'LA parva


tt


tooU up ilieir reswicnce m p

from ■D^t'arffvaii were diviaeU uuo s f
•and bestowed upon Vaira

>1110 occasion. Arjuna, w J j VVi*'**

tfis "ease.


, m. k.ro« o! ir.. Bhojj.t''^

^ .he V..ihni O Brel', nan.. .»/l'0
^ *ii?ot(ted with high-sonU. great hiight.

3»Sf„Sl.a.r Wlea o.r. ».ther

. tn battle.


vm.


tMAUSAl A PARVA.)-

CbMthidH.


Vaiahattipnyi'Ii’' =i"^ = h-rmlt.ge el

,hl.,,Jhh.rii:”f .V\.’;—' *’•>"■

bh pVaflire . , . j,

5 SfltyatstiN jn-

«aid — ‘l*Ve yonr «eal


4-5 ‘'pd hreaildo'ff

meal W 0"’*’^'!' ir.^j .5 m. Vvasa.


ITTPai^ c1 ie<n»«' «^ 1i'de«P*'f Vvasa

TPOeaVd^V and ,r,, H^en

artdres«od t im ha.U

ijprioUed of anybody’s ebnK *”•

kirVsU or tbe r^d of V ^

from tbe tno’^b M h j» «< >•««■

S'ereT"”!.-;.. hilled a Brahre-e*

® 1 ","rv’Se'’'"er^'e"'p™P^'^’'" 'j
You loob *’? , been defeated

*berebeno hstm fu «•


Arjnna said: bVetbat

of a cloud, lie «'<«>»■: ey iCr„l»»». b»*- *'“*1

\r.^nr"'r:nCc:d Ins’ b-dy and ascended

‘"s”ai 5'-^'''i^cedb;‘B*:3'.-

caused by tb« hM^taken place «*

,le.le.ir..rr.e» h« i”, h,.

t'eySiul' .nd net ..<« •
csesQed. ,


battle. • . . , • I •

*n Possessed of arms which looked like
* *« of ifdn and -capable of beanne the

seam heethe perverse coene ol lime.

.1 rive hetidred Iheetaiid michiy.armed
."•J.‘ha» the., been '..ll•J„,E:';”"j: :

.,g one eiiethev, they have met will, nes

1 en^int repeatedly ol this destriic-

1 -eannnt gel peace nl mind.

,, Ihe de.th nt tie. M'l'r °

cooling pr.ipe.tj el hie.

« OepMved of !'« tompany ^ IhC
Vfitbn. h^oes. I ^

A„„,),,yv.hl h« l.h^n

“ nmTetl.'; .^'elt"

of It. iny heaff >« ^ ,

.K 1.1 my very slghl, O Brat'maMa.
a. ft? V.ishii ladles were Carried
VwaTby Ablurasof the country ol the

live waters who attacked

„ lakme up mv bow. \ Immd myself
^ r .« strme »l. Me power that

J’Tai.iVm my . 5 m. seemed In have

dTmppearednn.haineeas.m.

,* o c»eal ascetic, my weapons of

v„L.. hmS. Iv.led m apPear- S.on, asai".

my arrows became exhausted.

in That peisim ol immeasurahle «mil,

5 ,. t nldm^ the concti me diiciit.
a';:.'. Sh’of'ol’v.nV” '^I'i. have lie h.e

!«. dragging my hie ... .oreow I

.« sie who uaed loMalk in advance of

„!“.r. .l.al d.vl'.e 1 ”'" giUed «'”■

rjWnd.mr ...d unfadine power, con ig

„ i,. p.neerded all ho.ule wa.e.o... c.n
lonyer be seen by me


.„’'en5!ey'h5.'.’'h5'"t’'>ll'l''<'-"'' "rmp'
* i l afletwa.ds hilled w.th arrows sbol
*n Candiva. I am filled with Ki'el »nrt my
»S.d swims O best cl men ! P.mlrated
cheerlrssness and de.pair. 1 cannot
1 get peace ol mind.


TABliE OF CONTESTS.


CnAlTfiw I —The King teavei the world CnArrcR III — Shakra comes to tl e K ng
after 1 ear ng Krishna s departure— p i and i (on is tt at I e «i]| see all I is relal ves
CuAPTBR ll —The departure of Paodava and kinsmei — p 4
princes from the world— p 3.


mahabhahata:

<IK ENGLISH.)
MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA*


CHAPTER E


Having saluled Narayana end tJara tht
test of male beings, es also Sarasviatt
iJie Goddess of Leoriftng, let M* cry
sueeess,

Janamejaya said •—

X Havtii;; lieard of th»l Bgfitine witU
Iron bolls between ibe heroes of ilie Vrtshnr
and tlie Andhaka races, and having been
informed also of Krlslma's departure from
Ihfs tvorfd, tvliat d/d tf/e Panda Mi do 1

VftUliampayaoa said
3-^3 Havin? heard the particulars of
the great desirtictian of (he Vrntmis, the
iCanrava king w,is deierminrd on leaving
Die tvorfd. He addressed Arju-ia saying,—
‘O you of great /nleJI/ge/ice, n i» Time winch
COOKS every creature (m bis cauldron),
1 think diet what ><ai taken pfsceitdue
to tfie cordn of ]iinp(wiili whicb he binds
us alft You should also see >l ’

4 Tims addressed by lus brother, (he
son of Knnti only repeated the word—

• > line, fime )' — and fully endorsed the view
of Ins eldest bfotlier e/idueJ with great
tnlelligcnce.

5. Knoiving llie resohilioi) of ArJijna,
Ghi/nafcna and the (wins fully endorsed the
rforo^'wiA'ii^ /Vtj;<iTVa"«>ktr*»3w,‘


fn Sbakraprastlia Voti sliould protect hfm'
Never set your fieact on sm/

to — It. Having said these words, kmg
Vudhishtbira, the just, along ivitli Ins
brothers, promptly offered obluitons of water
(0 Vasudeva of great intelligence, as slsu
Ins old maternal uncle, and Kama and
others He then duly performed the Slirad*
dhas of all ihose kinstren,
ly. Tfie king, m honor of Hari, and
naming turn repeatedly, fed the nwaipeyans
Yyasa, and Narada, and Marltarideya
having penances for weafiii, and Yajna*
valkya p! Bhsradwaje race, with many
delicious food.

13— IS Jn honor cf fvnshna, he afso
save away many jewels and gems, and
dresses and clothes, and villages, and horses
and Cars, and femals slaves by liundreds
and thousands to foremost of Drahmanas.
Calling (he citieens Kripa was installed as
0 e preceptor and Parilcshit was mad" over
to him as Ins thsciple, O chief of Ilharal^'/s
rare! Tlien Vndliishtlnra once 1'10/e suni*
moiled all ]»s suh|ects

l6~t7 "nie royal sage informed tfien»
of his desire I ke citirens and fhe vill-<g'is,
liearingtlc king's words heca'iie tinckrn
with anxiety and disapprr>ved of ilirm.

.‘Ihis should never be duue'—

I ilic kinv.


UAKABUAnATA.


bless them in ihe accomplisliment of their
design, (hose foremost of men renounced
Iheir sacred Bres to the water. Seeog the
princes in that guise the ladies wept aloud

23 They seemed to look as they had
looked fonnerl) when witli Draupadi form*
Dig the sixth in number they had left the
capital after their defeat at dice All the
brothers, however, ^were inBnitely de-
lighted at llie prospect of iheir reture-
snent.

24 — 25 Ascertaining the desire of
Vudhishthira and seeing the destruction of
the Vrishnis no Other course of action could
satisfy them then, llieBve brothers, with
Draupadi forming the sixth, and a dog
ionning the sevenlli, started on their
journey. Ihusdid king Yiidlnshthira de-
part, himself heading a parly of seven,
from the city of Hastinapiir. i he citizens
and the royal ladies followed tbens for some
distance.

26 None of them, however, could ven.
lure to address the lung for persuading him
to give up his uiientiun, Ihe cnizens then
seluined.

27. Kripa and others stood around
Yuyulsii as their centre Ulupi (he daughte^
ef ti e Nag« chief, O \ou of Kurus race'
anVtred the waters of G.4nga.

98. llie princess Chitrangada started
lor the capital of Manipur. Ihe other
ladies who were (he grandmothers of
Patiksliii gathered around Inrrk

39. Meanwhile tl e great Pandavas, O
you of Kuru’s race, and the illustrious
JDraupadi, having ob;>erved the prehminarY
iasi. slatted willt their faces towaids the
east.

3a. Setting ihemseT.'es on Yoga, ihose
great ones, resolved to observe the religion
of Uenunciation, passtd through various'
eounliKs and leached various rivers and
seas.

31 — 32 Yudhishthira proceeded first
l^ehinii him iv-is tiliiina , next walked
Arjuiia; after him were lie twins in the
order uf tl eir bn ili ; be 1 nid them alt, O
^nremnsi one of LllMr.<ia's race, went
I 3 raup.<di, that fiist of women, endued with
l,rea| be.iiily of dark complexion, and
liavmg eyes like lotus petals.

33 \VI lie the Paiidaras stalled for the
foiest, a dog followed them PiOCreding on,
Itiose heroes lesched the sea of led waters

34 1)1 anaiiriya had iioi thrown nf} I m
celcsiwi t>ow Gindiva nor Ins couple of

liiexhauslibla qtivris OoluSted. O king

by lli« cupivity i«( tiduable


j 3^ The Pandavas there saw the God
of Firo standing before them hke a hill.
Closing their way, the god stood there ns
Ills embodied form.

36. The deny of seven flames then ad-
dressed the Pandavas, say ing —‘O heroic
sons of Pandu, know me as the God of Fire.

37. O mighty-armed Yudhishthira O
Bfiimasena who are a vcorclier of enemies,
O Aquna and O twins of great courage,
listen to what 1 say t

38 O foremost ones of Kuril’s race, I
am the God of Fire. The forest of Khandava
was burnt by me, through the power of
Aijuna and of Narayana himself.

39 Let your brother Phalgiina proceed
to the forest after casting off Gniidiva, that
great weapon, lie has no longer any neces-
sity foe It.

40. That precious discus, which was
with the great Krishna has disappeared
(from the world! When the time agan>
comes. It will return into his hands.

41 Tl IS foremost of bows vie , Gandivtk
was procured by me from Vanina for the
use of P-irtha Let it be made over (cs
Varuna hinuelf.^

42- At (Ins, all the brothers requested
Dhananjaya to do what the god said. H»
then threw into the waters (of the sea) both
ihe bow and the couple of inexhaustible
quivers.

43 After this O chief of Bliarala'i race*
the God of Fire disappeared then and there*
the heroic sons of Pandu, next went on*
with their faces turned towards the south.

44. then, by the northern coast of the
salt sea. those princes of B.’iarala’s race,
went to the south-west.

43 Turning next towards (lie west, they
saw the city of Uwaraka covered by the
ocean.

46. Turning next to the north those
foremost ones went on Observsul of Yoga,
they were desirous of going round llie uLefe
earth.


CHAPTER II.

(MAHAPRASTJIANIKA PARVA )—

CanhnutJ.

Vaishampayana said

I. I hose princes of cO*ilfoH»<V and
devoted to Vog<, jK<«:ceding lo d'O netih,
t«w iiituatai, (■••I hkge luuuuiaUU


MAHAPRASTHANIKa parva.


2. Crossing (he Himavat, they saw a vast
desert of sand Ihey then saw the powerful
mountain Meru, t)ift foremost of al) hig))«
peaked mountains.

3 As those powerful ones were pro*
Ceedinj quickl\ all rapt in Yoga, Yajna-
se«>, faJhng oS from \t>ga, dropped down
on the Earcli.

4*-'5 Seeing her fallen down, Bhima*
«ena of great strength addressed king
YudUishlliira the just, saying,— * O scor-
cher of eiiemirs, this princess never did any
sinful deed 'fell us what tfK cause (s for
which Krishna has fallen down on the
Earth.’

Yudhishthira said:—

6 . She had great partiality for Dhanan-
Jaya in particular. She obtains the fruit of
that conduct to-day, O best of men.

Vaishampayana said ,

7. Having said this, (hat foremost

one of Bharata’s race went on. Ofiighte-
oua soul, tliat foremost of tnen, gifted with
great intelhgencei went on, with mmd
intent on itself. <

8—9 Than tile all «}se Satiadeva
dropped down on (he Earih Seeing him
drop down. Shima addreeeed the king,
saying,—' He who with great humhcy usra
fo aerve tia ail, afar, ivhy m tbar son ol
Madravali fallen down on the Earth 7 '

Yndhisbthira said

to. He never thought anybody *Ws
equal in wisdom. It is (or ilut sin that
piiiice has diopped down.

Vaisliampayaaa said

SI. Having said this, the king proceed-
ed, leaving Sahadeva there. Indeed,
Kunti’s son Yu'llnshthira went on, with.
Ins brothets and with the dog.

13 Seeing both Krtsfiria and the
Pandaya Sahadeva (alien down, the brave
Naltula, whose fove for Itinsineii was very
great, fell down htinseif.

13—14 Upon the fatting down of the
heroic NakiiU of great beauty, Bfnma
oncB more addressed the king, saying.—
‘Ifiis brother of oins who was gifird with
full righteousness and who always obeyed
our cotnioands, this Hakuta who was peer-
less for beauty, has fallen down !'

15 Ihus addressed by Bhimasena,
Y./dJinhth/ra sa/d. w/jh respect to N'akula,
thci* words — * Me was of nghreoue s» ol
snT tl e*fo(emust of all persons Lihed with
mtetheeiice.


3 :

16. He, however, thought that (here was
nobody who equalled him in personal
beauty. Indeed, he considered himself as
superior to all lit (hat matter.

- 17 Jt IS for this that NakuU has falieti
down Know Itiis, O Vrikodaiaf lliat,
O hero, wJiich’lias been ordained for a
person, must have to be borne by him.'

18 Seeing Nakuta and the ethf>rs fall
down Pondu’s son Arjiina of white horses,
that destroyer of hostile heroes, fell down
in great grief of heart,

19—30. When that foremost of men,
who was gifted wiili the energy of Sbakra,
had fallen down, indeed, when (bar in*
vincible hero was on the point of death,
Bhitna said to the king.—' 1 do not re-
collect any untruth uttered by (hi« great
one Indeed, not even m jest did he say
anything false. Wi>at then is that (or
wliiisa evil consequence this one has
dropped down on (lie Earth?'

Yttdhisbtbira saiti

31 . Arjuna had said that he would con« t
«nme' all our enemies in a single day. t
Proud of fix )>eroisin, he did not, liow« 1
ever, do what he had said. Hence has h« {
fallen down.

33. This Phalgnna disregarded all
wielders of bows. One desirous of pros*
periiy ahouid never entertain suob IbowgiiU,

Vawhaajpayana said

33 — 34 Having said so, the king went
on. Then Bhiina fell down, Havilhng
fetlen down, Bhima addressed king
Yudhishthira the just, saying— 'O king,
seel 1 who am your darling have fallen
down* Why have I dropped dowti ? fell
me if you know lU’ -v-

Tttdhislithira said t—

35 You were a great e^ter, and sou
used to boast of yonr strength. You
never did allend, O Parllvi, to the wants j
id others while eating, ]t M for (Ivai, O {
Ohima, that you have fallen duwn.

36 Having laid these words. Ih*
mighty-armed Yudhiihthira went on, with-
out looking back. Me (lad only one com-
panion. ere , the dog of which t have re-
peatedly spoken to you whKU loUoned Inra
trow-


4


MAHABIIAratA.


CHAPTER III.

(MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA.)—
Conclud4d,

Vaishampayana said

I. Causing the Heaven and tlie Earth to
be filled by a loud sound, (lien bhakra
came to the son of Prulia on a car and
asked tnm to ascend it.

' 2—^ Seeing brs broUiers fallen on the
Earth, king Yudliislitliira llie just said to
that deity of a thousand eyes tliese words.—

' My brothers have all drooped down here *
'1 hey must go with me Without them by
me I do not wish to go to the celestial
region, O lord of all the celestials,

4 1 he delicate princess (Draiipada) de*
serving of every comfort. O Purandara
sliobld go with us * You should permit tins '

Sliatra said *—

5 You shall behold )Qur brolhersin the
celestial region liiey have reached it
before }oq Indeed jou shall see all of
them there, with Krishna Do not give way
to grief O chief of tlie Bluratas '

'd Having renounced their human bodies
they have gone there, O chief of B larata's
race' As for you, it t$ (ordained (fiat you
shall go there in tins vtry body of yours.'

Tudhishthira said

7 This dog, O lord of the Past and the
Present, is Inglily devoted to me He should
go with me My heart is full of mercy
for him.

Sliakra said : —

8 You have acq iired to-day Immor-

tality and a status equal to mine. O king,
prosperity eixtending in all directions and
i igh success, anti all the felicities of heaven
Do >ou cast off this dog. la lh» there I
will be no cruelty. I

YudhisSthira said I

9 O >ou of a thousand eyes, O you,
who are of rigliteous conduct, iC is extremely
difhculi for one that is of righteous conduct
to perpetrate an act which is uurigliteous
I do not wish that union with prosperity
for whicli I shall have to cast off one that
IS devoted to me.

India said:— ■

10 Ihere is no place in the celestial

region for persons with tlogs Besides tlie
Krndiiavashas lake away all the merits of
siic>< persons 1 liinlri ii> of this, act, O k ng
Yndtmliih ra the j.isi I Do you ab4i>d,.n
this a- ' 1 l»rre IS I. 1 rj .rt,/ III this *


I Tudliishthira said:—

II. It lias been said tliat llie abandon^
ment of one that is devoted is sinful beyond
measure 'It is equal to the sin of Brahmiiu>
ctde. Hence, O great Indra, I shall not
cast off this dog to-day from desire of tny
happiness

12 This IS my vow, vts , that I never
give up a person that is terrified, nor
one thftt IS devoted to me, nor one that
seeks my help, saying, that he is des-
titute, nor one that is afflicted, nor one
that has come to me, nor one that is weak
in protecting oneself, nor one that begs for
life I shall never give up such a one till
my own life goes away.

Indra said —

13 Wfialever gifts, or sacrifTces spread
out, or libations poured on the sacred fire,
are seen by a dog, are taken away by the
Krodhavashas, Do you, therefore, re-
nounce this dog. By Irenouncing this dog
you \ ill acquire the region of th»
celestial.

14 Having abandoned your brothers
and Krishna, you have, O hero, acquired a
region of happiness by your own deeds.
Why are you so- stupefied ? You have
renounced everything Why then do yoa
not renounce this dog t ‘

Yudliisbthira said:—

15 Ifiis IS well known in all the worlds
that there is neither friendship nor eiunity
wnli the dead When my brothers and
Krishna died, I was unable to revive them.
Hence it was that I renounced them I did
not lioiAever, renounce them as long as
they were alive.

16 To frighten orie tliat I as soug'it
protection the killing of a woman, ihe
tlieft of what belongs to a BrahniAiia, and
injuring a friend each of these four, O
Sfiakra IS, I think eq lal to the abandon*
(nent of one that is devoted.

Vaiabampayaua said —

17 Hearing these words of king
YudUishtInra ttie just, (the dog became
transformed into) the deny of Virtue, who
well pleased, said words to hint m a sweet
voice fraught with praise.

Dharma said • — 1

l8. You are well born, O f mg of kings,
and endued w th the- i itel!i,.ei'CB and It e
good cunduct of I’jiwf,! ' You tiavc igeri y
fur all cren'u r< C> Bliarata, of ithikUtlii
I* n brl^lit tx. mpk I


MAIIAPRASTIIANIKA PARVA.


>9 ^'ormerly, O son, jou \ver» once
Examined by me jn ibe (crest ol Dwaila#
where jour brothers of preat process met
With (an appearance of) death.

ao Disrepardmp both jottr brothers
^5htma and Arjima, ^on did wish (or Ui<
Tevivaf of Naktda (rotn yoor desire of
'doing good to jour (step) mother.

21, On the present occasion, thinking
the dog to he devoted to jou, you have
renounced the very car of the celestials
instead of renouncing him. Hence, O king,
there is no one m Heaven that is equal
to JOU.

S2. Hence, O Gharata, regions ol 1n>
exhausiible Imppiness are joiirsT You have
■acquired lliem, O chief o! ihe nharatas,
and yours is & celestial and high end.

Vaiahampayana said •—

33—34. then Dharma and Sliakra, and
the Maruts, and tlie Ashwins and other
deities and the celestial Rishit, cansing
Vudhishthira to ascend on a car, went to
the celestnt region lliesebemgs crowned
svnh success and capable of going every*
where at wiK, rode their respective cars.

35 King Vudhishthira, itiat perpetoater
of Kuru's race, riding on that car, ascended
tjuicldy, canting the ■entire sky to blaze
With his effulgence

26—37 Then Sarada, that foremost of
all speakers, gilted with penances, and con.
Versant with all the worlds, from amidst
that concourse of celestials, said these
words —‘All those royal sages wlie are here
have their achievements tranrcended by
hose of Yiidl'iiluhira.

28 Coveririg all (he worlds by his fame
end splendour and by his wealth of conduce,


he has attained to the Celestial region u*
his own (human) body] None rise iImi
the son of Paiidu has been heard to acluevs
this *

zg— 30 Hearing these wbrds of Narada,
'the righteous'souled king saluting the
cefestrats and alJ the roy^tl sages tliere
present, said,— ' Happy or miserable, ivhat*
ever Ihe rejtion be that is now (my brother#,

1 wish 10 proceed to, 1 do not wish to go
anywhere else ’

31—32. Hearing this speech of the king,
the chief of the celestials, Piirandura, said
these words pregnant with noble meaning,—
'Doyoa live in this place, O king of kings,
which you have acquired by your men*
torious deeds 1 Why do you still cherish
human affections t

33 Yoa have acquired great succes#,
the like ol which no other man has ever
been able to attain Your brothers, Q
dehghier ol the Kurus, have fuceeded m
acquiring happy regions.

34 Human affecltons still touch you,
Tins IS Heaven. See these celestial Kialiik
and Siddhas who have attained (0 the re*
gion of the gods.*

35—36 Endued with great Intelligencer
Vudhishthira answered the king of ‘the
denies once more, saying,— '0 conqueror of
Oaiiyas, 1 venture nocm live anywhere,
separated from ilieml I wish to go there
where my broth*rs have gone 1

37. 1 wish to go lliere where that fore,
most ol women, Draupadi, of ample pro*
portions and darkish complexion and gified
with great intelligence and righteousness of
conduct, has gone I'


T-INIS ■ifjAIJAVRA^HAfflKA TAKYa.


A t»ROSE LfidLlSll TRA^^SLATIO^^


OP

THE MAHABHARATA.

tT^lANSLATnO LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT )

— — . .» 11.1.-- — -


vSWA. 3 ^aAK 03 EIAlSriK:A.

VOL. XVUL


tDiTCO A rCBtisnco *ir

MAHMATHi NATn DUTT, rSi^s/n) U.A,1IR,A3.
Rcgtor, Krsiluo Academy

Aufhor of the English Translation of the Rama^ava, Vtshnu-Paranxt-,
SnmaiUDhaga^alain, Kamandaitja NUisara, Dha^ava l-Gita,
and many other storks,

40, Nay an Chand JJutTs Street, CaUulta,


CALCUTTA

rRlVTtt) ET H. C. Dass, EfctSJCU PrSsj,
40, Ssfin Ooni DAiti S*Tt<{,


■4it '^fsnsersed}


1903 .


e WARG-AEOHAJSr TTT A paeva.


TABLE OP


oojjtents,


CiUPTCR I —Arrived at Heaven, kmg
Yudhiehiliira sees Dur>odhana biaemg witli
eflufgence and seated on an excellent
seal— Dialogue between Yudhistitbira and
Narada— p i.

CiisPTER H — Yudhishtliira's solichude
for Ins brothers and Uinsmen and itie
P/tneejs of Pancbala— p. a
CiiAPTElt ill — llieadvent of the denies,
and their adulation of the conduct of
Vudfiishtinra— Yudhisfilliira plunges in tlie
celestial Ganga and assumes a celestial
body— Yudhistitliira proceeds, m company
with the deities, to share witli Ins brothers
and t,insmen the region which they have
acquired for themselves — p. 4.

CitAVTEit IV — Yudtiishthirasees Govinda
m his effulgent Gfalima*form as also
all Ins Iroihers and relsiians— the Princess
of PaiKliala and her sons, liis own father
and mothers— grsndsire and preceptor,
uncle and grandsons— the Vrishm and
Andhaka heroes— p. 5


^UPTER V — Janamejaya's query re*
lV the period Jihe heroes of Kuni*
ksfiet^a would remain m the celestial re*
51®**"— Vaishampayana’s reply— Termina*
■ion Janame]aya's Snake'Sacriliee— His
returi, from takshashita to his capital after
dismissed the sacrificial priests with
profUjg gilw— The merits of the Maha*
bh8r^,j_qj,g Savittri of »lhs Mahabha*
d.


^"arTEft VJ — janamejaya’s query as
< • ® ordinances relating to the manner
''*tening to a recitation of the Uharata
fruits It yields- yaish4ropa>aiia's


*


Tins MA.’aABI-rARA'TA.

(I» EHOLlSH.)

SWAildAROliANlKA PARVA.


CHAPTEIt I.


ilaving Narayana &ai %lara the

best sf fiiale beiKgs as oho Saraswati
the CodJess of LeorMng let us cry
success.

JahattiEjaya said

C. HAving atCRifted to H«Ave<i. what re*
fiion« w«re re»beclively alcaineJ by my
^randsiresof old vfs , tiie Pattdavat. and
the sons o( Dlintaraslitrat
g I wis)i to hear this, t thiok that Vo>i
icfiovr every(li<ft{;, havinj' b««'t taiii;ht by the
(treat Rishi Vyasa of Wonderful feats.

Vaiahaaipayaiia said t~

3 1 isten now to what your jtrandsirrs,

Yudhis)itt»ra and others, did after liavioit
att-iined (o Heaven, (hat p)aee of the
denies ^

4 Athved at Ifraven, kfig Yudlush*
tliira the ]ust saw Uuryadhana gifted with
{jroipenty and seated on an eacelUnt seat.

15 He Was eftiilRent like (he sUu and
woie all the _s'g*is U{ heroic glory And
he was in tie company of inJny celestials
of blaiing eftnlgence and of SadhyaS of
righteous deeds

6 Yndl tshthira, seeing Diirjoltiana and
his pr<Sperify jheesme suddenly overpowered
with anger and turned back from the Sight
7. He toUdly addressed 1 is companions
Saying,— I do not wish to share regions oi
bliss with Dnryodhana who was stained by
Cijpidily and possessed of little foresight

8 Et was for him that friends, kinsmen,
over the whole E-itlh destroyed by ns Were
Whom he had greatly sfTlicted in the deep
forest

9 It was for him that the yirlnoiis
princess of P,<nchala, Dranpadi of favlilrss
lealures, oor wife was dragged snlo the
tnidit at Che cci«rC«rs betare oW our elders

to. Ye gods I have no wish to even see
Siiyo^Jiaua' I wish to go there where my
brothers ar^.’


If. Marada, srrtifing, told
should 2 not be ,so O king of kings' trt
Heaven, all entnities cease,
si. O mighty.armed Vudhishthira, da
not say so about king Doryodhana, Hear
my words.

t$ Here Is Dur^odhens He fg
adored with the celestials by those ngtiteous .
men and those foremost of kings, who are
now dwellers of Heaven.

14 By causing his body to bs poureef
as a hbeiion on the fire of battle, he ha*
obtained the end which consist* in attain*
ment o( the region for heroes You and
your brothers, who were veritable gods ort
Farth, were always persecuted by tins one.

(5 Vet through his observance e{
Kshalriya prsciices he has acquired thie
region, fins king was not terrified m ts
dreadful situation,

16 O son, you should net bear In fnmd
the woes inflicted on you on account oF the
match at dice Yon should not rerwem..
ber the sufleriiigs of Draupsdi.

17. You should not remember the olhec
miseries which you suffered for the deeds
of your kinsmen, — the miseries, site , that
were due to battle oFto other sitiialions,
iff— ad Do^voil meet Durvodhana rwfli
politely. 11 ns IS Heaven O king l Ihere
can be ho enmiiies here 1‘— Though thus '
addressed by Narada, the ' Kuru king
Yudhishtliua, gifted with great inlelligenc*,
enquired about his brothers and said
Itese eternal regions reserved for heroes be
Ouryodhana's that iinrighteaus and sinful
[ wretch, liiat ii>„n who was the destroyer of
I friends and of the whole world that mart

'for whose sake the entire Earth was devas* 1

' taCed with all her horses and elrphanis end
iiumait beings, that man for ivhose ^ake
we were burnt with anger fn tf inking of
how best we might remedy our wroin.s, |
wish to see what regions have been attained
by those great heroes, tny brothers of high


(iN ENGLISH.)
SWAilGAROHXNIKA PAilVA*


’laving iahtiei alio Saraftoalt

best of male us trf

the Godless of LearMng. «»
success,

Jahamejaya „k,i,e.

1 . Having -named by my

g,OM ««'®, ^ll,e Partdavaj. and

brandsiftso! o\i »»»•;",


VaiBEartpa, ana said;

3 Lnien now i l,avmi{

<■'■“ - "■•

denies ,, ^s,_ YudUnU

wo>e tbe _s ^. ,t manv cele*tial»

■jsr.::.^nsr.'''s:ri. w. .1


Wilt) ani}«'^ ‘ ,, -ompanienS'

, Hslddl'J'”'''!'"’''', ’,"”b.»..

™i ,..i...jb,
W,,, ...I, „r link

cip.ilny "'1 P . (,.c..d.. U.rtbbf'’.

8 I, «.< ky

;:ld gJU.Iy "’ lb' ‘'“P

•o^est. . viitiious

g It was ntaupadi «*

b.i... .a «“ ■I'l''*

° ‘ .. ^ n,a»e no wisb lo even lee

S-i'^c.llW KO ibere wWee my

lIoH sr» »‘e^'


chapter I. hml-'tt

,w dwelhn d

"1 b”"a^

a, • ''’’■"X wbith csnsi.l. o

obtained the eno Vi.m.* You and

ES?p^rSi;:£r^'

recion »his amK
drtadJo! »itualion.

S:.r« is Vo, .HooM 00 . rokom.

bcfthesufiennRsof Draupadi.

„ You should not remember the other
doe to battle 0^10 Other situations.


. 0 _iiS no soil meet Diirjodhana i.- .
onlsielv Ihis IS Heaven. O king • Then#

be no enm.ues here!’— niough thus

radres^d by Narad,, ih- Koru kmg

YodU.stmua.eif'rd »‘'b great mielligenc-.
eoqsnred about his broUiers and »

It weterriat regions reserved for heroes be

Ouryolhana’a. that imrigliteeus and snfjl

wretch, that m-n who was the destroyer <t
(fsends and ol t> e whole world, that man

for whose sake the mure Earth aasd-vas-

Uted with ail h-r t ors-s and e>p* ans and
I uman beings, that man hr « *s- rat*
w« were burnt with aog'f n li maj ? «
how best we might rem-dy o ir »T<?r..s. 1
wish to see what re<»ons have b»en atia s-d
by lliose great heroes, my brotb^ cf I gb


mahaIharAtA


Vows, steady acliievers of promises, (rutli>
Tui 111 speed), and disiiogui^lied for courage.
Ike great Kama, the son of Kuntt, in-
capable of being bafffed in bailie, Dliri&bta-
dyumna, Satyalir, tlib sons of DlirYsbia-
dyumna and those other Kshattiyas who
tnel with death fn the observance of
Kshain^a duties, where are those ffmgs,
O Brahmana? 1 do not see them here,
p Narada' I wish to see, O Narada,
Virala and Drupada and the other great
ICshairiyas headed by Dhrislitaketu, as also
Shihhaiidin, the Panchafa prince, the sons
of Draiipadi, and Abhtitianyb, ,irresislible
In battle.*


CHAPTER ll.

tSWAUGAROHANlUA PARVA.l— I

ConiitiHiJ,

Tudhishthira said

l—a 'YedeUies, I do not see he^e
Uadha's son of incomparable prowess, as
aUo my larRe'liearitid brothers, and Yudlia- ,
manyti and Ultamaujas, those g'^at ear-war- |
ttors who poured their bodies (as hbatfons)
on the fire battle, these kincS aild princes
who i^et with death for my sake m battle.

3. Where are those grbat ear-warrIorS j
who possessed oi the prowess o! tigers?
Have tlioSe foremost of melt gamed lliU
region?

4. If those great car-warriors havb ob- '
lamed these regions, then only do you

1 now, O gods, that i shall live heie with
those great ones.

5. If this auspicious and efernsf regloH
has not been gamed by those kings, then,
know, O gods, that witliout ihoSe brothers
and kinsmen of mine, I shall Pot hee here.

6. At the time of teleUratihg the t(ate6
ittes (after lf>e baiife), 1 heard iny mother
say,— Do sou ofier oblations of water to
Kama I I'loni the time of liearnig lliose
voids of biy mother, 1 am burning with
grtel.

7—8. 1 gfiCeC afso Contmiialfy at this.
O gods, that when I inacked ttie tesem-
b'aiice between (lie feel of my mother and
llioy of Kama of i Igh soul, I did not hit-
ineoiairiy place m|scM under the ofdeis of
that dt-stcoyer of iiovlile ranks! Ourselsr^
joined witti Kama, Shakta tnmseh would
luxe been unable to defeat m battle.

g. Wheievcr may that child of the Sun
be. I Wish (0 see him. Alas, not knowing his
teUtKMiship with-us, 1 caused lum to be i
VU*ed by Aijunar. ]


to— ti. Bhima also of dreadful prowesl
and dearer to me than iny life. Aijnia
loo, resenibhng Indra himself, the Iwmi
also who resembled the Destroyer liimself
HI prowess, 1 vvish to see' I (vish m see
the princess of Panchala, of good conducts
1 wiiii not, to iiay hbre. I tell ]ou (h^
iruth.

13 O foremost of the deities, iVha\ Ti
Ileavei) to me if I am Separated from niy
brothers? lhat is Heaven where those
brotliers of nuiie are. Ihis, ft my opinioii,
is hot Heavetf,'

t 1 i 6 deities Said:—

jj ‘If you wish to be there, go tlieri,
O son, fortliwitli. At the cominand of ihe
l<in(« of ihe celestials, We arc ieSdy to dd
what you like.'

Vaishatcipayaiia said 5—

14 — 15 Having said so, the ceiestiali
then ordered the celestial messenger, O
desHoyerof enemies, say ing— ‘Do >00 slionlr
to Yudfiisfithira hii iilends and kins-
men’— -Ihan tiie royal son of KuiUi and iti 4
celestial nfesseliget went together, O fore-
most of kings, to that plaKe vrhete these
chiefs of rtKU wire.

lO 'the celestial messenger \Veiit first,
followed b/ the king, the path was difll-
cull and trodden by men of sinful deeds.

ty— 18 It i 4 as covered With thick dark-
ness, and covered with hair and moss form-
thg Its grassy Vesture Polluted with tlie
smell of sinners, and miry with flevh and
blood, it was filled with gad flies and sting-
ing beCs and gnats and was endangered
by tho Inroads of grisly bedrj. livttin^
cor()$es lay here and thetc.

tg Overspread wttlv (sones and {lair, ii
was notscsome wiih worms and insects. U
was bounded all along vfiih a burning fire.

Jo. it was infested by crows find other
birds and ♦UUures.'all liavmg beaks of iron,
as aVsP W spnvts 'reitVi long motfiVfS
pointed hke needles. And il Was fitled
wuh^inaccessible fastnesS'es like (he Vindliys
inouauhi^.

di. fiurrfan corpses were Scafterrd oier
ti. sfnesred with fat and blood, witli arms
and tlifghg cut ufl, or with enuaflf tofu out
and leg* sesefW.

2t. Alang that path so disagreeable with
lhes(en£hol CorpsCsan'd awful w'lih c^l>of
incidents, the «>ghteous.>oU*e>l king went
filled with Variota ihoogh's. ,

aj. He saw a neet lull of bo>Iif»g wa'ier
and, tbrfefore, dif^cult to cross, asatio d
lotttX fit tftex wliose fcaycs Werp
atkords awd lanrr.


SWARGARO»AMlK;i PARVA.


3


Tficre were plain* full ol fine white
Sanj litxhly lieated, and rochs and stones
Wade o( iron, lliere were many )ars oi
Uorii all around, with-bovling oil in them*

25. Many a Kuta*slialmatika was there,
wiili sharp thorns, and therefore, greatly
painful to the touch I he son of Kunti
saw also (be loriures inflicted upon sinful
aiea.

26. Seeing that uiauspiciQiis region full
of every sort of foulness, Yudhishthira
asked the celestial tne's-nger, saying,—*
‘How far sltall we go along a path liKe
Hus T

27. You should tell me where those
brothers-^ mine are, I wish also to know
wliat re^on is this of the celestials,*

2S Hearing these words of king Yu-
dtnshihira theljust, the celestial messenger
Stopped tn hi$ ciurse and replied, saying,—

* 1 iiLia far IS your way,

aStr Tlie dwellers of tho eelestiat region
ordered me that liaviug come thus far, (
srn to stop I U you are tired, O king of
kings, you may return with nje *

3a Vudhishtfure, however, was sorely |
disconsolate and stupefied by the foul
•tench Kesolved to return, O Etiarau, lie
retraced Ins steps,,

Stricken with sorrow and grief, the
tigiiteous sou(ed king turned back Direct*
iy (hen he heard piieu is cries all around.

32. 'Oaon ol Dharms, O royal sage,
O you ol holy buth, U son of Pandu, do
you stay a inoineiit lor (avouiing t,s,

33 At yow approacli, O invincible one,
a (leligfiUuI breeze has begun (o blow,
bearing, ihe sweet Sinell of your body. We
have been gteaily relieved at this.

34 O foremost of kings, seemg you,
O ntsl ol men, we have been highly pleased
O son of Pntlia, let that liappiuess last

"longer (hroiigh your slay here (or « lew
moments mate.

35 Do you remitn here, O Bharala,
lot even 1 short tune I As long as >o« are
hete. O)ouo( Kurus race, tortures cease
to sfH ct us '

36 I he king heard there these end
m-niy similar words, citeted pueously by
persons m distress, reacliuig his ears from
all sides.

37 Hearing those words of beings in
distress. Vodluihthira ol compasiwnaie
liearl exclaimed aloud Alas, liow pam
full' and the king atuod sliU.

jCt 'Ihe words ol ihixe woe-begone and
afTi^ted arsons seemed to the son ol
Vandu to be uiteitd in voices that F e h^d


beard before although he could nof, Ihcp,
recognise them.

351. Unable to recognise the voices,
Dharma’s son, Yudhishthira, enquired,
saying,—' Who are yoaT VYliy also da
you stay here T'

40 Thus addressed they answered him
rrom all sides, saying,— f am ICarna
' t am Uhimasena 1 '—* I am Arjuna f*

41 . ‘ I am Nakula’— ‘ I- am Sahadeva>i’
— * I am Diinshtadyumna 1 '— ‘ I am Drau-
pad|l'— 'We are tlie sons of Draupadil'
—thus O king, did those voices speak.

42 Heariog (hose cnest O king, uttered
rn voices ol pain suitable to (hat place (he
royal Yudluslithira asked luniseK— *' What
perverse destiny is this?'

43—44. What are those sinful deeds
which were committed by those great beings.
«ia t Kama and the sons of Praupadi and
the slender-ivaijted princess oi Pianchalt,
$0 that they have been compelled to live m
this region of feeud smell and great di^>
tress, f am not aware of any sin that ca;i
be attributed to these persons of auspicious
deed*

45 What IS that deed by doing
Di ritarashtra's son, king Suyodhana, with
all his sinful followers, has acquired suen
prosperity ? ,

46. Gifted With prosperky tike (hat of
the great Indra himself, he it revereniU
worshipped. What is lhat deed for which
these (high souled onesl have fallen into
HellT

47. AH of (hem knew duly, were heroes,
wcie devoted lo (ruth and (he Vedas r «vere
observant of Kshainva practices , were
rigl teoiis 10 their deeds , were performers ol
saciifices , and givers, of Urge presents tp
Biahtoanas.

49 Am i asleep or Awake ? Ami enn*
scKHts or uncnnscioiis 7 Or. is all this an
aberration of the tnleUectl'


49> Overwhelmed by sorrow and grief,
and with hiS senses rufTl'd by anxiety, kj.u;
Yudhishthira mdutged 111 such thou^s for
a tong lime, >


Srw The ro^alsonoF Dharmi was, then
filled with riuhleous mdixalio Indeed,
Yudhishthira then censured the cefesliaUas
also Unartna himsrlf.


I smell,

l« addressed !),« celestial messenger
'^mg— Return to the presence ol ihaie
wiiose messenger jou are.


5* Tell them that j jj^jj
to where Kiev » .1 n


not reliirq


'4


MAHABHARaTA.


here, since, on account of my caiTipani«n>
ship, these nfflicted brotliera of mine l>ave
become comforied '

53 Thus addressed by the intelligent
son of Pandu, the celestial mcssen|>er
returned to the place where tlie king of the
celestuU was, vts , he of a hundred sacri*
fice^.

54. He represented to him the acts of
Vudhishihira fndeed, O king, he inform
ed Indra of all that Ohattna's son had
said.


CHAPTER IH.

XSWARGAROHANfKA PARVA.)—
Continued,

(Vaishampayana said:—

I. King Yudhishlhira the just, the son
of Pritha, had not waited tlieie /or more
Ilian a moment when, O sou of Kuru’s
race, all tlie celestials headed by fndta
came there

3. Ihe God off Righteousness, In his
embodied form, also came to that pUce
where the Kucu king was for seeing that
monarch.

3 Upon the coming of those celestials
of respIViideiit bodies and sanctified and
noble deeds the darkness (hat fud covered
that region immediately disappeared

4~-5> Ihe tortures undergone by
beings of sinful deeds were no longer seen.
The. river Vauarani, the thorny bti^lmali,
the iron jars, and the boulders of rock, so
terrible to look at, aUo vanished from s*ghi
Tfie vafious repulsive corpses also, which
the Kuru king had seen, duappeared at
the same time,

6. Tlien a breeze, delicious and fraught
svith pleasant smell, pciectly pure, and
delightfully cool, O Qliaiaia, began to
blow on that spot au acoountof the pre*
sence of (he celestials.

7— -8 The Maruts, with Iridra, the
Va.us with the twin Ashwiiis, tlie badhyas.
the Kudras, the Adilyas, and |l>e other
dweller\ ol Heaven, as also the biddhas.
and the great Kislns, all came tnere where
DIurma > royal son of great energy was.

9—10 Iheii Shakra, the lord of the
crlestials, gifted with blazng proHieiiiy,
tiddressed Yiidliisliltiua and consoling him,
said,— 'O Yudlmhiliiia ol mighly arms,
soine. come. U king ' these illusions have
ended, U poweitul cue.

V'kU have acquired sucCrss O
ux^htyatiuid one. and iiavc atlamcd to


eternal happy regions You shoidd '’Of chre
way to anger Listen to these words of iniive>
la Hell, O son, should, forsootli be
seen by every king. 1 here is enough of
goud and bad, O king,

13 He who enjoys first the frnils of his
good deeds must afierwarits suffer Hell.
He, on the (other hand, who first endures
Hell, roust aSierwards enjoy Ihe celestial
region.


14 He whose sinful deeds are many,
enjoys the, celestial region first, ft

this, O king, tfiat desirous of doing you
good, ! caused you to be sent for having a
view of Hell. i

15 You had by a pretence, deceived
Drona about his son You have, therefore,
beensliown Hell by an act of deception.

16 L'ke yourself, Bhmia and Arjuna
and Draup>,di, have all been sliowii the
place of sinners by an act of deception.

17 Come, O king, all of them liawr
been purged of (heir sms

18 All those kings who had sided you
and who have been killed in battle, have
all acquired the celestial region CotA®

see (hero, O foremost one of Bharata’'s race,
19. Kama, the powerftil bowman, that
foremost of all wielders el weapons for
whom you are grieving, has also acquired
high success,

SO See, O powerful one, that loitraost
of men. tis , tlie sun of the bun He is in
(hat place which is Ins own, O migldy*
armed one Kill this grief of yours, Q
king.

31. Look at your “brother, and olhers,
those kings, that is, who had taken your
side, they have all attained tu iheirtespec,

live places Let the fever of your heart be

rctiioved


33 Having suffered a liitfe misery first,
from this tune, O son of Kuril's race, do
you sjiort with me in happiness, sliorii of
grief and all aihnents,

33, O mighty-armed one, do you now
ci>|oy, U king, tlie rewards of all your
Viituou* deeds, of lliose regions wIikIi you
have acquired yourself by ^yout penances,
and of all your gilts.

34. Let celestial* Snd Gandharvas, and
eclestui Apsarss, dressed la pure robes and
beautiful ornaments, watt upon and serve
you for yuur happiness. ^


*S Do you, O imzhty-arrned orie, enjoy
now those t>appy rations wl.ich yn" h-.e
acquired thriugh tie lUjasuya-baV'***®
peilurmed by you and wl iwe l,luil*e» i

been mcreastil by the S4 Cii(h.i^ senurtar


WaRCAROHANJKA parva


$


tmpIo^eJ by you May you enjoy the
gctai Iruit i)f ysur penances.

26 Vour re|>ions, O Yudhuhthira, are
above, (ar above, those ol kings. Tliey
are equal to ihose <>( Harishchandra, O son
of P/iiiia Ccmc.iand sport titers m bJtss f
2j Sharing the bhssfnl region acquired
by the royal sage Maiidhatrt, king Bhagi>
raiha, Dushmanta's son Bbarau, you Wilt
sport there in bliss.

28 Here >s ihs celestial river, sacred
\ and saiilifyinif the three worlds, li ts called
! Celestial Gangs Plunging into it, you will

go to your own regions.

29 Having bathed in this river, you will

I be divested of your huinati nature. Indeed. |
your grief dispelled, your ailments conquer*
ed, you wUl be heed from all enmities '
30—31. WJule, O Kuruking. the duel ol
the celestials was saying so to Vudhishtlura.
the god q( Righteousness, in tii$ embodied
form, then addressed Ins own son and said,—

* G king, 1 am highly pleased, O you ol
great wisdom, with you, O son, by your
devotion to me, by your (ruthfulness of
speech, and forgiveness, and self control.

32 Ihis, indeed, is the ihiid lest, O
king, to which 1 pul you Yuu are ineap*
able, U sun of Pritha. of being swerved
fruiu your nature or reason.

-33 Before this, 1 had examined you »•>
the OwaiCA forest by my questions, when
ytu had come to that lake for reeovenng
a couple of fire-slicKs You stood it well.

34 Assuming the sliape ol a dog. 1
ex^siiTi'ied yon once more, O son when your
brothers with UraupaJi had fallen down.

33 This has been your third lest, you
have expressed your wish to Stay at ItcH
for ihe Sake ol your btMhcrs You have
become cleansed, O highly blessed One.
Punficd of SKI, be you happy.

36 O sen of Prilha, your brothers. O
fii»g, were not such as to deserve fjelJ All
this has been «n illusion created by tlx king
of the celesiiats

37 Forsooih, all kings. O son, most
Oiue see Hell. Hence have you for a liitle
while been subjected (o this great »urrow.

3^ O king, neitlicr Aijnna, nor Bhim-i,
nor any of (Wse foreirtosi of men. Via , She
twins, nor Kama, ever thruihfu) in speech
and endued with great cou*>i^e. cook] be
deserving of lUlt for a long (nnc.

39. 1 1 e piincess Istishna too, O Vwdhi*

ifnra, Could not be deseivmi; of that place
ol sinners. Cvme. con'f. b> foremost of if e
Ul^y^lss see Gaiiga, wl'O >}Ncads Icr
cumnt a!tt *l e ihuc waiUs.'


40 1 bus addressed, the rny^l sage tie,

your graivJsire proceeded with GnaiiuA
and all the other celestials.

41. Having bathed in the celestial river
Ganga, sacred and purifying and ever wof> •
slnpped by (fie ffisfiis, fie renounced Ins j
Itucnan body,

42 Assuming then a celestial form, king j
Vudlxsliihira the just. <ni account ofthatf
bath, became divested of all Ins enmities^
and grief.

43. Surrounded fry the cefesl/sir, the
Kurit king Vudlnshtlnra then went away
from that place He was accompanied by
Dliarma, and the great Rishis uttered his
praises,

44. Indeed, he reached that place wierc
tliose fnremost of men those heroes. v>* ,
•he Pandavas and the Dliartarashiras (reed
from (humanj wratli. were ^enjoying each
his respeCdve position.

! CHAPTER IV.

(SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA >—

Vaisbampayana

I. King Vudhiiliihira, thus honored by
(he celestials, the Maruts and (he llnhis,
went4<> that place where (hose foremost ones
oi ICuru'siace were.

9 He saw Covinda gifted with his
Brahma Sofin ft took after that farm of
las which had been seen before and which,
(herefure, helped the lecagintiCMr

3 Shining »n |1>al form of hw he was
adorned with ce)ests«l weapons such as the
dreadful and discus and others m their
respective embodied forms.

4 He was benig worshipped by thg
heroic Pnalguna, who also was gdted with
a biasing effulgence llx son of Kind
saw (he destroyer of Madhu ui also tns
own form.

5 riiose two foremost ol Bernes wor.
sluppedbya’I the crSesiuls, sce>»g Vu Jtnsli*
Ihira, received him wiili proper fiononrs

6 In anoUier place, the dehghier of ih*
Kurus saw ICariia, ii.ai foremost one
among alt tiolders o( weapons, (oeiiibhiig
a dtaeji bu»> in spJtndoo/.

7. In another [Will lie saw Bhimssena ol
great power, siitmg in tl e mnisi of Marutt.
and gilted with a tilaimg (oiin.

8 He war tilting by Side of (he* g<vd
of wind in his erntn^wj Iona tndrr I le
«ai tfeu ui a cefestuf Ijiiu gdicJ with


i«A»iAmuhAtA.


\CVislina, a mifltno sTns, iiu't^benni; such
};rdve oiie< ns Bi’^timaiuci<?e And the rest,
are wAsht d ollf.

4 l* The de^ar'ted rhanes of ihAt man
Who recites even a snl-ill poriieit oF this
tiisiory at A Shidddha, oh\aIii iiiekhadstibte
food/ind drink.

42 sins th^t one comTfiits during
\1ie day by one’s senses or the mind tfe all
Washed before evening by redtirt^ *
portion of the MahabhafAta. *'

43 Whatever $ins a Qrahrdana rrtay
tonirbit at nigfit tn the idid^t of Women,
are all washed nfl before da»n by reCiting
a portion oF the Mahabhatata*

^4. Ihb great rate df the Bharaus
is Its topic. Hence it is called Bharata
And because of its grave meaning as also
of the BliarataS being its topic, It is Called
Mahabliarata.

45 He who IS Versed in Interpretations
dt till* great work becoibes purged of every
sin Such a man lives tn virtue, profit and
pleasure, and ac^ nres Liberation also, O
Chief of Bliarata's race.

46. I hat Which Is in this Is etseWliete,
1 liat Which does not ocCUr here occurs no*
Where else Ihis history is known by the
hame of J«)a. It should be heard by
eVety one desirous of Liberation.

471 It should be read by Brahmattas,
Kiligs. and b) women big with children.
He who desires Fleaven attains to fioaven |
end he who desires victory achieves it.

48, The woman big With child gets eitheh
e son or a daughter highly blessed« Ihe
powerful Islatid'borii Krishna, wlio will not
have to come back, and who ts Liberation
incarnate, made an abstract of the Bharata,
moved by the desire of fielping the cause
of virtue.

49. He made another compifatiort con. I

sistii^ of sixty Uktis of verses. j

50 Ihirly lakhs of these were placed 1«
the region df the celestials In the region
of the Purls, nfieeit lakhs, u should be
kixmn are current ; wlule in that of the
Vakshas fourteen iakhs are cotretrt.

51 — 52. One lakh IS current among
hum >n beings. Nsrada reciied the Maha>
hharaia to the gods] AsiCa>Oevafa to Ihe
Pni«, Shuka to 0 « Uakshasas and the
Yaksliasisnd Vaishampayaiia to Immaii
beings this history is sacred, and of deep
Significance, and considered as equal to the
Vedas.

53. That man, O Shaunaka, who hears
this lii^iety, placing a Urahmana before hint,
acquires both fame and the fruition ofaJf his
desires.


5 i~" 5 S W** 'Vh')-, with fervid devntiodj

listens to A recitation of the Alaliabharata,
attains (hereafter) to great sdccess on ac-
cowot of the rrterii that becomes hi4 ihrough
understanding evert a very small part there-
of. Afl the sirts of that irtan wlio recites or
listens to this Insbry with deVotion are
wished oft

56 Formerly, the grell Bishi Vjasa,
liaving composed this ivork, caused Ins
Son Shiika to read it With him, aldiig with
these blr verses.

57. thousands 0! Mothers, and fathers,
and liUndreds of sons and Wives arise m the
world and depart from It. Others will arise’
and siirtiUriy gdflway,

53 There Are thdiiSands of occasions for
|oy and hundreds of occasions for fear,

' These affrct orfly him whO IS ignorant but
I hever him that is wise.

I 50 With uplifted arrts I ms crying
aloud but nobody hears me From Virtue?
originate Frofit and Fleasure \yiiy should’
not Virtue, therefore, be sought 1

do For Ihe sake nkuher of pleastlre, nor i
of fear, nor of cupidity Should any one re-
bounce Virlne. Indeed, for the Sake of evert
life, one should not renounce Virtue. Virtue
Is elehial Pleasure and Pain are not
eternal jiva 1$ eternal. The cause, how- ^
ever, of Jiva’s being covered with 1 body
I u wot to. ,

I 61. Ihdtrrtanwho, rising early in thd
morning, reads this Savitin of the Bharata,
acquires all the rewards attached to a recita-
tion ol this history and Uiiimaiely attains tO
the highest Brahma.

61. As the Sacred Ocearl, as the flimS-
vat mountain, are both ennsi fered as nimeS
ol precious gents, so is this Qiiarata.

63 The learned man, by reciting Id
others this Veda of Agama composed by
(the Island-born) Krishna, acquires wealth.
IViwe. v» via dawWt. x»v itivt iliai. tie who, will*
rapt attention, recites (his hiSlory called
Otiarata, acquires great success.

64 What need has that rnart of n sprink-
ling of the waters ol PnsUkara who alten-
lively listens to this Oharaia, wliile it it
recited to liimT It represents the nectir lhat
dropped from the bps of t!>e liUail bncJ,

It IS immeasurable, sacred, sanctifying, ski*
Heansing, and auspicious.


S\VAIICAR 0 «AN!KA parva.


CHAPTER VL

(SWARGAROHANHCA PARVA.)

Cmtiiiutii,

.Janamejaya. «aid:—

l. O holy one, acCortJinR <i» what

ithoiilJ the learned li«len to ihe IJharalat
\Vl»ai are the (mt*T Wi>at are to

be adored during (lie several Paranar ?

3. Wlial should be the grfts that one
should inako, O holy w»e, a( every Parva
or sacred dav fdiinng the eoidtnuaiice of
ti e recitation) 7 What stionid lie the «7*iahfi-
calioos of the reciter to be engaged T TeH
me^ll tU»,

Vaishampiyana 'lafd t— •

3 Hear, O ttinff, what that procedure
rr. and *hat ({>« frtii(«, O Hharata. are
which will onehule (rnm one's liMminir (to
a recitation of the Qharaia). flits, O king
of kinys, is what you aib me.

4. 1‘he deiiles, O king, came (a tin*
world (of sport, (favins achieved tl«e»f
task, they ascended once more to the eelee •
({at region,

5. U«en W vdiat I tell von hnefly (s
Oic Midiabharau is (0 be found (he txrtti*
of Kndds and deities on the Catih,

In tills work, called Rliarats, O
(orerMMt one of Rharata’s race, are to be
seen in one ptaee the eiernat Rndras, (he
Saddhyae, and the Vishwedevar; the.
Adnyae, (he (wo dentes named the A*hwms, '
(he reeen(s cf (lie World, ihe great Riihts,
(he Oiihyafcas, (he Gandliarvas, (he Magas,
(he Vidjadhsras, the Siddhaa, the diverse
deities, (he Self-born visible in a body,
will many nsceiics ; the (Jillt and Mown-
tains, Oceans and Seas, and Rivers ; (he
various tribe* of Apsaraa; ihe PJanets, Ihe
Vears, (he Half-Vears, and (heSeawins;
nnd (lie whole universe of mobile and im'
mnbife objects, will( all the celestials diid
Asiir,is

m. 'I'learing fiieirceVorViv. niifj on ac-'
count of a recilalion of (heir name* and
ru;liirvein*iils, a man. wl>o ha* commuted
even (errible sms, will be cleansed.

fl— -14 Having, with a cmicenfraied
sniil and piirili*d body, lieard (his l>is(oty
duly, frnni (tie beginning, and having
reached its end one should tnalce Shraddhs*
uReiing*. O 8hara(.<, la (hem (of whom one
ha* heard) | o the Riahmanas aUo, O chief
of Bharata .. race, sfinuld, with due drvottoH
ond according to one's power, be made
large gifi* and vario'i* liind* of gern* and
(line, and ttcvsetv of wliiie brass for itotiking
kii^r" and maidens dtckcd Killi every


ornantent, and pottesneJ of every aecom-
plisliment suited la (he eftfoymenr, as alta
various kinds of conveyances, beautiful
faljces, plots of laud and cloths.

15. Animals oho should be given, suck
as (lOtses and etepiiants, and beds, and
covered couveyanses borne on the shoulders
of men, and welUdecked cars.

16. Whatever objects are in the house,
of (he foremost kind, whalever wealth of
great value m !» it, should be given away
to Orabmanaf. Indeed, one should give
away one's ownseif, wives and children.

f y One desirous of hearing the Glnrats,
should hear i( tvithoitt a doiiblnig heart,
with cheerialness and { iy ; and as he goes
<m (lUennig (0 its recKstion, he should,
according (a the extent ui hii power, make
gifts will) great devoiiuit.

18. Hear how a ptrsaii who is devoted
(0 (ruth and sincerity, who is self-controlled,
pure (in tnntd), and observant oi thosu
deeds which lead (0 purity of body, (list is
endued with f*iih, and that has subjugated
anger, acquires success.

i9»3o. i(e should appoint a< reciter
one who is pure (of bod)}, who is endued
wiik good and pious eondiii.(, who should
be robed in white, who should have a com*
plete mastery over his passions, who 1*
cleansed of alt olTeuees. who is conversant
with every branch of fearning, who I4
endued wriih faitli. who (t free from malice.
w)t« ts possessed of handsome features. wl,<)
fS blessed, self controlled, truthful and with

passions under codirnl, and who la beloved

of all for (he gifts he makes and the honora
of wfiicit he is the possessor.

I 31-^1. Ttie rrCiter, seated at his ease,

I free (roiii al] bndiiv enmplahits, and wuU
I rapt attendou, should recite the text wnh>
out slowiies*, without a Uhouring voice,
wnhnut being fast nr quick, quietly, wiUi
siifHcient energy wiihout coufuiuig tl**
letters and word* together, m a sweK
inionation an t with such accent and em.

•)Jio«e,'JO.'wui|rf.*diniw'(»a. w««.. -givniE; 'tti/,

niterance (<» Ihe (lire* and sixty Jeilers of
the alphabet fiuut the eight places of (heir
formation.

3j Saluting Narayana, and to Mara,

, (hat foremost male-hemgs. as also (n (fiQ
goddess Saraswdli, should the woiii Jaya
be uttered.

34 Listening to the Bharala, O kmg,
when reciied O you nC Bhsrata's race, by
a reader of (Ins kind, the listener, oAiervauc
of vows the while anti purified by pui|*
ficatory rites, acquires valuable fruits. ,

33 When the iiiat Puranit is reached,


G


MA!IABIIARATA.


preskt beauty, aud had acquired with lughest

su c s<

^ In Ote pl^ce Uelongirit; ta li«** Atli "vio*!,
the (Lelighter oE the K irits saw NakitU
and blialiadeva, each biasing tviihht5o«i\
eHulgence

10 lie also saw the princess of PanehaU,
des.ked iu garUnsls ol lovuscs. Uavii^ ac>
qiuredllie celestial regiuo, she was sittuig
(Here, gdted wall a lurm edul^eut lue
the bun.

It— t?. K‘U£: Vudlusluhira suddenly

wislietl 10 qucSUou her. then ll\e tUoNHiww
{iidra, the King u( ilie cetesiials, spoKe lo
him,—'' Him orve is goddess oi piospeiity
lieiseif. It was (or your sake that bfie took
liiith, as the daitgluer a( Utiipada, aiQuiii'
Imniaii bellies, coining not (rotit a>iy inothet's
womb, O Vudliishihira, gifted with agree*
able perfume and capable o{ delighting the
e'llire world.

x^. \^or yoUT sat)s{actiQ>v she was created
by the wieldcr «l the indent. bUe was bom
III the race ol UiupaUa.and was eiqoyed
by>ouall.

14, these five highly bJessed. Gan*
dharvae gifted with the eriuigenCe 01 hre.
and endued witn gieat energy, were, O
kmg, me sous ui Ufsupadi and yourseU.

15 ViOok at Utiritarashtra, Vbe lung
ol the Oandharvas, endued with great
tvisdoaii i^now that (his one was the 'eldest
brother ol your tatheCi

t6. Ihts one ts your eldest brother, |he ,
sou of Kunii, gitied With the efltilgence o( |
hie. llie «0|j 01 burya, your eloest brolhcr
(he loremosi of men, even (his one vvas
known as die son ot Kadim

ij — 18 He moves m the company of
the bt)» God, Uehuld this luremost of
Beings I Among the tribes of me bhad*
dh>ds. (he celesnals, the Vishwedevas, and
tl c Mariils, see, U king ol kings, liic miglily
cafWdfiiors at tlie Vrislmis and die
Andimkas, t'l?*) those heroes having Salyaki
lot (hew first, and those powettul oHes
among the Uliojas

19 Book at the son of Subliadra, in-
ViKiioIe in battle, now staying with boma.
He IS the poweilul bowman Abhimanyu,
row gifted witli the gentle clTulgeiice of the
Moon.

20 Here is the powerful bowmari Pandit,
row united with Kunii and Madfi. Your
lailier irequenlly comas to me on lUS expel*
lent car.

21 Book at the royal Bhishma, Uieson
ot bliantanu, row lu the midst at me Vasus
Know that this one by the side of Vrtshas*
pall IS your preceptor Urona.


33. There und ojher kings, Osnn of
Pandit, w I > ll.itl luitglit on your helMli iiS'O
wala iviil) die Gmdharvas or Vakshas or
other sacred boiiigs.

3^ Some hive attained lo, the dignity
of Gobyak'Ts, O king. Having renouiiccd
their bodies, they liave conquered (he c'les*
till region by the merit they had acqueed
ihtougii word, thought, and deed.'

CHAPTER V.

(SWARGXROHANIKA PARVA.)—

Csntmtied-


Jauamejaya said i— *

t— 4 Bhisliina and Drona, those two
great persons, kuig Dliriiarashtra. and
Virata and Oritpada, and ShankhA (’"d
Utiara, DhnslitaKetu and Jayatsena, and
kmg SHiyapi, the sons of Diiryodhana, and
bltakuni ilie son of Suvala, Kama's sons
of gteat prowess, king Jayadratha, Ghalot*
kacha and oUiers whom you have rot men*
(wned, the other heroiff kings of shmiag
forias,— tell tne for what period lh«y re*
loamed m the celeUtal region.

S O best of tivice>horn8, did ihey lire in
Heaven lor -ever! What was the end ac-
quired by those best of men when their act*
tertninated.

6. 1 wish to hear this, 0 foremesl of
(wice*b«/n persons, and, therefore, have 1
asked you. By virtue of jour bU«ing pen*-
antes you see all things,

Santi saiti

7 1 bus accosted. iViatltwice bom K«hi»

receiving the permission of the great
Vyas-»r began to answer the question of
(he Uitig.


Vaisbampayana said:—

8 Giery one, O king, is not capable |
of returning to Ins own nature at (he end j
of Ins deeds Whether tins »s so or not. >
(s, undoubtedly, a good question asked by ‘
you.

9 — 10 Hear, O king, this which is a iitys-
leiy of the celestials O chief ol Bharata's
race* It was explained (to us) by Vyasa of
great energy, celestial vision, and great
prowess, that ancient ascetic, O Kauravya.
who IS the son of Parashara and who always
practises high vows, who liof immeasur-
able understanding, who is omiuscieni, and
wlio, (herefure, knows ihe end of all deeds.

II. Qliislima of great energy and grcali
cffulf^nce acquired the digniiy ok lhe>
Vasin Tight Vasus, U chief of^liarXia’a 1


^^\UkbAfebflANlfeA t>AHVA.


H tifona entered iiiio VnliaspaH» It’Sl i
jdfeinosi one o( AngTrasa’s dc<«n»J 4 nt*

H^dika’s sou KruaMrmaii tnierefl lUe

Flaiuts.

^ 'PraSj’un^na enlMeS SanalViJiraTa
wJence <lad 'come tJJimarasHlra

obiamei Uie reV'onS so difficult ol acijutit*
lion, belonging to ICuvera.

12} Ttie (atftous Gandharl gamed the
same iregions v;iih ber hdsbaitd Ubriia*
raslitfd With his tivo t»iv«f5, Piirdu freftt
la ihe abode oi the grbat Indra.

13—^. Both Virata dhd ijrupadi, and
king* dlirishukeld, as also Nishatlia,
AUcuta, Stiamva, llhanukampa, and Vtdu-
baOia, and Bhunsltravas and Sliaiia and
King Btinn, and {{ansa, and Ugrasena.
3nd Vasudeva, and Ultara, that ioremost
*' liitli Ins brother Shanhlid.— all


1?. Soi^a's Son of Creat pVdtvess, hameU
Varclias ol iiuglity energy, became AWii*
inanju, lire son o[ phalguni, Ulal lorcutosl
bl lueii

19 llakmg toliglU, abbatdlog la itsha*
Uiya praeuces, with Ur-Very sddi as none
else had ever beed able id that

liiigliiy drilled aild rt(,iileodS'ldu!ed Ueing
I eiileied boma Killed uu the field oi battle,
O ioremusl oi men, t^'nla e<'Ur«d Um ^un
j Sliartum eitleled uilu ti>e (Jwaperai ktid
I bhrishtad) umna mta (>'« God oi iVc.

3(. iSid sods d) l>(<(itdril>hr4 «^r«at(
Itaksbasai ai greit power, bancufied by
dcaili c-idscd bj' t/eaponi, those great
befiikvol gredt piospeifiy all sUcceedfexl in
buiuxing (lie Celestial tegitfd.

SS liotU ItihaHii and Rr/tg VodhlsbJ ,
Ihild eiilifed Into ihe Ood ol Virtue I lie
holy and ittiiililoUs Aiianta (who had taken
biilK as VaUraind) went lo the icgioil
below (fie iiailli

sj I Iiiotigfl Uifr cotnmand d( lite {jrand*
Sire, he. Iftiped l/y Ins Yoga power, sup-
borted the liaith Vaslidcva weS a part of
L>al eieriirtl god oi godj celled Natayana
Accuidingl^, he eiiieied into NarayaiU.

t4 bixtetii thousand vromeii had l»een
inatned to Vastidcva as Ins wised. Wien
il e time tame, U Jatiamrjaya, they ptungrd
lino i! e barasvtati

3^ Uenouiicing their (human) bodies
there ihev ic>ascended to the cbicsital
legiin Itansfoiined into Apsaras, they
ipproac) ed |l e presence ui Vaiudeva.

36 iliose Iieroic ^»id powerful car-
tvatiiois tf*, Ghaioikacha and sllien,
ylK> we«« killed in the gieat battle, auatiicd
Y *3t'^ Ctiesiuh and s«4e of


ij Those who had fouglii pii llie side \
„< Doryodhana are said to nave been ^
Rakshasas Gradually. G femg, their have |
alt aiiatned to eicetlenl tegioiSs ot hap]^i* t
i^s£.

ii. iTiose Torefnost of med hdvte J^drie\
some to the abode of indra, some to that
of htghfy liitelSlgerl Kiivera of great id*
idlfgmice, Jiid sonic to lhat d( VarxSna.

2^ I have now loJd you, O yoii of great
splesidiHir, everything about the acts, O
Rharati, of tidlli U e Kurus add th 6
Paddalras.

Sauti iald

30 Hearing Ihis, G foremosl of Iwice-
bom Ones, at the intervals of sacrificial
rues. Ring jauarncya became filled with
wonder.

31. nib sdcnficial priests then finished
the rites which reiiuincd to through.
Asiifia, liavtii^ rsseded the snakes (troia a
fiery death) became filled With joy.

King j^iiamtjaya then pleased all
the Brahmanas with profuse preseni^
Urns adored by the kmg, lliey telumeo
to (heir respective abudes.

33 Having ’tji'inissed Uio^l learned
Uraiiflianas, long Jaiiainrj rya returned
from lakshdlhila to Hasiinapur.

31 t have now told you eirerylinng
that Vauhampayaiia described, at tins
command of Vyasd, tu liie kidg at liH
snake ^^ehfikC.

35 Gitlled i( hisfory. It fs sscfed pdrU
lying .iiid ricellent it has been composed
by tUe aseelic KrlshiUj G iirahmaiu, ot
truthiul speech

ffe It dinhtsciefvf, coliversant

wntt all oidiilancrsi endued milf a know*
ledgd 6f al* duller, gifted with plify, 1
Capable of perceiving what is beyond the I
percejiuori of tile Sellses, purfe, liaving a!
soul puiified by penances, possessed oi the '
*1* lugh attributes, and devoivd to bahUhva
Yoga He lias composed tins, seeing |
everylhi.g with a celesi.al eye which lias 1
(ore* '**“^*'* (MfeiigthtuedJ by varied *

3 ^ fie f>« done tins, desiring to spread
««*e tame, throughout the world, of n.e

endued with profuse energy, ^

learned man who recites ihrf

*ite«jive audience becomes purged of etery
«». conquers the celestial region, *„i ,
aiiuins to the sUtw of bfrafima.'^

man who listens »nh r»p^
fi ’Ir*®? recitation 0/ »be ivhoteo/

wn \{ua composed by (i/it fjland-beru)


MAIIABHARaTA.


to

tlie liearer sliouW satisfy D'’a 1 imanas with
presenis of aU desirable objects.

25 Dy damji' Ibis, one acquires tlie
IriiKS ol the Agnisbtoma sacriFice.

26 He acquires a large (celeslia!) car
tub of vano\« orders of Apsatas WuUa
glad bean and wiili tbe celestials m Ins
company, be proceeds to llie celestial region,
Ins bean rapt (in felicity).

27 When tbe second PuritMii isreacbel,
tbe bearer acq nres the fiUits ol tbe
Altratra vow Indeed, be ascends a
celestial car made entirely of cosily gems

2S Wearmc celestial garlands and
dresses, and decked wiib celestial unguents
and aluajs shedding a celesUat fragrance
around, be receives great bonours in the
celestial region,

29 When Vba tliird rorrtna »s reached,
be acquires tbe fruits of tbe Dwad-ithalia
sow > indeed, lie lives in tbe celestial region
for myriads o! years, bke a god.

30—31. At tbe foiirib Parana l*e ac*
quires tbe (ruiis of the Vajapey a sacrifice
At tbe fiflli, he acquires twice those Irmis
Ascending a celestial car vvlucb resembles
tbe rising snn or a blazing fire, and wnb
tbe deities for I is companions, he goes'io
the celestial region and s 'oris I appily for
myriads ol years in tl e abode of Indra.

32—34. At the Sixth Parana, be acquires
Ihice. <<nd at the sevenlli, thrice those Irniis
Ascending a celestial car wbicli resembles
the summit of tlie Uailasa tiioimiains (in
beauty 1, v^bicti is equipt with an afiar made
Ilf stones of lapts fasH/t and Other precious
gems that is surrounded by beauliful
t bjects of various Viiids, that is decked witb
senis and orals, that moves at tbewrllof
the iider, and ilut teems with waiting
Apsaras, be lOves tbrougb »U tl e happy
lei’toDS like a second deity of the Sun At
the eifibih Poro/rn he acqoires the fruits of |
tbe Uajasnyasacilfi.e. |

33 He ascends a car as beautiful as the '
tisiii,> moon, and lo'wl icti are yoked hinges
.'.■bite as tbe rays of tbe inooir and fleet
like thought.

36 He IS served by most beautiful
svaiiieii villose faces are more charming than
'tie 1)10011 He I ears the music of the
{.arNiids (I at encircle their waists and the
Pt'npnros encnchiig llieir ankles.

37. Sleeping with his head resting on
tbe Hps of women of great beauty, he
awakes greatly refrestied. At the ninth
Parana be acq iiies, O Uharsia, the Iiuits
• ( tliat (ore.nusi oC sactirices, vrs , the
I lor'e>Saci 1111.6.

sS. AscenJii’S 0» a car tqnpi with a


chamber consisting of a top supported by
columns of gold fitrnisbed with a seat made
of stones of lapis /ozu/i, vviili windows on
all sides made of pure gold, and full ol
Apsaras and Gandharvas arid other celes'
tials, ho blazes forth ii) splendour.

39—40 Wearing celestial garlands and
dresses, and decked vvitli celestial unguents,
he sports liappily, witb deities for bis corns
paiiKMis »>i the celestial region, like a second
deity himself.

4t — 43 Reaching tf'O lenlir/’jm»a and
pleasing nralirnanas, lie arq I'res a car
whicli (inkles wiih iniiiimerabt.* betlsi vvl ich
' IS decked with flags and hainters, which is
eq irpt With a seal made 0/ precnus gemt,

, wticl has many arches made of fn^is fnstdii
I which lias a net-work <if gnid all rmmd,
which has liirrenis made of corals winch
IS adorned with Gandharvas and Apsaras
expert lit singuig, and which is fit fori' a
residence of ihe Ui^'hleous

44—45 Crnwiied willi 1 diadem of the
complr-xiou of fire, decked with orHsnienls
of gold, bis body smeared wilU eclesual
ssndalpaste, garnished with celestial g*r*
lands he passes tlirpiigli all celestial rrgnns,
enjoying celestial objects ot enjo>iii<"b
and gifted with great splendour, llirougb the
grace of the deities " '

46—49 Ihus accoutred, he reeeivM
great honours in ihe celestial reginii for
many long years With Gandharvas 10
his compa'iy, for full tweiity>mie iliousaiid
years, he Sports in bliss with Indra himself
in the abode of Indra He roves at pUasure
every day through the various celestial
regions, riding on celestial cars and convey*
ances, and surrounded by celestial dan"*'*
of cr*ot beauty He is able to go to t ‘®
abode of the Sun, of the Momi and of Shiva,
O king Indeed, he succeeds in hvmi
the same region wiih Visl nu himself If
IS even so, U monarch. Uliere is no doubt
lu this

50 A person h'tening with faith b®'
cnines even so Mv precrpfor has
this lo the j-eciter si mild be given ait
such objects as he may wish

51—5* Elephants and horses and cars

and conveyances, especially animals and
the vehicles they draw, a bracelet of gold A
pair of ear-rings, sacred (tireads, heauldul
dresses, and perfumes in especial (shoiilJ be
Liven. Uy adoring linn as a deity one
anjuires the regions oi Vishnu,

S 3~54 After tl is I sliall declare what
siiould tie given away, as each Parvaiv is
reached of ll>c Bharata '» eourao of ■<« reciia*
tion, to B'alitiianas afler asceimnn ig tl eir
biith touHrj, tiulhfuhiess, and L'e«ne»»,


vy


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.


o ct,l.l oI K*”,?

55 C.u.-.»B

benedictions, ihe ^ Patvan »s

sbauld be begiirt l^e adored

o Mi: b" "">/ “ •"'*

Itumetily of the best kind


' 5 ,. 'm,n' o 7 A,..u.

recited, * ‘a“,d Imtnenljr. and

v.iih raw sugar.

53 Wh.n Ih. f,d w,.t.

.w'> 0 . Apupa. ap. Pap-
aad Modaka., O UiP« •

55 Wh.p Il.a Arania a

r.ui.d 8 "a> B'l'™ \vi.,.i Ibe Aram

Pa;’v.''r,.‘c?.d' "a«r po.a (»« »*

'7"'^ rSsVpd’sPo" K

5,_66 Dacms ll" /“j““ d'mraJ
Virata Pai.a, ''l"‘r,ZTZ.,.e
.|, 0 » 1 d br eirr" *•« ' q . | it a

or ihe Ud\oga

llbaralas the garlands should

arched «“'• P'SVood ro^d. Dnr. .g the
be niusliin* Parva. O U.«K

rrcitriiion of t’'® , ,,,.,„ „*ct||epit cars and

’l;;I,‘''!»od .tiaold P. eirra "-b
"d writ cooked ...d P^"','!.
‘tvot> drrirablr 5 “Xod llioutd Pc

B-''\'ta? .T'llriranm a. a.m Prd.

,i„ii to Iratliro u j „j,

UoMO^fr S'r

SlMlvt Vt ce lotted *•>»• **’*

cntlleclionep a,.d sOOthinB

bliBar. as -tlso C-tUeS or »“* . d,h k

B.fd liutm.ve a.licles o
fcr.nuldt.epiesrn'*^ n.-l n aVvae sUouW be
of tl e Gsda I - 7 ®’ j vttlh MudiJ*
treated wuli food nt'*'


ns ns' p:.is“r;; liVtli;

"“r.hirl’c, alioidd Pr pterrnted Dorm, >Ps
recitation of the Shanti Parva. il.e btali
should be led with Habishya.

BrlmS:.'SooM'M."Vrd -dP llab-

?.s.‘;iro„.d”i'rs'r"po.'.r.s.d ot
• very good quality.

„ WPrn.P.S«.r 8 .P.rP->''»*,;

the Bra'ntaiias stiou'd 0 H^ri-

t':r,;pa,“'’tC„is,dTrl;r».. .p»p'^ b,

fed


M.T«i'.“rv..uld bo p-r.r..trd to eacli

co,.clo...n ol .11 <P"
f» « n,e wist l' 0 '*»el 8 '''# 1 «

Sre'^aterYcopycf ll e M-habharata will.
a mece of sOtd . .


7 'wpS IP. '’*"”i;j‘'tdp

„_,6 H.oii'BP'P.Pr'lP'llb. Parv.r,

in llie scriptures, dressing I jm*
one versed in me >s i j,, decked

»,lf m white, »'*“'■ "8 punRed.


ng each at a time «

„ lodrrd Okioe iPr .".r.! volumr,
77 * , -I riiilil be adore 1 hy «)iie witli

irluswoty eu d ^ Odr.ings should
devoiumand lapt^l v..riou!, kinds of food
I e made to drinks and various

7» D" ‘f,.OMSr°U.. ....

•m .‘I ra’pr lP"' a" crlr.l.all
'.W .i N-ra ...d N.r.>...a


79


,1 , fMil.titrtr rrl tl «
■'"1 . iu,.P"”“.'°“'.^


Sllt'e Par.. prrj'p,!^ Ar''.'l'iP.

p"A"“;;;;“i^;kd'ncra"p'rA»p“ ‘'““PI


worstiippnii: the persons of
I of Bra'-niandS wilii sceiils

‘Pry •P"“'p P," ""•“m

Pmd. »' v'”„“ “'i.yp" *"'*

veti superior or costly -iticles.

80 Uy dome It IS. one aeq-n;** ‘>'e
mJ,n« ol ‘he Alirat.a sac.lfice Indeed
9 t eacti successive P-'va lie -cq nres I e
«ern» wt «!. Lelo.V to the petfoimaiice cl
asactlfse.


Uaisa,


12


MAtlADIIARATA


St TIte reciter, O cliief of the Dliaratat, j
sliould be endued witb learning and etidued '
with a good voic^ and a clear utterance
about both letters and words Such a man
should, O chief of (he Bharatas, reote the*
BharaU.

After entertaining a number of
foremost Brahmanas, presents sliould be
made ^ them according; to the ordinances
'Ihe reciter also O duel ol ihe Bharatas
should be decked with ornaments and fed
sumptuously.

63 The reciter being satisfied, the house
bolder acquiring an excellent and auspici*
ous conlei Iment. li the Brahmanas are
satisfied all the deities are gratified

St After ills O chief of the QharalAc
Brahmanas should he duly served with
various kinds of enjoyable articles and
superior tl mgs

65 I have thus Indicated ttie ordinances
O foremost ol men, (about the manner of
reciting these scriptures) m response to
your enaiiiries You should observe (hem
wilh faiili

66 In listening to a recitation of tlie
Dl arata and at each Parana O best of
k igs, one who desires to acqiire to tie
higl est good should listen with (he great
e»l cate and atteiuiun

87 One should listen to (lie Blurata
every day One si ould proclaim il e
merits of (he Dharata every day One who
has the Bnarata in his house, has m his
hands all (hose scriptures which are known
by (he name of Jaya,

83 lie Bliarata is purifjing and
sacred |i> tl e Bharata are various topics
*1 > e Bharaia is adored by the very gods
7 lie Bl araia is t> e I ighesl end

89 7 lie Bliarata, O chief of lie
Bliaratas is tl e foremost of all scriptures
O le acquires Liheralion through tie
Bliarata Ihis that 1 tell }Ou is certain
truth

go One who proclaims the merits of
It IS I islory called the Mat abharata of
tl e Caith of the' cow of Saraswau (the
goddess of speed) of Qrahnauas and
of Keshava, has never to lan|>\nsh.

gi lulleVada title Ramavana and
in (he sac ed Bl arata O chief of Bharata's
/aci* Han is s mg 11 the beginning, He
middle, and the end

gs n at in w1 ich occurs excellent dis
course about Vis' uu and the eternal
SI lull* sliould be 1 slei ed lo by men
desitqus ol acquiring tl e I igViest end


93 This treatise is purifying. This Is'
the highest indicator as regards duties,
tins IS endued with every merit. One
desirous of prosperity should listen to it.

9t Sms corpmitted by means of the
body, by means of vfords and by means of
tfie mind, are all dissipated (through listen-
ing to the Bharafa) as Darkness at sunrise.

95 One devoted to Vishnu acq ures
(throueh this) that ntent wfricli is acqnred
by listening to the eighleeii Puranas I liere
IS no doubt in (Ins. *

96 Men and women (by listening to
this) would certainly acq lire the status
of Vislinu Women desirous of children
should certainly I sten to this wliicli pro.
claims (he fame of Vishnu

97 One desirous of acq nnng the fruits
wl cli belong to a reciiation of the Bharata
should accord ng lo one's power give unto
lie reciter Dakshma as also an honorarium
in gold.

98 - One desirous ef one’s own behoof
sliould give to the reciter a Kap'la cow
with horns cased m gold and accompanied
by her calf, covered with a cloth,

99 'Ornaments, O chief of Bharata'g
race, lor the arm*, as also those for the
ears, should be given Besides these, other
kinds of riches should be presented

100 >To the reciter, O king of me",
gift of land should be made. No gilt like
(liat of landbould ever be or will be.

I0| 1 he man who listens (to the

Bharata} or that recites it lo other people,
becomes purged of all his sins and acquires
at last the status of Vishnu

loj Such a man rescues h s ancestors
to ihe eleventh degree as also |i meetf w Ih
his wive* and sons O cl lel of Bl arata s
race After concluding a reciialion of the
Blrarata one slioild O ki ig, perform a
Homa wall all its ten parts

103 I have Oiu* O king, told everj.
(lung m jour presence

104 He who listens w tli devotion to

tl IS Bharata fro ti the begmni ig beco ncs
purged of every 6)0 even if he be tuilty of
Brahmaiucide or* the vi latio 1 of l)i:> pre.
cepior's bed or even if he be a drinker of
alcol ol or a robber of oilier people's goods,
or even if be be born in the O andala
order. ^

105 Destroying all I s sms like the
maker of day destroy ng darkness Such * ’
man forsooih sports I appilv 111 the region
of Vishnii like Vislniu liiiiiielf.


FiNib SwahcabobanIKA Pmiva ^ •*,

j//£ r/C//7T£V rAffVA^ OF THE HAlJABHARATA ARE THUS COJIELETED
