PARTS. IV—Ix,
THE
RAMAYANA.
‘TRANSLATED INTO EnGuis Prose FROM THE ORIGINAL
Sansxarr oy Varaxt.
AYODHYA KANDAM.
EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, HM. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
Girish CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Drva Press, 65/2, BEADOw Sreeet,
CALCUTTA.
1892.
[ AM rights reserved.J
ee
FOR THE COMPLETE SBT IN ADVANCE, INCLUDING POSTAGE.
In-dwota Bs, #6: In Byaore £ 2.
TIE
RAMAYANA.
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PRosk FROM THE ORIGINAL
Sanxsxrrt oy VALMIEI.
——0rej00——
AYODHYA KANDAM.
EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A,
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
Girish CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Press, 65/2, Beavox Srreet,
CALCUTTA.
1892.
TIE
RAMAYANA.


AYODHYA KANDAM.


SECTION I.


Wises Bharata sct out for the home of his maternal
uncle, he affectionately took with him the sinless Satrughna
ever repressing his passions.* And there he abode with his
brother, being ministered unto in every respect and tended
by his maternal uncle, Agwapati, with all the fondness of a
father.t Albcit thus staying, with every ministration exteuded
towards them as much as they could wish, yet those heroic
brothers failed not to remember the aged king Dagasatha.
And the puissant king also on his part remembered his sons
away from home, Bharata and Satrughna, resembling the
mighty Indra and Varuna. All those four chiefs of mep were
dear unto him even as four hands issuing from his own body.
Yet among them all, the highly energetic Rama was the
favorite of his sire. He was the foremost of all in every
virtue, like unto Sayambhu’sf self in the esteem of creatiou.
Solicited by the celestials wishing for the destruction of
Ravana, he, who is the cternal Vishnu, was born as Rama

* The adjectival epithet is sitvasatrughuak, In rendering it I follow the
commentator, who is presumably learned in the peculiar associations of the
literature. But the literal meaning may do as welt: ever vanguishing his
foesanT.


+ Lit, with the fondncss shown to u son,—T.
¢ Brahmi.—T. -


178 RAMAYANA,


in the world of men. And with that son of immeasurable
energy, Kaugaly4 looked graceful, even as Aditi, with that
foremost of the celestials, the weilder of the thunder-bolt.
He was furnished with grace, and possessed of prowess ; and
he did not seek for defects in others in the midst of virtues.
That son of Kaucalya was incomparable on earth and in
worth fully equal to Dacaratha himself. He was aye of
quiescent soul; and always preluded his speech with an
amiable phrase; and although he might be addressed
in a harsh manner, yet he returned no corresponding
reply. He was gratified even with a solitary instance of
benefit; and from freedom of soul did not remember an
hundred injuries. In the intervals of martial exercises, he
always discoursed with persons of character, or wise men,
or the aged, or the virtuous. He was intelligent, and
sweet-speeched, and spoke first ( to visitors, } and used
grateful words, and was possessed of prowcsss, withal not
proud of his mighty native virtue. He never spoke an un-
truth ; and he was learned ; and he rendered homage unto
the aged. He felt kindly towards the subjects; and the
subjects on their part held him in dear regard. He was kind
te’ the poor ; and he had conquered his anger; and he re-
garded the Brahmanas ; and he commisserated the wretched ;
and was versed in morality ; and always chastised the wicked;
and was pure in spirit ; and possessed the thoughts and senti-
ments of his race ; and regarded highly his own Kshatriya
duties ; and considered that heaven was to be attained through
the glory acquired by performing them. He was never engaged
in forbidden practices ; and never relished improper talk ;and
argued in chain even like the lord of speech himself. And he
wis free from ailment ; and of young years; and endued with
eloquence ; and of an excellent person; and versed in sea-
son and place; and discerned character,—the one honest
Person ever created. Endowed with supreme excellence,
that son of the monarch was by virtue of his merit dear unto


AYODHVARKANDAM. 179


the subjects like their life ranging externally. He had
performed his ablutions after having mastered all learning ;
and was properly versed in the Vedas with their branches.
In all weapons either inspired with mantras or otherwise,
Bharata’s eldest brother was superior even to his father.
And he was the spring of all good ; and was saintly ; aud of
undisturbed souls ; and truth-telling; and candid; and humble
towards the aged twice-born ones congnizant of virtue and
interest. He was congnizant of virtue, profit, and interest ;
had an excellent memory ; and was possessed of genius. He
was an adept and was well versed in social usages and cus-
toms, He was lowly ; and of close counsel; and used to keep
unto himself his purposes ; and was resourceful. Neither
his pleasure nor his displeasure went for naught. He knew
the season of amassing riches, and of giving them away.
And he was ardently reverential ; and his wisdom never
wavered ; and he accepted no improper present; and he
used no rough speech. He knew no idleness ; and was vigi-
lant ; and bad a knowledge of his own as well as of others’
failings. He was conversant with the scriptures ; and was
grateful; and could read the hearts of others, He had
sagacity to perceive the seasons for duly showing favor
or disfavor. He understood all abgut the reception of .the
righteous, the maintenance of family, and the occasion for
chastising evil-doers ; and he was an expert in collecting
dues (from the people); and knew the manner prescribed
(by the authorities) for expending money. He had attained
proficiency in all the scriptures and literary works
composed in both Sanskrit and Prakrit. He sought
pleasure without sacrificing either interest or morality;
and he was never dilatory in duty, He understood the
arts of those who entertained others. He knew the vari-
ous heads on which wealth was to be expended. He was
skilfsl in riding and training up horses and elephants.
He was the foremost of those accomplished in archery ;


180 RAMAYANA.


and was acknowledged among men as an Afttratha.* He
léd his forces in the direction of the foe; and he slew
his enemies; and was accomplished in marshalling the
troops. He was incapable of teing repressed in fight
even by the enraged gods and Asuras. He was not given
to carping, and had subdued his anger, and he was never
elated, or malicious. He did not disregard any creature ;
he was no slave to the times. That son of the monarch was
furnished with such qualities. And he was liked by the sub-
jects as well as by the three worlds. In forgiveness he was
like unto the Earth ; and in intelligence like unto Vrihaspati ;
and in prowess like unto the Sachi’s lord. Furnished
with such qualities acceptable to the people as well as
gratifying unto his father, Rima looked beautiful like the
effulgent Sun surrounded by his rays. And the Earth desired
for her lord even him(Rama)possessing an excellent character
and of prowess incapable of being repressed—like unto
Lokanatha + himself:

And finding his son crowned with so many incomparable
qualities,that subduer of his enemies, king Dagaratha, thought
within himself. The long-lived aged monarch reflected,
saying, —"“How can Ramz become king, I living ; and how
can this delight be mine ?” And this supreme desire rolled
in his heart,—“When shall I behold my beloved son install-
ed t in the kingdom? Surely he always wisheth for the pros-
perity of the people ;-and he showeth kindness to all crea-
tures. And like unto the showering rain-cloud, he is dearer
unto the people than myself. He is like unto Yama and Sakra
in prowess, and unto Vrihaspati in intelligence ; and in
forbearance, unto a mountain,—yea, he is far more qualified


* He who alone vanquishes an innumerable host of warriors is called an
Ativatha.—T

+ Vishax.—T

The Sanskrit abhishilta literally means sprinkled, But such a rendering
would sound outlandish. —T.


AYVODHYAKANDAM. 18t


than myself. Therefore in this age, beholding my son estab-
lished in (the dominion of) this entire earth, I shall repair
unto heaven.” Seeing him (R4ma) thus crowned with all
these various as well as other sterling and immeasurable
virtues rare among other princes, the king then took coun-
sel with his ministers, and made up his mind to confer upon
Rama the -dignity of heir-apparent. And that intelligent
(king} mentioned (unto his minister) the dreadful evils por-
tended by appearances and phenomena in heaven and the
air and on the earth ; and also pointed out the circumstance
of decrepitude having taken possession of his person. He
therefore gave them to understand that the installation of
the high souled Rama of countenance resembling the full
moon would dispell his grief, at the same time that it would
be universally hailed by the people. Therefore, influenced by
his affection (for his subject,) and with the view of compass-
ing his own as well as their welfare, the righteous monarch
urged expedition (upon his counsellors ;} and that lord of
earth brought together the prime and noble from the Various
regions and countries of the earth. Like unto Praj&pati's
self before all creatures, the king appeared before them, who
had been received respectfully, and had, as befitted their
tanks, various ornaments conferred upon and quarters as-
signed unto them. Bat that lord of men did not, on account
of haste,bring over either Janaka or the king of the Kekayas,
concluding that a little while after they would receive the
glad tidings.

Then when the king—that captor of hostile capitals—had
sat down there, began to pour in all the princes popular
with their subjects—all save ( the two afore-mentioned
rulers.) Facing and eying the monarch, those kings gat
them down on different seats pointed out by the former.
Surrounded by those prime and noble of the various
provinces, and all those lowly rulers, who had been received
honorably and who generally resided at Ayodhyd, the so-


182 RAMAYANA.


vereign appeared like unto the adorable thousand-eyed (one)
surrounded by the immortals,


SECTION It.


Tren facing his whole court, that lord of earth, the
king, resounding all sides as if with thunder, in a mighty
voice, echoing, and solemn, and like unto the sounds of a
kettle-drum, spake words fraught with welfare, and capable of
creating high rapture,and worthy of the attention of all.And in
tones overflowing with royal signs; and mellifluous; and peer-
less ; and surcharged with the sentiment of surprise, the mon-
arch addressed the princes, saying,—“It is known to ye that
the (people of this) spacious empire now governed by me was
governed like unto children by those sovereigns that were my
predecessors. Now it is my intention to bring welfare unto
this entire earth worthy of being rendered happy, which
had been governed by all those sovereigns, Ikshw&ku and
the rest. Following the path trod by my predecessors,
Ihave, heedless of my own happiness, to the best of my
power, always protected the people. And under the shade of
the white umbrella, I effecting the good of the entire commu-
nity, have brought decrepitude upon my body. Having at-
tained an age extending over many thousands of years, and
lived for a long period, desire rest for this decrepit frame.
Bearing in the interests of the people the heavy burden of duty
incapable of being borne by even those that have controlled
their senses, and requiring (in the bearer) right royal qualities,
Vhave become fatigued. I therefore wish for rest, after in the
interests of the subjects installing my son,with the permission
of all these excellent twice-born ones around me. My worthy
son, like unto Purandara himself in prowess—Rama, the con-
querer of hostile cities, hath been born, endowed with all


APODHYAKANDAM. 183


my virtues. Him, like unto the moon while in conjunction with
the Pushyd constelletion—the foremost of those maintaining
righteousness, the chief of men, will I, in the morning with a
delighted heart, install as the heir-apparent to the throne.
And that auspicious elder brother of Lakshmana* will make
afit ruler for ye,—yea, the very three worlds might con-
sider themselves as having a lord, by possessing him.
Through his agency I shall this day bring about the welfare
of the world ; and shall renounce my toil by reposing in him
the task of government. If what I have devised be meet, and
also recommend itself to ye, do ye accord approval to it,—
proposing what lam to do besides this, together with the
how of effecting it. If I have thought thus solely because I
find delight in it, do ye look about any other way to welfare,
For different is the thought of the dispassionate ; and by fric-
tion becomes far more efficacious.”+

As the king had said this, the princes, exceedingly de-
lighted, seconded him even as peacocks dance at sight of a
mighty mass of clouds showering down rain. Then there
arose a pleasant resonance (from the assembly of the potent-
ates ;) and next from the vast concourse inspired with high
rapture arose an echo generated ,by their voices, which
seemed to shake the earth. Then being in complete possess-
ion of the views of that one (the king) versed in morality
and interest, the Brahmanas and the principal personages of
the army, in company with the citizens and the inhabitants
of the provinces, took counsel together, and became un-
animous,~—and, having again revolved the matter individually
in their mind, spake unto the aged king Dagaratha, saying,—
“O king, being many thousand years old, thou last becomg


* There is an allitevative beauty here in the original Lakshmiodn Laksh-
manograja ; which of course is impossible to be retained in the translation —T.
+ This is Mill’s principle of free and equal discussion so lucidly upheld in
his LiBerty, The meaning in the text is obscurely expressed, Tke thought of the
divspassionate is different from that of the passionate ; and truth comes out
from the friction of the tmo opposite furces—P.


184 RAUAVANA.


aged. Do thou then install Rama as the heir-apparent to
the throne. We wish to behold the exceedingly strong and
inighty-armed hero among the Raghus, riding a huge ele-
phant, his countenance underneath an umbrella.’ Hearing
those welcome words of theirs, the monarch, as if not know-
ing their minds, asked them, saying,—“Ye have wished for
Raghava, soon as ye have heard my speech. This, ye kings,
raiseth my doubts. Do ye, therefore, speak out your minds
truly. Why, while I am righteously governing the earth,
do ye wish to see the highly powerful Rama as the heir-ap-
parent ?” And those high-souled ones together with the
citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces said unto him,
—"O king, many are the virtues of thy son, having for their
object the welfare of the people. To-day we will recount
unto thee in detail the merits making even enemies happy
of the meritorious and intelligent (Rama) resembling a ccles-
tial. O monarch, furnished with the choicest qualitics, Rama
having truth for prowess is like unto Sakra’s self; and he
towereth above Ikshwaku and all. Rama is the one excellent
person among men ; and is true and devoted to truth, And
in very Rama is established morality with prosperity. Touch-
ing the good of the subjects, he is like unto the moon, and
in the quality of forgiveness, he is like unto the Earth ; in
intelligence like unto Vrihaspati ; and in prowess like Sachi's
lord. Heis cognizant of duty, and true in promise,—
and honest; and not given to detraction. He is for-
giving, and soothing, and sweet-speeched and grateful,
and of subdued senses. He is pliable to entreaties and staid,
and of agreeable carriage, and uncalumniating. Raghava
Speaketh everyone fair, and is of truthful speech, He
minstereth unto vatiously-versed aged Brahmanas. It is
for this that in this world his fame and renown and energy go
on increasing. He hath mastered all the weapons that
are extant among the gods, the Asuras, and human beings.
He hath performed his ablutions after having acquired


AYVODHYARANDAN. 185


learning ; and knoweth the Vedas with their branches. And
Bharata’s elder brother is a proficient in music. He is
the home of the good, and is saintly, and hath conquered his
gtief, and is magnanimous. He is lowly unto those twice
born ones that are worthy and are conversant with morality
and interest. And when in company with Sumitra’s son he
wendeth to the fight with the view of protecting a city ora
province, he cometh not back without conquering the foe.
And even asa father enquireth after the welfare of his sons,
he, returning from the ficld on horse or elephant, exhaustively
and consccutively enquireth after the weal of the citizens,
concerning their sons, or their (sacrificial) fire, or their
wives, or their servants, or their disciples. And that tiger-
like Rama always asketh the Brilmanas,—‘Do your disciples
tend you’ and the Kshatriyas—‘Do your disciples always
remain mailed?” When calamity befalleth the people, he
experienceth excess of sorrow; and on their festal occasions,
he rejoiceth ever like their own father. He speaketh
the truth, and is a mighty bowman. He ainistereth
unto the aged, and hath controlled his senscs, He.
preludes his speech with a smile, and is established in right-
eousness with his whole soul, He entirely bringeth about
good, and he taketh no delight in Bandying words after a
quarrel, In reasoning in chain, he is like unto the lord
of speech himself. His eye-brows are graceful; and his
eyes expansive and coppery; and he is like unto the very
Vishnu. Like Kama he is charming unto all by virtue of his
heroism, prowess and might. He is ever engaged in
protecting the people: and the desire for the good things
of the world cannot perturb his mind. He is capable
of bearing the burden even of the three worlds,—what then’
is this Earth? Neither his pleasure nor his displeasure
even goeth for naught. IIe s'aysth those that deserve
to be slain; but he is never enraged with those that
ought not to be slain (fe. the unoffending),—with whom,
24


186 RAMAYANA.


he is pleased, he bestows wealth upon. In virtue of his
self-control and other qualities; dear unto the subjects and
capable of exciting the delight of mankind, Rama shineth
even like the effulgent Sun surrounded by his rays. And
even that Rama, crowned with such qualities and having
truth for his prowess,—like unto a Lokap&ala, thé Earth
wisheth to have for her lord. By our good luck it is that thy
son hath acquired competence in the task of administration ;
and also by thy good luck it is that Raghava hath been
born endowed with sonly qualities, like unto M&richa’s
son Kicyapa. The gods, and the Asuras, and men, with the
Gandharvas, and the Uragas, and the inhabitants rural and
urban, pray for the strength, health, and long life of self-
knowing Rama. And whether inmates or outsiders, citizens
or natives of provinces, everyone speaks high of him.
‘Women, old and young, in both the morning and evening,
with intent minds, bow down unto all the gods on behalf
of the intelligent Rama. Let their desire, O worshipful one,
be fulfiled, through thy grace. And we would behold the son
of the foremost of monarchs, the foe-destroying Rama
dark-blue like a lotus,—installed as the heir-apparent to the
kingdom, Therefore, O bestower of boons, it behoveth thee,
for the sake of our well-being, with a delighted mind to
speedily instal thy son furnished with noble qualities resembl-
ing the god of gods, and ever intent upon the welfare of the
entire community.”


SECTION tt,


Ano when they had raised unto their heads their clasped
hands resembling fotuses, the king responding unto them
addressed them in welcome words fraught-with their good ;


AYODHYARANDAM. 187


“Exceedingly pleased am 1, and incomparable also is my
influence,—-because ye wish to behold my dear first born
installed as heir-apparent.” Having greeted them thus, the
king in their hearing spoke unto Vasishtha, Vamadcva, and
other Br§hmanas saying,~~“This is the holy month
of Chaitra; and the groves look beautiful with blossoms. Do.
ye now prepare for the installation of Rama.’ When the
king paused, there arose a mighty tumult from the
multitude. And when it subsided, that lord of men, the
king, addressed that foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha
saying,—" It behoveth thee, O worshipful Sir, to order
for things, necessary for the installation of Rama.”
Hearing those words of the monarch, Vasishtha—chief of
anchorets—ordered the counsellors staying before the king
with clasped hands, saying,—‘Do ye early in the morning in
the Agnihautric hall of the monarch provide and stere up
gold, and gems, and articles for worship, and Sarvaushadhi*
and white garlands, and fried paddy, and honey and clarified
butter in separate vessels, and cloths fresh from the
loom, and a car, every kind of weapons, and the fourfold
forces, and an elephant with auspicious marks, and a
couple of chowris, and a sceptre and gn umbrella, pale
colored, and an hundred furnished gtiden pitchers of water,
and a bull with horns plated in gold, and an entire
tiger-skin, together with all other necessary articles. And
do ye embellish all the door-ways of the inner apartment as
well as those of the entire city with garlands, with sandaf
paste and fragrant Dhupa. Do ye on the morning
of the morrow bestow upon the principal Brihmanas
goodly and refined rice mixed with curds and milk.—so that
hundreds of thousands may be fed, and gratified, bestowing
on them at the same time clarified butter and curds, and
fried paddy, and more than sufficient Dakshizas. To-morrow


* Consists of Muré Valerian and such like crogs.—T.


.


188 RAMAYANA.


as soon as the sun will rise, the Swastivachana® will be
finished. Do ye invite the Brahmanas, and prepare seats
(for them). And do ye set up flags, and water the high ways,
and let courtezans whose profession is music, adorning
themselves stay in the second apartment of the king’s
residence. In the abodes of the gods and under the
Chaityat trees, should be separately placed fragrant blossoms,
together with boiled rice and other edibles, and with
Dakshinas. And \et the warriors properly arrayed, enter the
courtyard of the monarch which is welling up with festal glee—
mailed, and accoutred with leather fences and long swords.”
Having issued these orders, those two Vipras entered upon
their work (as priests ;) and did what remained to be done
after making that known unto the lord of the earth. When
everything had been got ready those foremost of the twice-
born ones gladly and well-pleased presented themselves
before the master of the earth, and said unto him, “Every-
thing as ordered has been done.” Then unto Sumantra, the
effulgent monarch spake, saying,-“Do thou speedily bring
the virtuous Rama hither.” Thereupon saying, “so be it,”
Sumantra at the mandate of the king brought thither in a
car Rama the foremost of car-warriors. The kings of the
North, and the South -and the East and the West, together
with the Afvechas and the Arya princes, with those
inhabiting mountains and forests were then paying
homage unto him (Dagaratha) even as the celestials do
unto Vdsava. Stationed in his palace, the royal saint
Dagaratha in the midst of those princes, like V&sava in the
midst of the Maruts, saw his son, resembling the king of the
Gandharvas, approach, gladdening the subjects like a shower,
when they were oppressed with the heat of summer—even


* A religious rite, preparatery to any important ccremony, in which the
Brahmanas strew boiled rice on the ground, and invoke the blessings of the
gods on the rites about to commence. —7.

+ The religious ig. —T.


AVODHYAKANDAM 189


R&ma of redoubtable prowess among men, long armed, and
of mighty strength, and bearing the gait of a mad elephant,
with a countenance fair as the moon, of presence prepossess-
ing to a degree, and captivating men's sight and hearts by
reason of his beauty generosity and other qualities. And as
he was approaching, the lord of men eyed him steadily,
without experiencing satiety.

Making Raghava descend from that excellent car,
Sumantra followed him with clasped hands as he proceeded
to the presence of his father. Accompanied with Sumantra,
Raghava, the descendant of the Raghus, for the purpose of
behkolding the monarch, began with rapid steps, to ascend
the palace resembling a peak of the Kaildsa hill, Rama
humbly approaching his father with clasped hands, and
announcing his name bowed low and worshipped his father’s
feet. Thereupon seeing Rama at his side with clasped hands,
and in lowly guise, the king took hold of Rima’s clasped
hands, and drawing his beloved son, embraced the latter.
Then the king desired Rama to sit upon a seat prepared
expressly for him, excellent, and flaming and garnished
with gold and gems. Raghava shed lustre on that noble seat,
as the unclouded sun at his rising lighteth up the Swmeru
hill with his rays. That entire assembly looked beautiful
in his presence, like the cloudless, autumnal sky crested
with stars and planets, in the presence of the moon. The
king experienced delight, beholding his dearly beloved
son, like unto his own image, richly adorned, reflected on
mirror. And even as Kagyapa addresseth Indra of the
celestials, the king—the best of those possessing sons—
addressed his son, well seated, in these words, saying. ‘Born
of my eldest wife worthy of myself, thou crowned with the
best qualities, art my worthy son, O Rama dear unto me.
Thou hast by thy virtues drawn unto thyself the hearts
of the people, therefore do thou during the conjunction of
the moon with the Pushya constellation, receive the office


of heir-apparent. Thou artdy nature crowned with virtues.
Notwithstanding thy great virtues, I will,O son, from affection
tell thee what is for thy profit. Practicing greater humility,
do thou constantly restrain thy senses. Do thou’renounce the
ills that come through anger and Just. Replenishing thy
exchequer and arsenal do thou, acquainting thyself with the
state of things personally and otherwise, administer justice
and thereby enlist the affection of the courtiers and other
subjects; for the friends of him that swayeth the earth,
pleasing the people to his satisfaction, rejoice even as did
the immortals on obtaining ambrosia. Therefore, do thou,
O son, disciplining thyself thus address thee to thy task.”
Hearing this, Rama’s well! wishers, ever doing his pleasure,
speedily going out, acquainted Kaugalya with everything.
Thereupon that foremost of her sex Kaugalya ordered gold
and kine and various kinds of gems to be given to the tellers
of the glad tidings. Then Raghava, having been honored by
the multitude and saluted the sovercign, ascended a car,
and repaired unto his shining residence. And: the citizens,
hearing those words of the monarch, as if fraught with some
speedy good fortune unto them, made their obeisance unto
that lord of men, and repairing to their homes, with delighted
minds, worshipped the gods.


SECTION Iv.


Wren the citizens had gone away, the king versed in
the time and place of ceremonies, after deliberating with his
counsellors fixed the time (of the installation.) And his con-
clusion was even this “To-morrow the Pushy’ will be in ; and
to-morrow should my son, Rama of eyes like lotus-leaves be
installed as heir-apparent.” Then entering the inner apart-


AYODHVARANDAM. 191


ment king Dagaratha said unto the charioteer Sumantra,—
“Do thou again bring Rama hither.” In response to those
words, the charioteer again speedily went unto Rama's
residence,for bringing him thither. His fresh approach having
been announced unto Rama by the warders, the latter, filled
with apprehension, became anxious. And bringing Sumantra
in, Rima with eagerness said “Tell me fully the reason of
this thy fresh visit.’ Thereupon, the charioteer told him,—
“The sovereign wisheth to behold thee. Thou hast known
the occasion; and now decide whether thou wilt go thither
or not.” Hearing the charioteer's speech, Rama also in
haste repaired unto the king's palace, with the view of
again beholding the lord of men. And on hearing of Rima’s
arrival, king Dagaratha made him enter his own chamber,
with the view of communicating unto him something
exceedingly agreeable. And immediately on entering
his father’s residence, the graceful Raghava seeing his father
from a distance, bent low with clasped hands. Thereupon
raising Rama as he was bending down, and embracing him,
and pointing out a seat, the protector of the earth again
spake unto him,—"O Rama, enjoying at my will the good
things of life, [have grown old; and have attained great
age. I have worshipped the deitigs by celebrating hundreds
of sacrifices with numerous Dakshinas and gifts of boiled
rice; and incomparable on earth, thou hast been horn
unto me for a son after my heart. I have given whatever
had been wanted (by others); I have finished my studies,
O foremost of men. 1 have, O hero, acted and enjoyed.
I have been emancipated from my obligations unto the
celestials and saints, and the Pifris, and the Vipras, and
myself.* And naught now remaineth to be done by me
save thy installation. Therefore it behoveth thee to do even


* Sacrifice, study, son, gift, enjoyment are the five means of clearing
the debts one owes to the celestials, the saints the fitris, the vipras
and sclf—T.


na RAMAPANA,


what I say unto thee. To-day the subjects in a body have

expressed their desire of having thee for their sovereign.

Therefore, O son, I shail install thee as the heir-apparent.
© R&ghava, to-night I have dreamt inauspicious dreams.
Stars with tremendous sounds, shoot by day, accompanied
with thunder-claps. The astrologers say that the star of my
life hath been invaded by those terrible plancts, the Sun,
Mars, and Rahu. It generally happens that when such
signs manifest themselves, the king cometh by a terrible
calamity, and may meet with death itsclf. Therefore, O
Raghava, my thoughts change, be thou installed (in the
kingdom), for fickle is the mind of all creatures, To-day,
before meeting Pushy, the moon has entered the Punarvasu
asterism; and the astrologers say that to-morrow it will
certainly be in conjunction with Pushya. My heart
urgeth me to instal thee during the Pushy& conjunction, so
Oh! afilicter of foes, 1 shall instal thee to-morrow as heir-
apparent. Therefore do thou along with my daughter-in-law
commencing from sun-sct, serving the prescribed restric-
tions, and lying’ down on a bed of Kuga grass, spend
the night in fast. And let thy friends vigilantly protect
thee all around, for many are the impediments that happen
in affairs like this. In.my opinion, during the interval
that Bharata is away from the city, should thy installation
be effected most opportuncly ; even though thy brother
Bharata ever stayeth entirely by the course of the honest ;
he followeth his elder brother; and is righteous-souled ;
tender-hearted : and of subdued senses. But in my opinion,
the hearts of men are inconstant,—and, O Raghava, the hearts
even of the virtuous change by the action of the natural
impulses,” Having been thus addressed in the matter of his
coming installation in the next day, Rama, with the king’s
permission embodied in ‘Go thou,” grecting his father,
repaired unto his quarters. And entering his residence in
the interests of the installation ordered by the monarch, he


AYODHVAKENDAM. 193


immediately issued out, and went to the inner apartment of
his mother. There, Rama found his mother in the temple,
clad in silk, adoring the gods, and silently praying for his
royal luck. There, hearing of the welcome installation of
R&ma, had already come SumitrS, and Lakshmana and Sita
summoned (by Kangalya). Hearing of the installation of his
son in the office of heirapparent during the influence
of the Pushya, at that time, tended by Sumitra and
Sita and Lakshmana, there stood Kaucaly, meditating
the (triune) person Janarddana, through suspension of
breath. Rama, approaching and saluting her engaged in
auspicious observance, addressed her in excellent words,
cheering her up,—“‘O mother, by my father have I
been appointed to the task of governing the people. And,
agreeably to the desire of my father, to morrow will
take place my installation. To-night Sita will fast
along with me. The priests have said thus; and this
also hath been declared by my father. Do thou therefore
even to-day provide those necessary auspicious things that
will be required for myself and Vaidehi on the occasion of
the coming installation.”

Hearing of that for which she had ever wished, Kaugaly4,
her voice choking with the vapour Begot of delight, addressed
Rama, saying,—“Rama, my child, be thou long Sived ; and
may thy enemics find destruction! Furnished with this
good fortune, do thou gladden Sumitra's as well as my own
relatives. Qh‘! thou wast born under an auspicious star:
thou hast, O son, by thy virtues gratified thy sire Dacaratha.
Ah ! not unfruitful has proved my


isinterested observance of

vow unto the lotus-eyed Person; for this royal fortune of

the IkshwAku race shall rest upon thee.” .
Having been thus addressed by his mother, Rama looking

athis brother (Lakshmana), seated in humble guise with

clasped hands, with smile spake unto him, saying,—“O

Lakshmana, do thou together with me rule this carth. Thou

25


194 RAMAYANA.


art my second self ; and this good fortune hath taken posses-
sion of thee (as well). Do thou, O Sumitra’s son, enjoy
every desirable thing and the privileges pertaining to royal-
ty. My life and this kingdom I covet for thy sake alone.”
Having said this unto Lakshmana, and paid reverence unto
his mother, Rama with their permission went with Sita to
his own quarters.


SECTION Vv.


Huvins given his directions unto Rama as to his ine
coming installation on the morrow, the king, summoning his
priest, Vasishtha spake unto him, saying—“O thou, having
asceticism for thy wealth, go, unto K&akutstha, and for his
welfare and obtaining the kingdom, make him fast along with
my daughter-in-law.” Thereupon, saying, “So be it,” that
best of those versed in the Veda, the worshipful Vasistha
conversant with mantras, that one practicing cxcellent
vows, mounting a Brahma car, himself went unto the resi-
dence of Rama cognizant of manéras, for the putpose of
making him fast. And that foremost of ascetics, fhaving
reached Rama's sable hued residence resembling a mass of
clouds, passed through three several apartments, mounted
onthe car. With the view of honoring the saint worthy
of honor, Rama swiftly issued out of his abode. And
nearing the car of that intelligent one, Rama, personally
taking him by the hand, made him descend. Finding Rama
so humble and dear, the priest addressed him, gratifying and
delighting him with words that were acceptable,-"O Rima
thy father hath been well pleased with thee ; since thou
achievest the kingdom (through him). Do thou to-day fast
with Sitd. And in the morning, the king, thy father
Dagaratha, will, well-pleased install thee as heir-apparent


AVODRYAKANDAM 195


like Nahusha installing YaySti.’ Having said this, that
pure spirited one, observing vows with mantras, made
Rama fast along with Siti. Then having been duly worship-
ped by Rama, and taken K&kutstha’s per:nisssn,
the spiritual preceptor of the king, went avvay
Rama’s residence. Rama, having pas
with sweet-speeched friends, and been honored by the
with their permission entered his apartment. At that
time Rama’s residence was filled with joyovs men and
women ; and it was like unto a lake containing lotuses and
graced with maddened birds.

(On the other hand) Vasishtha, issuing from the
palace of Rama like unto the king’s palace itself, found
the street filled with people. On all sides, Ayodhy&’s
high-ways were crowded with groups of men full of
curiosity. The tumult that arose in the high-ways
in consequence of the concourse and noise, was like
the roaring of the ocean. The streets were cleared and
washed and hung with garlands; and that day Ayodhya
had her dwellings furnished with upraised flagstaffs. In
the city of Ayodhy& men with women and children eagerly
expected the rising of the sun (next day), and R&ma’s ins-
tallation ; and the people burnt to Sehold in Ayodhya the
august festivity, that was Hlke unto an ornament unto the
subjects, and that enhanced the joy of the people. Divid-
ing the crowd thronging the high-way, the priest slowly
proceeded to the royal family. And ascending the palace
like unto a peak of the Himavat, he met with the lord of men,
like Vrihaspati meeting with Sakra. Seeing him come,
the king rising up from his royal seat, asked Vasishtha
whether his intention had been carried out, whereupon
Vasishtha answered that it had. The courtiers who had all
along sat with Dagaratha, rose from the seats, for worship-
ping the priest. Then with the permission of his spiritual
guide, leaving that assembly of men, the monarch entered


Seren


196 RAMAYANA.


his inner apartment like a liog entering his den. Even
as the moon illumincth the firmament crowded with stars, the
handsome king entered his mansion, like unto the abode of
the mighty Indra, and thronged with females excellently at-
tired, —gracing it (by his presence).


SECTION VI.


Ww EN the priest had gone away, Rama, having
bathed and with a collected mind, began to adore Nara-
yana, in company with his wife having expansive eycs. Then
raising the vessel of clarified butter unto his head (by way
of paying reverence), he in accordance with the ordinance
began to offer oblations unto the flaming fire on behalf of
that mighty deity. Then, having partaken of the remaining
quantity of the clarified butter, Rama prayed for his own
welfare, and meditated on the god Narayana. The son of the
best of men with a collected mind, and restraining his speech
lay down on a fuga bed together with Vaidehi within the
graceful dwelling of Vishnu.

When a single watth only remained of the night,
Rama awoke, and made his residenec well decorated.
Now he hearing the melodious utterances of genealo-
gists and panegyrists and Brabmanas versed in the Puranas,
Rima finished devotions for the prior twilight, and
with an intent mind began to recite ( Sdvatr/ * Aud
clad in a clear silk dress, he with bended head hymned
the destroyer of Madhu, and made the regenerate ones
perform the Swastivdchana ceremony. Already resounding
with the blares of trumpets, Ayodhya became filled with


* The celebrated hymn tothe sun, the most sacred thing in all the
Vedas.—T.


_ AYODHYAKANDAM. 197


the sweet and solemn tones of the expression “Holy day”
uttered by them. The denizens of Ayodhy3, hearing that
Raghava had fasted with Vaidehi, rejoiced exceedingly.
Then the citizens, hearing of the installation of Rama,
and seeing that the night had departed, fell to adorning the
city, Standards with pennons were beautifully reared up
in the abodes of the gods resembling a peak, enveloped
with white clouds, and at the crossing, and on high-ways ;
and over the chaityg tree ; and edifices ; and over the ware-
houses of merchants abounding in goods and the goodiy
and prosperous mansions of houscholders ; and over all the
council-houses ; and conspicuous trees. The multitude
then heard the music, soothing unto the ear and heart, of
stage managers, dancers and singers chanting. The people
began to talk with each other anent the installation of
Rama; and the time for his installation having arrived, on
terraces and houses, and doorways boys playizg in bodies,
conversed with each other concerning the installation of
Raima. On the occasion of the investiture of Rima, the
goodly high-ways were adorned with garlands,and scented with
dhupa incense—by the citizens, And fearing lest Rama should
come out over night (to behold the beautified capital), the
inhabitants of the city, by way of orhamentation as with the
view of beholding Rama himself, had by the road side reared
up lamp-stands in the form of (branched) trees. Eagerly
expecting the investiture of Rama as the heir-apparent,
all having thus ornamented the city and assembling them-
selves on terraces and in council-halls, talking with
each other, extolled the lord of men, saying, —'Ah
high-souled is this king—the perpetuator of the Ikshwaku
race ; for, knowing himself as old, he will install Rama in
the kingdom. Obliged we have been, since good Rama
capable of reading character, will be the lord of earth, and
our protector. He is of a heart devoid of arrogance, and
is learned ; and rightcous-souled ; and affectionate to his


198 RAMAYANA.


brothers. Raghava loveth us even as he doth his own
brothers. May the sinless and pious king Dagaratha live
long ; for it is through his grace that we shall behold Rama
installed.” The inhabitants of the provinces, who having
heard the tidings, had come from various regions, heard the
citizens conversing thus. Desirous of beholding the installa-
tion of Rama, they coming into the city from var‘ous
directions, filled Rama's city. As the vast concourse
entered (the city), there was heard am uproar like unto
the roaring of the heaving ocean during the fullness of
the moon. Then that city resembling the regions
of Indra, being filled on all sides with tumult raised
by the dwellers of the provinces who had come to behold
(the installation), resembled the ocean when its waters are
agitated by the aquatic animals inhabiting it.


SECTION Vil.


A WOMAN, brought up with Kaikeyi, who formerly served
as a maid-servant, the family of her maternal uncle, at her
‘own will, ascended the palace resembling the moon.
Manthara beheld from the palace the high-ways of Ayodhy&
well watered all round, and strewn with lotuses, and adorned
with standards bearing gay pennons ; with thoroughfares and
roads leading along undulating lands ; sprinkled with sandal
water, and crowded with men who had performed their ablu
tions; and echoing with the accents of regenerate ones
“bearing garlands and sweetmeats in their hands ; and having
the doorways of the temples painted white ; and- resounding
with the sounds of musical instruments; and filled with
many folks ; and singing with Veda chantings; and with
its horses and elephants delighted, and cows and bulls emit-


APODHYARINDAM. 199


ting roars; and with standards displaying flags erected
by the exhilarated citizens. Upon seeing Ayodhy4 (in such
excitement) Manthara was seized with exceeding surprise,
Manthar’, seeing a nurse hard by clad in white silk, with
her eyes expanded with delight, asked her, saying,—‘What
for Rama’s mother although close-fisted, is cheerfully and
with the greatest possible alacrity dispensing wealth unto the
people ? And what for is the general overflow of joy? And
what doth the delighted monarch purpose todo?” ‘There-
upon bursting with very great delight, the nurse communicat-
ed unto the hump-backed woman the high fortune awaiting
R&ma, saying,—“To-morrow under Pushy’, king Dagaratha
will install the sinless Raghava having his anger under
control, as heir-apparent to the throne.” Hearing the words
of the nurse, the hump-backed one, speedily growing
angry, descended from the edifice resembling a summit
of the Kailaga hill, Burning in ire, the sin-seexing
Manthara addressed Kaikeyi, lying dowa, saying,—“Up,
ye senseless one} What for art thou down? A great
danger approacheth thee. Thou understandeth not that a
mighty grief overfloweth thee. Thou boastest of good for-
tune while misfortune is thine in the shape of luck. Thy
good fortune is surely unstable like tlfe tide of a river during
summer, Thus addressed by the sin-seeking hump-backed
(hag) in exceedingly harsh language, Kaikeyi became afflicted
with great grief. And Kaikeyi said unto the hump-backed
one,—"Is any evil present, O Manthara ? I do not find thee
with countenance fallen and sore distressed with grief.” The
hump-backed Manthara, skilled in speech, who really sought
Kaikeyi’s welfare, hearing the latter’s sweet-accented words,
displaying sorrow greater than Kaikeyi's own, lamenting,
and enlisting Kaikeyi’s feelings against Rama, uttered words
inflamed with anger, saying—"O worshipful one, an en-
during and terrible destruction is imminent unto thee. King
Dagaratha will install Rama as heir-apparent. I have been


200 RAUEYANA.


sunk in a fathomless fear ; and am afilicted with grief and
heaviness. And as if burning in fire I, seeking thy wel-
fare, have come unto thee. For, O Kaikeyi, great waxeth my
grief on witnessing thy sorrow ; and my advancement
progresseth along with thine. There is no doubt about
this. Born in a race of king thou art the queen of this
lord of earth, Why dost mot thou then realise the
steruness of royal morality. Thy maintainer speaketh
most morally; but is crafty for all that: he speaketh
blandiy, but hath a crooked heart. Him thou takest as of
blessed condition; and thercfore art gulicd. Speaking
unto thee soft words bare of substance, he will, his heart on
the alert, to-day compass the welfare of Kaugaly’, Having
sent Bharata unto the home of thy relatives, that wicked-
minded one will establish Rama in his ancestral kingdom
rid of its thorn. Thou,O girl, in consideration of thy welfare,
hast like unto a mother taken unto thy Jap a venomous snake
in the form of thy husband. Even what is done by an
enemy or a serpent left alone, is being done by Dagaratha
of wicked ways and false soothing spcech, unto thee and
thy own son. And, O girl, deserving as thou art of happi-
ness, the king having established Rama in the kingdom ;
thou wilt be annihilated along with thy own. The time hath
come, O Kaikayi,—do thou on the spur enter upon that which
would turn to thy advantage. And, O thou, influenced by
surprise, do thou deliver thyself, me and Bharata also.”
Hearing Manthara’s words, that one of graceful counte-
nance filled with delight, and looking like the autumnal
moon-light, rose up from her bed. Inspired with ex-
ceeding joy, Kaikeyi, struck with surprise, made unto the
hump-backed woman a present of an excellent and elegant
ornament. And having given her the ornament, that paragon
among the fair Kaikeyi joyfully, addressed Manthara,
saying,—“O Manthara! highly welcome is the news that
thou hast communicated unto me. And surely thou hast told


AVODHYARAND: M. 203


me what is dear unto my heart, what shall 1 do for thee?
Difference find I none between R4ma and Bharata. Therefore
delighted am I that the king purposeth installing Rama in
the kingdom. There is no other ambrosial speech that is
excellent and acceptable unto me, compared with the installa-
tion of Rama. Therefore do thou ask of me whatever reward
dost thou want and I shall give thee.”


SECTION vitt.


Moasrnar’, making Kaikeyi the object of her wrath,
threw off the noble ornament, and spoke these words, in anger
and grief,—"Thou senseless girl, wherefore dost thou display
thy joy on such an unfit occasion. Thou dost not see that
thou art in the bosom of an ocean of grief. Being grieved
at heart do I laugh at thee inwardly, O worshipful lady,
because thou having met with signal calamity, rejoicest even
in what should be lamented. I Jament thee for thy perversion
of sense, What sensible woman can rejoice in the advance-
ment of a co-wife’s son, like unto death itself? From Bharata
proceeds Rama's fear concerning the kingdom to which both
have an equal claim, Thinking of this, I am pressed down
with sorrow, because fear proceeds from the person who fears
much, The mighty armed Lakshmana hath for certain in
all ways taken refuge in Rama; and Satrughna like unto
Lakshmana hath taken refuge in the Kakutstha, Bharata. With
reference to gradation of birth, the probability is in favor of
Bharata’s attempting the kingdom ; yet by reason (of Rama’s
being the elder) of the two, Bharata hath been thrown off.
Anticipating the peril that might spring unto thy son from
Rama, learned and versed in the functions of the Kshatriya,
and of quick decision, Itremble. Surely Kaugalya is of blessed
fortune, for to-morrow under Pushya she foremost of the twice- '


26


202 RAMAYANA.


born ones will instal her son as the mighty heir-apparent
unto the empire. Thou wilt, with clasped hands, serve aa
a slave the illustrious Kaugalya, mistress of the world, and
brimming over with joy, with all her foes discomfitted. Thus
along with us thou wilt attend her commands, and thy son
-also will await the pleasure of Rima. And Rama’s wives*
‘together with their hand-maids will be filled with delight ;
and in consequence of Bharata’s name, thy daughters-in-law
will be afflicted with sorrow.”

Seeing Manthara dead set against Rama, and speaking
in this wise, the noble Kaikeyi praised the virtues of Rama.
“Rama is cognizant of morality, and filled with perfections,
and accomplished, and grateful, and endowed with truth, and
pure. And as he is the eldest son of the king, he deserveth
the kingdom as heir-apparent. That long-lived one shall
maintain his brothers and his retainers even like a father.
Why then, O hump-backed one, do thou grieve, hearing
Rama's installation. And for certain, that foremost
of men, Bharata also, an hundred years after Rama,
will attain the kingdom bequeathed by his father and
grand-father. OQ Manthar&, thou burnest (with grief) in
this auspicious time. Our good fortune will come (after
this in the shape of Bharata's installation); why then dost thou
grieve. Surely Rama is dearer unto me than Bharata; and he
also loveth me more than he doth Kaugalya. And if the king-
dom be R&ma’s it will be also Bharata’s at the same time.
Rama regardeth his brothers even as his own self.”

Hearing Kaikeyi’s words, Manthard exccedingly aggrieved,
sighing hot and hard, thus addressed Kaikeyi, saying,—
“Regarding that to be evil which is thy good, thou dost not
through thy want of understanding know that thou art going
to be drowned in a sea of grief and peril. Raghava will
become king, and after Raghava his son,—so that, O


* Historically Rama had but one wife, Manthara here anticipated that
Roma would marry many wives like his father after the installation.—Z,


AYODHVAKANDAM. 203


Kaikeyi, Bharata will come to be at once cut off from the
royal line. O emotional one, surely all the sons of the
king do not obtain the kingdom. And if all were placed
on the throne, mighty would be the disturbance therefrom.
Therefore it is that kings, O Kaikeyi, lay the task of
Government on the eldest son if worthy, or else upon a
younger most meritorious. This thy son, O affectionate one,
cast off from the royal race, and deprived of happiness,
will fare like one forlorn. Thou dost not understand that
it is for thee that I am taking such pains; and it is
evident that thoa dost not understand that I have come
to thce for thy good. Thou art conferring on me rewards
on the advancement of thy co-wife. For certain, Rama
having attaiped the kingdom without let, will send Bharata
either to a distant land, or to the other world. Bharata
isamere boy, and by thee it is that he hath been sent unto
his maternal uncle's mansion. Even in immobile objects
attachment grows by virtue of nearness. Satrughna also
ever following Bharata hath gone with him, He is attached
unto Bharata as Lakshmana is attached unto Rama. It is
heard that once upon a time the woodmen had intended to cut
down a tree; but it was relieved from the high peril because
of the proximity of prickly shrubs* around it. Sumitra’s
son protects Rama and Raghava protects Lakshmana.
Their fraternal love like that of the Aswins is celebrated
in the world, Therefore Rama will never do any wrong
unto Lakshmana ; but he will do wrong unto Bharata, there
is no doubt about this. Therefore let that son of Raghu
be sent unlo the woods from the palace. This pleaseth
me; and this also is for thy supreme welfare; and in
this wise also wiil be realised the good of thy relations.
But if Bharata can get at his ancestral kingdom by just
means, that would also be welcome to thy kindred. That
boy deserving of happiness is the natural enemy of Rama,
How can he live under the prosperous Rama being deprived


204 RANMAPANA,


of all wealth? Therefore it behoveth thee to save Bharata
about to be overcome by Rama, like a lion pursuing the
jeader of an elephant herd in a forest. Thy co-wife, Rama’s
mother, had formerly through pride and good fortune been
slighted by thee. Why will not she upon thee wreak her
revenge now? When R&ma will obtain the earth furnished
with many oceans and mountains, then, O proud dame,
thou rendered forlorn, wilt along with Bharata, sustain sorry
discomfiture. And when Rama will obtain the earth, Bharata
will certainly meet with destruction, therefore do thou ponder
as to how thon canst place thy son on the throne, and banish
thy enemy.”


SECTION IX.


Tas addressed, Kaikeyi, with her countenance flaming in
wrath, sighing hot and hard, spoke unto Manthara, saying,—~
“Even this very day will I speedily send Rama into the
forest and without delay install Bharata in the royal heir-
apparentship. Do thou now sce by what means I can effect
this. Bharata must obtain the kingdom and never Rama.”
Thus addressed by the noble one, the wicked-minded
Manthar4, envious of Rama's interest, thus spoke unto
Kaikeyi,—“Ah | O Kaikeyi, consider: Listen to my words,
telling thee how thy son alone will obtain the kingdom. Dost
thou not remember, O Kaikeyi, or concealest although remem-
bering, wishing to hear from me of the means for thy welfare
which thou thyself hadst before communicated unto me? If,
O dalliance loving damsel, it is thy wish to hear it as told by
me, listen thou, I will tell it thee. And having heard it,
do thou act accordingly.” Wearing Manthara’s words,
Kaikeyi raised herself a little from her tastefully spread bed,
and said,—“Do thou tell me the means. By what means, O


AYODHYAKANDAM 205


Manthara, Bharata will gain the kingdom, and in no wise
Rama.” Thus addressed by the worshipful one, the wicked-
minded Manthara,—envying Rama’s interest, thus spnke unto
Kaikeyi:—“Formerly daring the wars of the gods and Asuras,
thy husband taking thee along, went with the royal saints
for the purpose of assisting the king of the celestials,
O Kaikeyi, in Dandaka, situated towards the south,
there is the city known by the name of Vaijayanta,
where dwelt Timidhvaja, otherwise called Samvara,
—possessed of an hundred conjurations, and a mighty
Asura. That unreproved one gave battle unto Sakra accom-
panied by the celestials. And in that mighty conflict the
Rakshasas during the night used to drag by main force persons
asleep having their bodies cut all over, and kill them. Then
King Dagaratha warred with the Asuras most heroically. And
that mighty armed one, O worshipful lady, losing his senses
in consequence of wounds received from weapons, was re-
moved from the field by thee. In that imminent danger, thy
husband, sadly cut by weapons, was preserved by thee.
Thereupon gratified, he, G, thou of gracious presence,
granted thee two boons. Whereupon thou didst say,--‘I shall
receive from my lord the boon whenever I shall wish.’ There-
upon that high-souled one said,—'So be it.’ I did not know
anything about this, O respected one; and it was thou who
didst formerly communicate this (unto me). And it is because
1 bear affection unto thee that I have not forgotten it. Now
do thou forcibly make the monarch desist from installing
Rama; and ask thy husband for these two boons,—the instal-
lation of Bharata, and the exile of Rama into the woods for
fourteen years. On Rama having been banished into the
woods for fourteen years, thy son securing the affections of
subjects, will be firmly established (on the throne). Entering
the anger-chamber to day, do thou, O daughter of Agwapati,
clad in soiled garment, lie down on the uncovered floor.
Do not look at him, nor speak tu him aught. Do thou on


206 RAMAYANA,


beholding the lord of the earth,over-whelmed with grief, weep
only. Thou hast always been the favorite wife of thy husband.
Of this I have not the least doubt. For thy sake the monarch
can enter into a flame. Hecan never anger thee, nor can
he eye thee when angered. For compassing thy pleasure
the king can renounce life itself. Therefore the monarch can
never set aside thy word. O senseless lady, do thou ‘now
reflect upon the strength of thy good fortune. King Dagaratha
will offer thee rubies and pearls and gold and gems of various
kinds ; but do not thou bend thy heart to them. Do thou, O
exalted dame, bring into Dagaratha’s recollection the two
boons which he had granted thee at the time of the war between
the gods and Asuras, and thou shalt not fail to achieve
thy objects. And when that descendant of Raghu, raising
thee will go to bestow the boons, do thou then binding
him fast by oath, unfold unto the monarch the boons,saying,—
‘Send Rama unto the forest for nine and five years, and let
Bharata, becoming on earth the foremost of monarchs, carry
on the Government.’ And Rama having been banished for
fourteen years, thy son growing (in the interval) firm and fast,
will remain (on the throne) during the rest of his life. Do
thou, therefore, O worshipful one, demand even the banish-
ment of Rama; for by this it is, O damsel, all interests will
be secured unto thy son. Thus banished Rama will no
longer maintain possession of the hearts of the people ; and
thy Bharata with his foes put out, will be the king. By the
time that Rama returns from the forest, thy son, thy prudent
son along with his friends, securing the hearts of the people
externally and internally, will have been firmly established on
the throne, Now is the time, l apprehend. Renouncing fear,
do thou forcibly make the monarch remove from his mind his
intention of installing Rama.”

Having been thus made to accept that for good which was
really evil, Kaikeyi, desirous of obtaining the boons, was filled
with delight. And at the words of the hump-backed woman,


AYODHYAKANDAM. 207


that exceedingly beautiful Kaikeyi experienced the height of
surprise, and betook herself to this wrong course, like a mare
attached to her young, (springing up after it). And she said
unto Manthari,—“O excellent wench, O speaker of things
fair, thy wisdom I do not dishonor. In ascertaining the pro-
priety or otherwise of actions, thou art the very first of hump-
backed women on earth. And ever intent on my interest,
thou seekest my welfare. I had not, O hump-backed one,
(ere this) apprehended the endeavours of the king. O hump-
backed one, there are many deformed, crooked and unsightly
women (on earth); but thou alone down, lookest beautiful
like a lotus bent by the breeze. Thy breast weighed down by
thy hump, is high near the shoulders; and beneath is thy
belly graced with a goodly navel, which hath grown lean from
shame (on holding the attitude of thy bust.) Thy buttocks
are spacious; and thy breasts are firm. Thy countenance
is like the bright moon, Ah! O Manthar&,how lovely dost thou
look! Thy hips are smooth, and is decked with chains;
and thy thighs and legs are of large proportions. O Manthar&,
© thou clad in linen garment, O graceful damsel, with
thy pair of spacious humps, thou goest before me like a she-
crane. In thy heart reside all those thousand-conjurations
belonging to that lord of the Asuras,* Samvara; and besides
thousands there are many more. Intelligence and policy and
conjurations reside in thy elevated hump resembling the nave
of a chariot-wheel. When Bharata hath been installed and
Rama gone to the woods, I will, O hump-backed one, furnish
thy hump with a garland made, O beautiful one, of well
melted gold. And when I shall have attained my object and
be happy, I will smear thy hump with sandal paste. O
hump-backed one, I will prepare for thy fate an excellent
tilaka of gold ; as well as other ornaments. Wearing elegant
apparel, thou wilt go about like a very goddess, With an
incomparable countenance challenging the moon himself,
thou wilt attain pre-eminence, defying thy foes. Even as


208 RAMAYANA.


thou servest me, other hump-backed women adorned with
every ornament will serve thy feet.”

Thus praised by Kaikeyi, as she was lying down ona
white bed, like unto fire upon the sacrificial dais, Manthara
addressed her, saying—‘“O blessed one, when water has
flown out, it is not proper to sect up a dyke, Arise. Do thy
welfare. Show thyself unto the king.” Puffed up with the
pride of good fortune, that noble lady of expansive eyes thus
encouraged (by Manthar4), went with her to the anger-
chamber. (Having entered the chamber), that exalted lady
put off her pearl neck-lace priced at many hundreds and
thousands of gold, together with other elegant, beautiful and
rich ornaments. Then sitting down upon the ground,
Kaikeyi, comparable unto gold, under the influence of
Manthara's words, spoke unto her, saying—“Do thou, O
hump-backed one, tell the monarch, that I am dead at this
place. On Raghava having gone to the forest, Bharata
will obtain the earth. I do not require gold, or gems, or
repasts ; this will be the end of my existence if Rama be
installed,” ‘

Again the hump-backed woman addressed Bharata’s
mother in exceedingly cruel language fraught with good unto
Bharata and evil unto ‘Rama,—"If Raghava attaineth the
kingdom, thou wilt surely grieve along with thy son. There-
fore, O blessed one, do thou strive so that thy son Bharata
be installed,”

Thus momentarily pierced by the wordy shafts shot by
Manthara, the queen exceedingly surprised, laying her hand
on her bosom, wrathfully broke out,—“Either beholding me
gone unto the regions of Death, thou wilt apprize the king of
it, or Raghava repairing unto the forest for a long time,
Bharata will attain his desire. If Raghava doth not repair
hence into the forest, I will not desire beds, nor garlands, nor
sandal paste, nor colyrium, nor meat, nor drinks, nor life.’
Having said these cruel words, and thrown off every orna-


AYODHYASKANDAM 209


ment, the wrathful dame lay down on the ground having no
covering, like a fallen Kinnari. Casting away her excellent
garlands and ornaments with her countenance clouded with
the gloom of wrath, the King’s wife became sunk in thought
looking like a sky enveloped in darkness, with the stars hid.


SECTION Xx.


"Thus perversely advised by the exceedingly wicked
Manthar&, the noble and sagacious lady, influenced by passion,
having completely decided in her mind as to her course, was
lying down on the ground like a Kinnari pierced with poisoned
shafts, and gradually told everything unto Manthara. And
having made up her mind, that lady wrought up with ire,
being under the influence of Manthar&’s words,sighed hot and
hard like the daughter of a N&ga; and for a while reflected
on the way which was to bring her happiness.Then her friend
and well-wisher Manthara, hearing of her resolution, rejoiced
exceedingly, as if she had already secured success. And,
having fully ascertained her course, that weak one being
angry, lay down upon the floor, knitting her eyebrows. The
ground was strewn with garlands and excellent ornaments
which Kaikeyi had cast away ; and they adorned the earth
as the stars adorn the welkin. Like an enfeebled Kinnari
she clad in a soiled garment, binding fast her braid, lay
down in the anger-chamber.

The monarch having issued orders for the installation of
Rama,entered his inner apartment after giving permission to
the courtiers to repair to their respective abodes. “To-day
it has been fixed to install Rama, but Kaikeyi has not yet
heard of it’—thus thought the monarch. Therefore with
the view of communicating the welcome news unto that lady
deserving of good, (Kaikeyi), that renowned one of subdued


27


310 RAMAYANA.


senses entered the inner apartment. Like unto the moon
entering the sky covered with white clouds and with Rahu
present in it, that one of high fame entered the excel-
lent apartment of Kaikeyi, having parrots and peacocks
and Xraunchas and swans, resounding with the sounds of
musical instruments,—containing hump-backed and dwar-
fish women, graced with houses containing creepers, and pic-
tures, and adorned with askokas and chantpakas, furnished
with daises composed of ivory and silver and gold, and ad-
orned with trees bearing flowers and fruits always, and tanks,
having superb seats made of ivory, silver and gold ; rich with
various viands and drinks and edibles, with costly ornaments,
and resembling heaven itself ; and the prosperous monarch
having entered his own inner apartment did not see his dear
Kaikeyi on the excellent bed. The lord of men not seeing
his favorite wife, asked (within himself) and was struck
with grief. Never before this that noble lady spent that
hour ( at any other place ); nor had the monarch ever entered
the empty apartment. Then the king entering the apart-
ment asked (a sentinel) concerning Kaikeyi, not knowing that
that unwise woman was hankering after her self-interest, as on
previous occasions not finding her he used to ask. Thereupon
hurriedly and with clasped hands, the warder said,-“Worship-
ful sire, the noble lady exceedingly angry, hath repaired
unto the anger-chamber.” Hearing the warder’s word, the
king exceedingly anxious, with his senses agitated and affiict-
ed, again grieved. There burning with grief, the lord of the
earth saw herlying down on the ground in an improper
guise. And the sinless aged (monarch) saw on the ground
his youthful wife dearer unto him than life itself, cherishing
an unrighteous intention,—like a torn creeper, and lying
down like a very goddess, resembling a Kinnari fallen from
heaven because of sin, like a fallen Apsar&, like unto an
illusion spread to take another, and like an ensnared doe, or
a she-elephant that has been pierced with an envenomed |


APODHYARANDAM. aur


shaft shot by a hunter. And himself resembling a mighty
elephant in the midst of a forest, the king, exceedingly
aggrieved, out of affection. gently passing his hand
upon Kaikeyi’s person, thus addressed her furnished
with eyes resembling lotus’ petals,—“I do not know why
thou hast been angry with me. O noble lady, who has
reprimanded thee, or who has offended thee, that, O auspi-
cious one, in this guise thou art lying down in dust enhancing
my sorrow? And wherefore art thou down on the ground, I,
who seek thy welfare, being yet alive? O thou that afflictest
my heart, art like one under the influence of a malignant
spirit, I have skilful physicians whom I have completely
satisfied with gifts—they will render thee whole. Do thou,
O angry wench, mention thy malady. Whom dost thou wish
to please ; and whom to displease ? Who shall to-day receive
an welcome office, and who a highly unwelcome one? Do
not conceal thy. thoughts, nor, O noble one, afflict thy
person, Who, that should not be slain, shall be put to death;
and who that should, is to be set at liberty? Who that is
poor is to be made rich; and who that is affluent is to be
turned into a pauper? I and mine are at thy command. I
dare not cross any wish of thine. Tell me thy mind, and I
will satisfy thee by laying down life itself. Thou knowest
the influence thou hast upon me,—therefore, it behoveth
thee not to entertain any apprehension. By all my good
deeds I swear that I will compass thy pleasure. The space
that is lighted up by the solar disc is mine—the Draviras,
and the Sindhus, and the Sauviras, and Shurashtras and
the Dakshinapathas, and the Bangas, and the Angas, and
the Magadhas, and the Matsyas, and the flourishing Kasis
and the Kogalas. In these are produced many things, wealth
and corn and animals. Do thou, O Kaikeyi, ask for those
things that thy mind may take a fancy to. What,O timid one,
is the use of afflicting thyself thus? O beauteous damsel,
arise, arise. Do thou, O Kaikeyi, unfold unto me the cause


212 RAMAYANA.


whence hath proceeded thy fear. On hearing the reason, I
will dispell it, even as the sun drieth up the dew.”

Thus addressed and encouraged, she desirous of saying
that disagreeable thing with the view of afflicting her lord
still more, spoke unto him thus.


SECTION XI


Anp unto that ruler of the earth extremely under the
influence of passion, Kaikeyi spoke cruclly, saying,
“C worshipful one, none has wronged or reprimanded
me. 1 have a certain intention, which I wish that
you will carry out. If thou wilt execute-that, do thou
then promise to that effect. Then only will I express
my desire.” Thereupon, by his hands placing Kaikeyi’s
head upon his lap, the mighty monarch, under the influence
of passion, smiling fairly, addressed her lying on the ground,
“QO thou that art swollen with the pride of good fortune,
thou knowest that foremost of men, Rama excepted, there
liveth not any that is dearer to me than thyself. I swear by
that invincible prime of men even the high-souled Raghava—
who is the stay of my existence. Do thou tell me thy heart’s
desire. By that Rama, Kaikeyi. whom if I do not see for
a moment, I die for certain, do I swear that whatever thou
wilt say I will accomplish. By that Rama, O Kaikeyi, fore-
most of men—whom I hold dearer than my other sons, do
I swear that, | will accomplish whatever thou wilt say. O
gentle one, my heart is in what Isay. Do thou, considering
this, deliver me from this distress. Taking all this into
consideration, do thou, O Kaikeyi, speak out what is in thy
mind. Thou seest the power thou wieldest in me, therfore
it behoveth thee not to fear. I willdo thy pleasure by my
good deeds do I swear this.”


AYODHVAKANDAM. 213


Thereat intent upon her own interests, that exalted dame
seeing her own wish ( almost ) attained, assuming an attitude
of intercession, being rejoiced, spoke harsh words { unto the
monarch ). And delighted at the king’s speech, she unfolded that
dreadful intention of hers like unto the approaching death.—
“Thou swearest repeatedly, and conferrest on mea boon. Let
the three and thirty deities headed by Indra, hear this. Let
the Sun, and the Moon, and the Sky, and the Planets, and
Night, and Day, and the Cardinal points, and the Universe,
and the Earth, with the Gandbarvas and Rakshasas, and the
Rangers of the night, and all Beings, and the house-hold
gods residing in dwellings,—together with all other crea-
tures,—know tly ultcrances. Let all the deities hear that
a highly energetic one speaking the truth, and pure, and
cognizant of morality, and abiding by his promise, has
conferred on mea boon”. Having entreated the monarch
thus with a view to prevent him from swerving, and keeping
him firm ia his promise, she again addressed that mighty
bowman, overcome by desire, who was ready to confer on
her a boon, “Remember, O king, the incidents that took
place formerly in the war between gods and Asuras. In-
capable of taking thy life, thy enemy had rendered thee
exceedingly feeble. Because, O respected Sir, I tending
thee sleeplessly, preserved thee, thou didst grant me
two boons. Entrusting the boons then with thee, do I now,
O descendant of the Raghus, ask for them (at thy hands ),
O lord of the earth. If having religiously promised to that
effect, thou dost not confer the boon, this very day, will I,
coming by this disgrace from thee, renounce my life.”

‘When the king was completely brought under the in-
fluence of Kaikeyi, he was ensnared by her speech for his des-
truction, like a deer entering into the noose. Thereafter she
thus spoke unto the king about to confer a boon, who was
under the influence of passion, saying,—‘Of the boons that
thou hadst then promised me, I shall speak to-day : do thou


a4 RAMAYANA.


listen to my words, . Preparations are being made for ins-
talling Righava. Do thou with the provisions made ready
install Bharata in the kingdom. O exalted one, the time
has also come for thee to confer on me the second boon which
thou being pleased had promised in the war of the gods and
Asuras. Let the gentle Rama, clad in deer-skin, lead the life
of a mendicant in the Dandaka forest for the space of nine
and five years. And let Bharata gain the heir-apparentship
rid of thorns, Even this is my prime wish; and I
beseech thee but to grant the boon thou hast already
promised. Even this very day will I see Raima
despatched to the woods. Do thou by proving true unto
thy word, become the king of kings ; and preserve thy race,
character, and birth. Truthful speech, say the ascetics, is
of supreme welfare unto men in the next world.”


SECTION XII.


“Hearne Kaikeyi’s fell speech, the monarch bewailed for
atime, and then thought,—"Is this a day-dream unto me or has
bewilderment befallen my senses? Is this owing to influence
of some evil spirit or has my mind been affected y’’ Thinking
thus, the king could not arrive at the origin of ( this phenome
non); and then he swooned away. Then regaining his senses, he
was filled with grief on recollecting Kaikeyi’s words ; and
pained and woe-begone, like unto a deer at the sight of a
tigress, he fetched a deep sigh, and sat down on the uncover
ed ground. Like a venomous snake confined by power of
incantation within a circle, the lord of men, in indignation
exclaimed, “O fie!’ And deprived of his senses by grief,
he again swooned away. After a long while, regaining his
senses, he extremely aggrieved, wrathfully, and as if burning


AYODHYAKANDAM. 215


in energy, addressed Kaikeyi, saying,—Thou cruel one!
Thou of vile ways! Thou destroyer of this race! O wicked
woman, what has been done by Rima unto thee; or what
wrong have] done thee? Raghava ever serveth thee as a
mother. Why thou art then bent upon wronging him?
It is to bring down destruction upon myself that through
ignorance I brought unto this house thee like unto a serpent
of virulent poison. When all men show their regard for Rama's
virtues, for what transgression shall I forsake my dear son?
Imay renounce Kaugaly& or Sumitra or the kingdom, or life
itself; but Rama, filled with affection for his father, will I not
renounce. I experience supreme delight on beholding my
first-born ; and when I see him not, I lose my senses. The
world may exist without the Sun; and corn without water;
but this life doth not exist in this body without Rima. Do
thou then that entertainest unrighteous aims, abandon this
intention of thine. I lay my head at thy feet. Be propitious
unto me. Why dost thou, O sinful one, cherish in thy mind
such a frightful ideay Thou (often) asked me whether ! love
Bharata or not. Be that which thou hadst formerly told me
in favor of that descendant of Raghu. ‘That blessed one
is my eldest son, and the most righteous of them all’ even
this, with the view of pleasing me, théu sweet speeched one
had said. Now hearing of the installation of Rima, thou
thyself filled with grief, art making me exceedingly aggrieved.
Or in this empty chamber having been possessed, thou hast
come under influence not thy own. And this signal lawless-
ness, O exalted lady, has befallen the race of the Ikshwakus ;
the cause of which,O Thou versed in moral laws,is thy mental
derangement. Thou didst not formerly do unto me aught
that was improper or disagreeable; therefore, O thou of
expansive eyes, I cannot rely upon thee (as sane). Thou didst,
O girl, many a time tell me that Rama was equal unto thee
with the high-souled Bharata. Wherefore then, O bashful
one, dost thou fike that the illustrious and righteous Rama,


216 RAMAYANA.


O exalted dame, should reside in the forest for five and nine
years? Why dost thou like that the exceedingly tender Rama
with his soul established in virtue, sliould dwell in the
woods, undergoing terrible hardship ? Why dost thou, O thou
of graceful eyes, wish Rama, captivating all creatures, and
engaged in ministering unto thee, to be banished? Ra&ma
verily serveth thee far more than doth Bharata; and I do not
find that Bharata regardeth thee more than Rama. Who will,
save that foremost of men, so devotedly minister unto thee,
regard thee,senhance thy influence, and do thy will. Not one
of the many thousands of females and the innumerable
retainers (in the palace),has been able to fasten reproach upon
Rama for real or false misconduct. Soothing all creatures
with a pure heart, that great soul by means of good officers
secureth the affections of the inhabitants of the kingdom,
He conquers all the twice-born ones by gifts ; and that hero
conquers his superiors by ministrations ; and his enemies
by encountering them with the bow. For certain, in
Raghava are truth and charity,and asceticism,and self-renun-
ciation,and friendship, and purity, and sincerity, and learning,
and the disposition to tend his superiors. How, O respected
one, canst thou ask for this that will bring thee sin, touching
Rama endowed with* candour, and energetic like unto a
Maharshi, and resembling a celestidl 7 1 do not recollect to
have heard Rama, who ever speaks sweet words, to have used
any unpleasant speech to any one; how can I then for thy sake
unfold this disagreeable matter unto the beloved Rama? And
what stay have I save him in whom abide forgiveness,and asce-
ticism and renunciation, and verity, and righteousness, and
gratitude, and harmless towards all creatures. It behoveth
thee, O Kaikeyi, to have pity on me, aged and on the verge of
death, and afflicted with grief, and distressed, and engaged
in lamentations. Whatever can be obtained in this earth
bounded by the ocean I will confer on thee—do thou not bring
about my death. O Kaikeyi, I clasp my palms, I fall at thy


AYODHYAKANDAN 217


feet, be thou the protector of Rama, so that sin may not
taint me.” .

When the terrible Kaikeyi in still more terrible language’
addressed the mighty king, who was burning in grief, and
bewailing, and deprived of his senses, and feeling a sensation
of whirling, and overwhelmed with woe, and again and again
beseeching for crossing this ocean of sorrow, saying. “If, O
monarch, having coaferred the boon,thou repentest afterwards
how, O hero, wilt thou speak of thy righteousness in the
world ? When,O thou versed in duty, the Rajarshis assembled.
around thee, shall ask thee regarding this matter, what wilt
thou answer ? Wilt thou say,‘by whose favor do I live and who
had tended me,unto that Kaikeyt have I broken my promise ?”
Surely, O lord of men, thou wilt bring disgrace unto all the
monarchs (of thy line), since having conferred the boons this
‘very day, thou speakest otherwise. Saivya granted his own
flesh unto the bird iu the matter of the hawk and the pigeon.*
And Alarka, having granted his eyes (unto a blind Brahmin)
attained excellent state. And the ocean, having bound him-
self by promise, never passes beyond his shores. Remember
ing these old stories render not thy promise nugatory, O
thou of perverted understanding, renguncing righteousness,
and installing Rama in the kingdom,thou wishest ever to give
thyself up to pleasure with Kaugalya. Whether what I have
proposed be righteous or otherwise, whether thou hast promised
truly or falsely, swerve not from thy word. If thou install
Rama, this very day drinking poison, I will surely die before
thee. If 1 for a single day behold Rama's mother receiving
homage rendered with clasped hands, I will consider death


* The story goes that desirous of testing the charity of Saivya, Indra
and Agni assuming the forms of a hawk and a pigeon respectively, went to
the king, the former pursuing the latter. The pigeon in a fright asked the
protection of the monarch, whereon he granted it. But the hawk urged,
‘why dost thou retain the food that has been appointed by Providence !’
But the king declincd, and cut off his own flesh and gave it unto the


hawk.—T, 7


28


ar8 RAMALANA.


even-as welcome, O lord of men, by Bharata’s self dear unto
me as my own life, I swear that save the exile of Rama,
nothing shall satisfy me.” ‘

Having said this, Kaikeyi paused; and ‘maintained
silence disregarding the bewailing monarch. The king with
his senses overwhelmed with grief, hearing Kaikeyi’s
exceedingly bitter words, reflected on R&ma’s abode in
the woods, and the advancement of Bharata, and being
bewildered for a while spoke not unto Kaikeyi; but gazed
steadfastly at that exalted dame, his beloved wife, who
had uttered disagreeable things. And having heard that
speech resembling a thunder-bolt, and unpleasant to
the heart, and surcharged with grief, the king was extremely
pained, Then recollecting that revered lady’s resolve,
and his own terrible oath, he, sighing forth,—“‘O Rama,”
dropped down like a felled tree. And then that master
of the earth being deprived of his sense, was like a mad
man, or a patient with his faculties wildered, or a serpent
whose energy has been exhausted. In sad and distressful
words, he addressed Kaikeyi, saying,—Who is it that has
convinced thee that this exceedingly heinous course is a
proper one? Dost thou not feel shame to speak thus unto me,
like one whose faculties have been possessed by an evil
spirit? I did not know before, when thou wast youthful that
thy nature was so perverted ; but now I find the very reverse
of what J then theught, Whence proceedeth thy fear that thou
askest for such a boon—the establishment of Bharata in the
kingdom, and the banishment of Rama into the woods? Do
thou cease to urge such a suit that is fraught with evil unte
thy wifely virtue, and that will render my word untrue, if
thou wishest for the good of thy husband, of the people, and
Bharata. O cruel woman ; O thou that intendest sinfully, O
base wretch, O doer of impious deeds, how have I and Rama
conspired against thy happiness; and what offence dost thou
find in us? Bharata will by no means accept the king-


AYODHFAKINDAM. 219


dom, depriving Rama of it, for I consider Bharataa stil!
more grounded in righteousness than R&ma himself. When
I shall say,—tRepair unto the forest,” and Rama's counte-
nance will fall, like unto the moon overwhelmed by Rahu, how
shall I behold it? How shall J, having in consultation with
my friends come to this decision, retract the same, like unto-
an army defeated by the enemy ? And what will the mon-
archs coming from various quarters say concerning me,—
“Alas! how has this puerile descendant of Ikshwaku-
reigned so long ?? And when many aged folks, endowed with:
virtues, and accomplished in various lore will ask me con-
cerning Kakutstha, what then shall I sav unto them.—'Sore
pressed by Kaikeyi, have I banished Rama? Even if I
speak this truly, yet none will lend credence to it. And what
will Kaucalya say unto me, when Rama shall have gone to
the forest? Having done her this mighty wrong, what
shall I say unto her ? Kaucalya serves me at the sametime like
a slave, and a friend, and wife, and sister, and mother. Ever
sttrdious of my welfare, dearly loving her son,and speak-
ing every one fair, that exalted lady, although deserving of
homage at my hands, has up to this time not been regarded:
by me, because of thee. That I have so long sought thy
welfare, afflicteth me now, even like rice pattaken by a sick
person with curries that are unhealthful. Beholding Rama
deprived of his kingdom, and banished unto the forest, why
will Sumitra alarmed believe in me. Ah! woe tome! Vaidehi
will have to hear of two evil events,—my death and
Rama's journey unto the woods, Alas! my Vaidebi, indulg-
ing in grief, will renounce her existence, like a Kinnari on
the side of the Himavat, who has been forsaken by her kin-
nara. When I shall witness Rama repairing to the mighty
forest, and Sit4 weeping (in grief) , I shall not hope for a long.
life ; and thou, becoming a widow, will reign along with thy
son. Like unto a goodly liquor, which people having par-
taken it, subsequently find to contain poison, I have found


220 RAMAFANA.


thee, who had passed for a chaste woman, to be now really
unchaste. Having soothed me with soft but false words, -
thou speakest thus, Thou hast killed me like a-deer that has
been entrapped by a hunter, having been allured into the net
through the sound of asong. Surely gentle folks will on the
high-way censure me as one lost to gentility,—as one who has
sold his son (for buying his wife’s good graces), even like a
Brahmana given to drinking, Alas! alas ! having promised
thee the boon, I have to bear these words of thine ; and have
come by this grief like unto evil consequent upon misdeeds
in a previous existence. Wretch as I am, like a halter set
round one's neck, have I, O vile woman, cherished thee
through ignorance. Not knowing thee for my death, I have
sported with thee, like an infant dallying in solitude with a
venomous snake. Surely, people will be justified in con.
demning me wicked-minded that I am, for my son having
been deprived of his ancestral kingdom by me ; sayiig,—
“Alas! king Dagaratha is foolish and lustful ; for he sends
his beloved son to the woods for the sake of his wife.” Rama
has grown emaciated by studyng the Vedas, leading the
Brahmacharyya mode of life, and serving his preceptors,—
will he again undergo this mighty toil at this time of enjoy-
ment? My son is incapable of uttering a second word unto
me; and commissioned, he will repair to the woods, saying,
‘Very well.’ if ordered with ‘Go to the forest,’ Raghava
does not consent, even that would conduce to my pleasure ;
but he will do nothing of the kind. And R&aghava having
gone to the forest, Death will surely summon me away to his
abode who am of exceedingly reprehensible character, and who
am. universally execrated. And I having been dead and that
best of men, Rama, having gone to the woods (I do not know) to
what a plight thou wilt bring my kindreds. And if Kaugaly&
loses me and Rama, and Sumitra loses her two sons and
me and Rama, then tormented with the extreme of grief,
those exalted ladies will follow me. Dothou, O Kaikeyi,


AYODRYAKANDAM. 223


casting into hell Kaugalya and Sumitra and myself with our
three sons, attain happiness. Renounced by me as well as
Rama, this Ikshwaku line existing from a time immemorial,
and ennobled by excellent qualities, and incapable of coming
by grief, thou wilt rule, when it shall have been overwhelmed
with misfortune. If the banishment of Rama, be agreeable
to Bharata Iet him not, when I am dead, perform my funeral
obsequies. When I am dead, and when that foremost of men
has gone to the forest, do thou, a widow, rule the kingdom
along with thy son. O daughter of a king, when by chance
thou residest in my mansion, I must come by signal
infamy and discomfiture in the world, and meet with
general disregard, like unto asiuful person. How having
always gone on cars and clephants and horses, will dear
Rama range in the forest on foot? How will my son,
at the approach of whose meal-time, cooks wearing
ear-rings and emulating each other prepare excellent
meats and drinks, pass his days, living on fare furnished
by the woods, of astringent, or biiter, or pungent taste?
How will he, who has always been clad in costly attire,
and who has always enjoyed happiness, will dwell on the
bare earth, wearing a piece of red cloth? From whom
hast thou received this inconceivable and dreadful advice,—
Rama’s journey to the woods and installation of Bharata ?
Fie upon women, crafty and selfish! But I must not name
all women—lI mean only the mother of Bharata. O thou that
art intent upon doing mischief unto all, O thou addicted to
selfishness, O cruel one, has God made thy mind so very
vile, only to torment me? What wrong hast thou come by
either through me, or Rama ever engaged in thy welfare?
On beholding Rama plunged in sorrow, fatheis will forsake
sons, and wives attached’ unto their husbands will forsake
them, and the entire earth will be affected with ill-humour,
When I hear him coming, adorned like unto a son of the
celestials, I rejoice on casting my eyes on him, and I feel as


232 RAMAYANA.


if had regained my youth. Men may. do without the Sun,
and the wielder of the thunder-bolt not raining, but none, I
apprehend, can live, on witnessing Rama repairing hence. I
have kept in my mansion, like unto my own death, thee that
desirest my destruction, and art intent upon doing me wrong,
and art my foe. Ihave for a long time held thee on my
lap, like unto a she-snake of virulent poison ; therefore in
consequence of my folly, I now meet with destruction. Now
dissevered from me, and Rama together with Lakshmana, let
Bharata govern the city and the kingdom along with thee.
Destroying thy relatives, do thou enhance the joy of my
enemies. O thou cruelly-disposed, O thou bringer on of cala-
mities, since banishing all sense of the relation in which
we stand to each other as husband and wife, thou hast
spoken thus, why reduced to thousand fragments thy teeth
drop not from off thy mouth down to the ground? Rima
has not used any harsh specch towards thee. Indeed Rama
knows no harsh speech; why then dost thou seek to
inflict upon Rama (ever) pleasant spoken, and endowed
with agreeable qualities—such wrongs. O thou that render-
est infamous the king of the Kekayas, whether thou becomest
miserable, or enterest into fire, or killest thyself ( by taking
poison ), or divest into the bowels of the earth opened at
thousand places, I will not execute thy fell intention that is
fraught with evil unto me. I do not wish, that thou, like unto
a razor, and evcr speaking pleasant falsehoods, and possessed
of avile heart, the destroyer of thy own race,—thou that
wishest to burn my heart and life, thou unbeautiful one,
mayst remain alive. My life itself is in jeopardy,—where
then is my happiness? Where is the happiness of parents
without their sons? It behoveth thee not,O noble dame,
to do evil unto me. I take hold of thy feet; be thou
propitious unto me.” As bewailing thus like one forlorn
the ruler of earth whose heart was captivated by Kaikeyi on
account of her supreme beauty procceded to take hold of


AFODHYARANDAM. 223


her feet, who having banished all self respect, sat with
her legs stretched, he, without being able to come at them,
fell down in a swoon, like one enfeebled with disease.


SECTION XIil.


Ten as the mighty king was lying down in this unbeseem-
ing and improper guisz, like Yay&ti dropped from the
celestial regions when his“ religious merit had been ex-
hausted, that lady, personating the ruin of the race, not
fearing public odium, who had discerned danger from
Rama unto Bharata, not having attained her wish, again
addressed the monarch, concerning the boon he had
promised unto her,—Thou describest thyself, O mighty
monarch, as speaking the truth and firm in vow. Why then
dost thou hesitate to confer this boon on me ?” Thus address
ed by Kaikeyi king Dagaratha, remaining stupified for a while
thus answered her in wrath,—"O ignoble one! O enemy of
mine ! On my being dead, and that chief of men, Rama,
reparing to the woods, do thou, thint wish attained, become
happy. When in heaven, questioning me as to Rama’s wel-
fare, the celestials, learning of his banishment to the woods,
will tax me on this score, how shall I also bear that reproach
of theirs? If 1 shal! truthfully say I have sent Rama to the
woods for compassing Kaikeyi’s pleasure, that will count for
a falsehood. Sonless first, 1 have obtained the exceedingly
energetic an] mighty Rama by great pain,—how can I then
renounce him ? How shall I banish Rama having eyes resem
bling lotus’ petals, who is heroic, and accomplished and of
subdued anger, and forgiving. How shall I dismiss unto Dan
daka the charming Rama of dark blue hue like that of a blue
lotus, possessed of mighty arms, and having great strength 7


224 RAMAYANA.


How shall [ behold the-intelligent Rama in evil plight, who
has never known suffering, and has always enjoyed felicity ? If
without inflicting injury upon Rama, I meet with death,
IT shall then attain happiness. O cruel Kaikeyi, O thou
of evil purpose, why dost thou do this wrong unto my beloved
Rama having truth for prowess? If 1 banish Rama, an un-
paralleled obloquy will surely darken ( my fair fame ).

As king Dagaratha was bewailing thus with aheart wrought
up with grief, the sua set and night came on. But al-
though crested with the lunar disc, the night failed to
bring comfort unto the king, distressed, and indulging
iu grief. Then the old king Dagaratha, with his eyes fixed
at the sky, sighing hot, lamented in this strain—~"O night
studded with stars, I beseech thee, let not the morning appear.
Do thou, O gentle one, do me this kindness. I do thus clasp
my hands (by way of supplication). Or do thou speedily
repair for 1 do not wish to see the hated and relentless Kai-
key?, who has brought this calamity upon me”. Having
spoken thus, the king conversant with the duties of Sovereigns
again endeavoured to propitiate Kaikeyi, saying,—O noble
dame, do thou show favour unto me, who am of honest ways,
who am distressed, who have made myself thine, who have
finished his life, and Who, in especial, am thy king. That I
have spoken to thee thus was because, O thou of shapely hips,
I had been deprived of my senses (through grief). © girl, do
thou show thy favour unto me,—be thou generous,—be thou
propitious. Let my Rama obtain the kingdom in fact
conferred by thee. Thereupon, O thou having the outer
corner of thy eyes of dark blue hue, thou wilt attain high
fame (among men). O thou of well-developed hips, do thou
do this act of benefit unto me and Rama and the people and
the superiors, and Bharata”.

Having heard the exceedingly piteous words of -her
husband, the king of pure sentiment, who was distressed,
with his eye rendered coppery and flowing with tears, that


AYODHYARANDAM. 225


wicked minded and merciless woman spoke not, Thereat
seeing that his favourite dissatisfied wife persisted in urging
the banishment of his son, the king struck with grief, again
fell down to the earth, senseless. As the wise king afflicted
with sorrow was sighing hot and hard, the night passed away.
Then as the culogists attempted to sing his praises for
awakening him, he prohibited them to do so.


SECTION XIV.


—


Tren that sinful woman, seeing the descendant of
Ikshwaku distressed on account of his son, and deprived of
conciousness, and lying inert on the ground, spoke unto him;
saying,—"Having promised to grant me the boon, how dis+
tressed dost thou lie on the ground, as if thou didst commit
some sin? It behoveth thee to keep untainted thy dignity
by performing what thou hast promised. Truth, say persons
cognizant of it, is the prime virtue. And it is in the interests
of virtue, that I have been exhorting thee. Having promised
his own person unto the hawk, that lord of earth, Saivya,
having granted the same unto the bird,- went the excellent
way. Inthe same manner, Alarka, being asked, plucked out
his eyes readily and bestowed them on a certain Brahmana
versed in the Vedas. And the lord of rivers, having promised,
even on occasions of Parvas, does not pass over his
bounds for the sake of truth. The one syllable (Onkar) signi-
fying Brahm& is the truth itself, In truth is established righte-
ougness. Truth is the undecaying Vedas, and through truth
people attain the foremost state. If thy mind is established
in virtue, do thou then follow truth. Since, O excellent one,
thou hast promised the boon, let that boon bear fruit. Do
thou, incited by me with the view of maintaining virtue,
banish Rama. Thrice, do [tell thee. If thou dost not fnlfil

29 e


226 RIMAIYANA.


this noble vow, O worshipful Lord, thou hast made unto me,
forsaken by thee will leven in thy very presence renounce
my life.”

Thus fearlessly urged by Kaikeyi, the king could not
take off from himself the noose (of promise), even as Bali
could not take off the noose that had been fixed upon him
(by Upendra) at the instance of Indra. Thereupon, the
king looked blank, and his heart became agitated, like
unto a beast of burden moving tortuously when placed
within the yoke and wheels. Then calming himself
with a great effort, the king, as if not seeing Kaikeyi, with
his haggard eyes, addressed her, saying,—"I do here,
O wicked wretch, renounce that hand of thine which
1 had held with mantras before the sacrificial fire, and
I do also renounce along with thee own-begotten*
thy son Bharata. O exalted one, the night has departed;
and as soon as the Sun rises, the superiors will surely
urge me for installing Rama with the provisions that have
been procured for the purpose. But if, O thou of auspicious
ways, hinderest the installation of Rima, Rama will perform
my funeral obsequies, when I am dead,—and not thou
accompanied by thy son shalt perform the same. That
countenance of Rama which I have once seen expanded in
delight, I shall never be able to behold bereft of joy and
cheerfulness, and down, with melancholy clouding it.”

As the high-souled ruler of e&rth was speaking thus unto
her, the night engarlanded with the moon and stars was
succeeded by the morning. Then Kaikeyi of vile ways
versed in speech, rendered senseless by wrath, again addressed
the monarch in harsh language, saying,—'What words,
O king, dost thou say, comparable unto poison or painful
indispositions. It behoveth thee to summon hither thy
son, the energetic Rama. Having established my son in


© ‘This is a new coinage rendered necessary for the exegencies of translation,
34 first-born’ is justifiable, ‘own-begottes,’ is algo such.—T.


4YODHYAKANDAM. 27


the kingdom, and rendered Rama a ranger of the woods

and made myself rid of rivals, 1 shall attain my end.” Thus

urged by Kaikeyi, the king like unto an excellent steed

stung by a sharp goad, again spoke unto her,—“I have been

bound fast by the ties of virtue,—therefore have I lost my

senses. I now only wish to behold my beloved eldest son—*
the righteous Rama.”

Then when the night had gone by and day broke and
the Sun arose, and when the sacred astral hour had
arrived, Vasishtha endowed with many virtues, surrounded by
his disciples and furnished with the provisions, entered that
foremost of cities, whose streets had been swept and watered
and which had been decorated with streamers, and which was
filled with people rejoicing, and whose stalls overflowed with
articles, and which resounded with the noise of festivity, and
which was populous with folks eager for the installation of
Raghava, and which was every where scented with sandal
and dhupa and aguru. Having entered the city, like unto
the metropolis of Purandara himself, he saw the graceful
inner apartment decked with innumerable standards, and
which was thronged with citizens and the inhabitants of the
provinces, and graced with Brahmanas cognizant of sacrifices,
and crowded with highly worshipful: assistants at sacrifice,
entered the inner apartment and passed by that press.
Vasishtha exceedingly delighted, surrounded by great saints,
saw at the gate of the charioteer of that great one,—who at the
same time was his counseller of gracious looks. Therefore
the highly energetic Vasishtha said unto the skilful son of the
charioteer,—“Do thou speedily acquaint the mighty monarch
that I have come. Here are golden vessels filled with water
from the Gang& and the ocean ; and for the installation, an
excellent sdumvara seat, and all kinds of seeds, and scents
and various gems, and honey, and curds and clarified butter
and fried paddy, and milk, and sacrificial grass," flowers
and milk, and eight good-looking maids, and an excellent


228 RAMAYANA.


mad elephant, a car yoked with four horses, and a sword,
and an elegant bow, anda carriage containing men, and
an umbrella like unto the moon, and iwo white chowries,
and a golden vase, and a pale-colored bull tethered with a
golden chain and bearing a hump adorned with ornaments,
and a mighty lion—the best of his race—furnished with
four teeth, and a throne, and a tiger-skin, and sacrificial fuel,
and fire, and all kinds of musical instruments, and courtezans
decked out with ornaments, and preceptors and Br&hmanas,
and cows, and various kinds of pure animals and birds—have
been brought. The foremost citizens aud inhabitants of the
provinces and the merchants with their retinue,—all these
and others, with hearts tilled with joy, and mouth speaking
pleasant words, stay with the sovereigns to witness the
installation of Rama. Do thou urge expedition upon the
mighty monarch, so that this day under the influence of the
Pushya star Rama may obtain the kingdom.”

Hearing these words of his, the chariotecr’s son possessed
of mighty strength, eulogizing that powerful monarch,
entered his quarters. And advanced in years, he had before
this been granted free access everywhere,—so that the-
warders, loved of the king and seeking his good, could not
prevent his entrances Not kuowing the plight that had
befalien the king, Sumantra presenting himself before him,
endeavoured to gladden the latter with pleasing speech.
And having entered the apartment of the king, the charioteer
Sumantra with clasped hands, pleasing the monarch as he
proceeded, said,—‘Do thou please us delightedly and with
a glad heart, even as the strong ocean pleases people at the
rising of the sun, The charioteer Matuli used to hymn Indra
at this season, and (encouraged by that eulogy) he conquered
the Danavas. Even so do |] hymn thee. And even as the
Vedas with the Angas and other lore indoctrinate the
self-create lord Brahm&, so do I enlighten thee. As the sun
in company with the moou enlightens the fair earth con-


AFODHYAKANDAM azg


taining creatures, so do I to-day enlighten thee. Arise, O
foremost of monarchs,clad in excellent attire and decked with
ornaments, like unto the sun issuing from the (mount) Meru.
All the articles necessary for the installation of Rama are
ready, And the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces
and the merchants stay with clasped hands. And the
worshipful Vasishtha stays with the Brahmanas. Do thou,
O king, immediately order the installation of Rama. Like
unto cattles without their keeper, like unto an army without
its commander, like unto a night without the moon, like
unto kines without their bull, is a kingdom without a king.”

Hearing these words of Sumantra, bland and appropriate,
the lord of earth was afresh overwhelmed with grief. Then
the graceful and virtuous king, waxing disconsolate, on
account of his son, and with his eyes reddened with the effect
of grief, seeing the charioteer, said,—‘‘This eulogy of thine
pains me the more.”

Hearing those sorrowful words and finding the lord of
earth aggrieved thus, Sumantra with clasped hands went off
alittle, Seeing the king utterly incapable of speaking any
thing personally owing to his heavy sorrow, Kaikeyi, the best
counsellor in matters like these, addressed Sumantra with the
following words :—‘“Sumantra, being elated with joy on
account of Rama’s installation, the king has kept up the
whole night, and being tired therefore, is overpowered with
sleep. Go ye therefore speedily, O charioteer, and bring Rama
here, the praiseworthy son of king. This willdo you good—
do not hesitate in this. “How can I go,” replied Sumantra,
“without the permission of the king ?”

Hearing these words of the counsellor, the king spoke to
him “Sumantra, bring the beautiful Rama here—I want to
see him.” Thinking that some good would accrue to Rama,
he was pleased at heart and away he went speedily delighted
at the royal mandate. Being asked again by Kaikeyi to hurry
on at the time of departure Sumantra thought within himself-—~


230 RAMAYANA.


“Evident it is, that the Queen has become impatient to see
R&ma’s installation and hence is the hurry—and the king
will now take rest.” Thinking this the energetic charioteer
with great delight, intent on seeing R&ma, issued out of
the city like a lake near the ocean. Having come out of the
presence of the king suddenly, he saw the warders, various
citizens and great personages sitting at the gate.


SECTION XV.


Tre Brahmana, versed in Veda, the counsellors, the com-
manders of military forces and the leading merchants,together
with the royal priest, all brimming with joy on account of
R&ma’s installation, were waiting at the royal gate all night
long. On the appearance of the bright Sun, on the approach
of the day under the astral influence of Pushya and on the
ascension of Karkata, the presiding star of Rama's birth, they
brought call articles necessary for the installation and as
ordered by the best of Brahmanas—namely ; gold, earthen jar
(for preserving water,) well ornamented excellent seats, chariot
with a coverlet of splendid tiger-skin, water brought from
the sacred confluence of the Ganges and Jamuna, from other
holy streams,lakes,wells,ponds and rivers full of water flowing
in the East, over mountains,and from the North to the South ;
and waters brought from all the oceans, honey, curd, clarified
butter, fried paddy, sacrificial grass, milk, flowers, eight un-
married girls exquisitely beautiful, a mad elephant, gold and
silver jars, adorned with fig leaves and lotuses and filled with
holy water, a best yellow chowri for Rima crested with jewels
and resembling the bright rays of the moon; a brilliantly
ornamented beautiful umbrella of yellow colour, resembling
the disc of the moon, and the most important of all the


AVODHYEKANDAN. 231


articles necessary for installation ; 2 welladorned yellow ox
and horse; and all musical instruments,—bringing these and
all other things necessary for the installation of the descend-
ants of Ikshaku, in accordance with the king’s permission,
the panegyrists and other persons were assembled there. Not
finding the king present there, they began to speak amongst
themselves :—"Who will iatimate the king of our arrival?
The Sun is up and we do not see the king amongst us
as yet. ‘All articles necessary for the installation of the
intelligent Rama are ready.” While they were thus
conversing, the charioteer Sumantra, well respected by
the king, reached there and spoke unto all those persons
and the kings the following words. “With the king’s per-
mission I am going to bring Rama speedily here. Worshipful
you are all to the king and specially to Rama, I shall with
your words, ask the king of his sound sleep, and then of
the reasous for his not coming here as yet though up from the
bed.” Saying thus, Sumantra, versed in legends, arrived at
the gate of the royal seraglio. And he entered the palace
with its open gates; and having entered the appartment of
the lord of earth he went into his sleeping room, and placing
himself behind a screen near at hand, addressed the descend-
ant of Raghu thus, pleasing him with blessings fraught with
good unto him—‘Oh! Kakutstha, may the Moon, Sun, Siva,
Vaisravana, (the god of wealth), Varuna, (the god of water),
Agni and Indra grant thee victory. The worshipful night
is gone and blessed morn has arrived ; arise, Oh! thou great
king,and perform morning ablutions. Brahmanas,commanders
and merchants are assembled at the palace gate, desirous of
seeing thee,do thou therefore arise, Oh descendant of Raghu.”

Perceiving from the voice that it was charioteer Sumantra
versed in good counsels, who was thus eulogising, the king
Tose up from his bed and thus addressed him :—"O Charioteer ©
‘Bring Rama here’ was the order I gave thee; what is it
that makes thee neglect my command? I am not asleep;


238 RAMAYANA.


go and bring up Rama here instantly.’ Saying this, king
Dagaratha despatched Sumantra again.

Hearing the words of the king and bowing him with his
head down,he issued out of the king’s residence,thinking that
some great good was awaiting. And having reached the
public roads adorned with flags and pennons, he, filled with
an excess of joy, began to wend his way, casting his look
around. There on his way he heard the passers by, all
talking about Rama and his installation, as if brimming
with joy on that account. Then proceeding a little, Sumantra
saw the beautiful palace of Rama towering like the Kailaga
hill and resembling the abode of Sakra. It was closed
with two big pannels at the gate way (of which the trap-door
was flung open), and adorned with hundreds of terraces,
on its top were many idols made of gold, and arches crested
with pearls and diamonds; its colour was white as the
autumnal cloud and bright as the golden cave of Sumeru ;
it was ornamented with highly brilliant jewels set in the
garlands of gold flowers and strewn with pearls and diamonds
and sprinkled with sandal and Aguru, the fragrance of which
captivates the mind like the summit of the hill Dardura ;
it was graced with the presence of Sarasas and peacocks
emitting pleasant sounds ; and covered with well-made figures
of wolves aud pictures of artistic excellence, the splendour
of which captivates the mind and the eye as well; bright
as the sun and moon, resembling the abode of Auvera
and the capital of the king of the celestials ; filled with
brids of various kinds and high as the summit of Sumeru,
Sumantra saw the palace filled with people coming from
different quarters with clasped hands, and adorned with citizens
approaching with various presents and eager (to see the instal-
lation of Ram&) and (standing at the gate)being prevented by
the warders to enter; resembling a huge cloud, of picturesque
situation, spacious, strewn with pearls and diamonds and
crowded with servants. That charioteer, in his chariot with


AYODHYARANDAM. + 233


its wooden ledge and horses, beautifying the crowded streets
and pleasing the citizens, entered the abode of Rima. There-
upon arriving at this abode filled with wealth, and having its
beauty greatly intensified with deers and peacocks, moving
to and fro, resembling the exqusitely splendid palace of the
lord of the celestials,that charioteer was extremely enraptured,
having the hairs of the body erect. Then that charioteer
entering several apartments, well adorned and resembling the
Kailaga hill and the abode of the celestials and passing by
many persons, dear unto Rima and abiding in his purpose,
entered the apartment of the ladies. And he became exceed-
ingly pleased on hearing pleasant words, meaning well unto
the son of the king, from ail persons, engaged in some sort
of service for the installation. He saw the pleasant abode
of Rama, resembling that of Mahendra, and filled with
deers and birds, having its top high as the summit of
Merx and situaved well in splendour, and the gateway filled
with millions of citizens with clasped hands keeping their
conveyances outside and coming from various quarters with
presents for Rame. He saw there a wild elephant by the
name of Satrunjaya or the conqueror of foes, having a huge
body resembling a mountain enveloped in dark clouds,
beautiful, capable of bearing the goadfng hook and intend-
ed as Ri&ima’s conveyance. He saw well adorned ministers
dear unto the king with horses, chariots and elephants ; and
leaving them all on either side, entered unprevented,
like uoto the marine monster Makara entering the ocean
containing many pearls and diamonds, the splendid apart-
ment of the ladies, resembling the clouds that hover over
the summit of the Hill Him&dri, and having a number of
beautiful houses comparing with great celestial cars.


go


234 RANAPANA,


SECTION XVI.


Somanrra,well versed inlegends,after passing by the gate-"
ways crowded with people, reached the solitary apartment
(of Rama), having youthful warders, carrying darts and bows
wearing ear-rings, cautious, attentive and devoted, and saw
{seated at the gate) several old men, commanding female
warders, mindful of duty, wearing red cloths and excellent
ornaments, and having raftans in their hands. They all seeing
Sumantra, ever wishing good unto Rama, approach, rose sud-
denly up from their seats with due respect. The humble-
minded charioteer then said to them :~—"Go and speedily com-
municate unto Rama that Sumantra is waiting at the gate.”
At this the warders, desirous of doing good unto their
master, nearing Rima, speedily comunicated these words
unto him who was in the company of his wife. Rama hearing
of the arrival of his father’s charioteer, ordered him to enter
into the apartment, having his father’s pleasure in view. He
(on entering) saw Rama resembling Vaisravana, well adorned
and seated on a gold sofa, with a beautiful coverlet on ;
having his body sprinkled with holy and fragrant sandal
of the best kind, red as the bluod of a hog; and having by
him S:#4 with a chowri in her hand, like Moon himself in the
company of Chitrd.

Whereupon Sumantra, acquainted with decorum, humbly
saluted him (Rama), the conferrer of great boons, and res."
plendent like the mid-day sun; and he well honored by
the king, seeing the king’s son seated on the sleeping sofa
with a delighted countenance, spoke these words unto him
with clasped hands :—“Oh, Rama, great son of Kaucaly4,
thy father and the queen Kaikeyi want to see thee ; so it be-
hoveth thee to go there without delay.” Being pleased with
these words the mighty hero of great effulgence, honored his
father’s behest and spoke unto Sita thus,—"Oh, darling,doubt


AYODHPERANDAM. 235


there is none that my father,going to Kaikeyi,is parleying with
her regarding my installation. Concieving the king’s intention
that clever lady,of dark eyes and desirous of doing good unto
the king, that mother, the daughter of the king of Kekaya,
pleased and intent upon king’s welfare as well as upon that of
mine, is hastening the monarch for my installation. Fortun-
ately for me, the monarch in the company of his Queen has
despatched Sumantra, intent upon my welfare. Worthy of
the meeting at the inner apartment, the messenger has come,
and I doubt not that the monarch shall install me to-day as
the heir-apparent of his throne. Therefore I shall speedily
go hence and see my father. Do thou remain and enjoy here
the company of thy friends.”

Regarded by her husband, Siti, of dark eyes and
intent upon her husband's welfare, followed him to the
entrance and said:—‘May the great monarch bestow
upon thee first the heir-apparentship, and afterwards
the dignity of the Paramount power like Brahm’ grant-
ing kingdom unto Vésava. I shall be ministering unto
thee, seeing thee initiated, engaged in ceremonies, wearing
excellent deer skin for cloth and carrying horns in the
hands. May Indra protect thee on the East, may Yama
{Death) protect thee on the South,.and Varuna (God of
water) on the West and Kuvera (God of wealth) on the
North.” Being greeted with benedictory ceremonies, Rama,
bidding farewell to Sitd, issued out of his house like unto a
Hioa, living in the den of a mountain. He saw Lakshmana
standing at the gate with clasped hands, and met all his
friends assembled at the middle apartment. Then that great
son of the king, casting a glance upon them all who were
present there to see him and pleasing them with sweet words
ascended, like unto the thousand-eyed Indra, the splendid
chariot, made of silver and coated with tiger-skin, and
bright like the fire itself,making a noise (when going) like the
roaring of clouds ; defying all obstacles, adorned with jewels,


236° RAMAYANA.


and gold, dazzling the eye-sight and bright Tike the gollen
peaks of Sumeru, It had two excellent horses tied to it like
unto two young elephants, and was of quick motion, resem-
bling that of Indra’s chariot carried by his horses.Ascending the
car, Righava, of great effulgence, went speedily on, making
{the space)resoundcd like unto the muttering cloud on the sky.
He issued out of his abode like the beautiful moon passing
through a huge cloud. And Lakskmana, the younger brother
of Righava, standing behind him on the car with 2 splendid
Chowr? in his hand, began to guard his body. And there was
caused a great tumult by the crowd gathering around on the
issuing out of Rima. Then followed in his train many
hundreds and thousands of beautiful horses and elephants
resembling hills in their appearance ; and went before him
hundreds of heroes, well accoutered, and having their bodies
sprinkled with sandal and Agar and holding swords and
arms in their hands, and other persons uttering
benedictions. He heard on the way sounds of musical
instruments, eulogy of the panegyrists and lion-like roars
of the heroes. Exquisitely beautiful damsels, adorned with
various ornaments and dresses, standing by the windows
began to shower flowers upon the head of the foe-destroyer
Rama, and those spotless beauties with a view to please
Rama,some standing on the buildings and some on the ground
began to praise him :—“Oh thou, delight of thy mother,
surely has mother Kaugalya become exceedingly gratified, on
seeing thee of successful journey to accept the heir.
apparentship of the throne.” Those ladies thought that
Sit@, the captivater of Rama’s heart was surely the best
of all women and for certain had she performed some great
austerities in her past life or else she would not have been
the companion of Rama, like unto Rohini, the companion of
Moon. That best among men heard these pleasant words
from those ladies standing on the buildings and on high-waya.
Raghava then heard the people coming from different quar-


AYODHVAKANDAM. 237


ters and the well-pleased citizens,talking amongst themselves
regarding him in the following strain. "This Raghava going
- shall obtain through the grace of the king great wealth, and
all our desires will be gratified when he will become our gover-
ror, It is a great gain to the subjects that he is going to get
for ever the entire empire at once; he being the lord of the
people, no body shall witness any misfortune or unpleasant
thing.” Like unto Vaisravana he began to proceed, being
dignified by the horses and elephants going before sending
forth great sound, and eulogised in various metres by persons
singing his glory, by the panegyrists and by men tracing his
noble ancestry. He saw the courtyard thronged with young
and old elephants, horses, chariots, and the high-ways
crowded all over with people, many pearls and various mer-
chandises,


SECTION Xvi.


Ram, having his friends delighted, ascending the car,
and viewing the city adorned with pennons and flags and
incensed with Dkupa and Aguru, sentered the high way,
crowded with people and ccntaining houses coloured as the
pale white clouds, and the place between the two rows
whereof scented with Diupa and Aguru. It was a splendidly
spacious \road decorated with a collection of sandal, Aguru
and other fine scents, with silk and red cloth, with pearls
holed and other valuable crystals and strewn with various
flowers and filled with edibles multiform. Like unto the
lord of celestials in heaven he saw this high way and the
court-yard covered with curd, clarified butter, fried paddy,
Dhupa, Aguru and sandal, and embellished with garlands
and other scents. Having heard benedictions uttered by
many in the following strain and paying proper respects


238 RAMAPANA,


unto all, he wended his way. “Being installed this day do
thou following in the footsteps of thy father and grand-fathers
cherish and protect us. Thou taking the reins of government
we shall live more happily than what we were under your
ancestors. Seek not we earthly comforts or the highest things
(in the life to come), if we can only see R&ma installed in the
kingdom issuing out from his father’s abode. There is nothing
more pleasant to us than the installation of the highly
energetic Rama on the throne.” Rama, hearing these and
other auspicious words from his friends eulogising his owa
self, went on his way without being moved. Raghava passed
away, but not a single person could withdraw his eyes and
mind from that best of men. In fact he who did not see
R&ma, and whom Rima did not see, was looked down by all,
and he considered himself contemptible. That righteous one
showed mercy unto all, old and young, of the four castes,
and hence, they were all obedient to him. He proceeded
leaving on his left side the junctions of four roads, the paths
leading to temples, the religious fig trees and altars, and
reached after all the family dwelling of the king, with its
palatial tops piercing the sky, looking beautiful, resembling
mass of clouds, white as the celestial cars and high as the hill
Kailaga, and with sporting houses adorned with pearls. And
the son of the monarch, shining in beauty, entered into the
palace of his father, the best on earth resembling the abode
of Mahendra. Dagaratha’s son, the best of men, crossed in
his chariot three apartments guarded by warriors with bowsin
their hands, and other two on foot, and in this way passing
by all, and ordering his followers to go back, entered the inner
apartment. That son of the king entering into the presence
ot his father, all were extremely gladdened and were eagerly
expecting his return like unto the lord of water expecting
the appearance of the moon.


AYODHYARANDAM. 439


SECTION XVII.


—00——


Rama saw his father, seated on a beautiful sofa with
Kaikeyi, looking sorry and poorly and with his countenance
dried up. And humbly bowing down at the feet of his father
first, he saluted Kaikeyi with due solemnity. Uttering
the word “Rama” only, the poor king with his eyes full of
tears could not eye him nor could he speak to him. Seeing
this unforeseen and terrible appearance of the king,like unto a
serpent trampled under foot, Rima was exceedingly terrified,
He was dejected and pulled down much with sorrow ard
penitence. He was sighing hot and hard and his heart was
greatly pained. His heart was troubled like the wavy ocean
agitating though incapable of agitation,and clouded like the Sun
possessed by R&hu,and (that of) an ascetic speaking falsehood.
Thinking of this unthought of sorrow of the king he became
agitated like unto the ocean during the course of the full-moon.
And clever Rama, intent on his father’s welfare, thought
within himself :—“Why does not the king display joy on
my arrival to-day? Angry though, he used to express joy
whenever he saw me; then why does his sorrow prevail
even seeing me to-day ?’ Being pressed with sorrow, Rama
of pale countenance, like one miserable, saluting Kaikeyi,
spoke unto her the following words. “Is it not that I com-
mitted some offence through ignorance that I see my father
angry? Do thou propitiate him therefore. Why is his
mind so aggrieved who was so kind to me, and why does he
look poorly and of pale countenance who used to welcome me
always with kind words? Is he subject to any physical or
mental disturbance? Oh! happiness uninterrupted is
very dear. Has any evil befallen the good-looking Bharata or
high-souled Satrughana ? Is it not all well with my mothers
Dissatisfying the king, disregarding his words and offending
him, I do not want to breathe for a single moment. How


240 RAMAYANA.


can a man disregard him who is god himself seen and feit,
and who is looked upon as a cause from whom he has sprung.
Oh mother, hast thou spoken any harsh word to my father
either through anger or through haughtiness for which
his mind is thus pulled down? Oh worshipful one, teil
me all this, who am exceedingly anxious to get at the
real truth. Why has_ this unforeseen sorrow overtaken the
heart of the lord of men ?”

Being thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, that
exceedingly shameless Kaikeyi spoke unto him the following
impudent words, fraught with her self-interest.“Oh Rama, the
monarch is not angry nor has any danger befallen him. He has
got something in his mind which he cannot speak out through
thy fear. Thou art his most beloved son and word does not
proceed from his mouth to speak thee things unpleasant. But
it behoveth thee to carry out what the monarch has promised
unto me. Formerly regarding me very highly he conferred
on me two boons and he now repents for that like a common
person. Promising ‘I give thee’ the lord of earth granted
me these boons ; in vain he wishes to set up a dyke when all
the water has passed away. Oh Rima, it is known to thee
that truth is the root of all religion and may he not renounce
that for thee, being angry with me. If do thou carry out all
that the king will speak to thee, good or evil, then I shall
relate unto thee every thing. If what I, with the king’s
permission, speak to thee, does not go useless, I shall speak
unto the all ; thee king will not speak any thing.

Hearing these words uttered by Kaikeyi, Rama, pained
at heart, spoke unto her in the presence of the king in
the following way :—“Oh! shame to me. May it not please
thee, Oh worshipful lady, to speak such words to me.
I can at the king’s words jump into the fire. Being
ordered by him, who is my father and who is my king especi-
ally, Ican drink virulent poison and drown into the ocean.
Speak thou, Oh worshipful lady, what is the desire of the


AYODHYAKANDAM. 24x


king, and know that I shall carry it out—Rima dees not
contradict what he has once spoken.” Then that wicked
Kaikeyi spoke these highly cruel words unto Rama, simple
and truthful. “Formerly in a great war between the gods and
Asuras, thy father, being wounded with shafts was tended
by me for which he conferred upon me two boons. Of these
two boons I have asked of the king the installation of Bharata,
and the departure of Raghava into the Dandaka forest
even this very day. Oh thou, best among men, if do thou
wish to keep thy father’s vows as well as thine, hear what
I say. Thy father is bound unto me by promise, obeying
therefore thy father’s mandate, do thou repair unto the forest
for nine years and five. Bharata shall be installed, Oh
R&ghava, by all those articles which have been brought by
the monarch for thy installation. Forsaking this installation,
do thou repair unto Dandaka forest for seven and seven
years and wear bark and matted hair. And here in this
Kogala let Bharata govern the world, adorned with many
pearls and diamonds, with elephauts, horses and chariots.
The king, filled with pity and having his face marked with
the affliction of sorrow, cannot cast a glance upon thee.
Oh thou descendant of Raghu, do thou carry out these words
of the Lord of men and save him by redeeming these great
vows of his.” Hearing these cruel words of her, Rima
was not grieved; but the generous king afflicted with the
thought of the approaching separation with his son, was
greatly pained.


SECTION XIX.


Fearne these unpleasant words like unto death, Rama,
the destroycr of foes, was not pained, and spoke thus unto
Kaikeyi. “Be it what thou sayst; carrying out the promise
of the king, I shall repair unto the forest from this place


242 RIMIPANA,


wearing bark and matted hair. Now [ want to know only
why that lord of the earth, invincible and the conqueror of
foes, does not receive me in the same way as he used to do on
previous occasions. Be not angry, Oh worshipful one, I speak
before thee, be thou propitiated well, and I shall go to the-~
forest wearing bark and matted hair. What is there that I
cannot perform, considering it good without suspicion, if I
am ordered so by my well-wisher, spiritual leader, father and
king, who acknowledges thy service {rendered in time of
danger*), But this one sorrow burns my heart, why king
did not tell me personally of the installation of Bharata.
What of the command of the king, my father, I shall even at
thy mandate joyfully make over unto Bharata, my kingdom,
Sita, wealth and even my life, thereby satisfying thee, and
fulfilling my promise. Do thou now console the bashful
king ; why has he, with his eyes steadily fixed on the ground,
been shedding tears slowly? Let messengers, with fast
going steeds go to-day at the command of the king to
fetch Bharata from his maternal uncle's house. And J
shall, not even judging the propriety of my father's
words, speedily repair unto the forest of Dandaka for
fourteen years.” Hearing those words of Rama, Kaikeyi
was pleased, and being certain about his departure,
hurried on Raghava. “Let it be that messengers with fast
going steeds shall go to tring Bharata from his maternal
uncle’s residence. [do not think it proper for thee, O Rama,
to delay, when thou art so anxious ; it behoves thee therefore
to depart from this place speedily unto the forest. The king’
being abashed, does not himself address thee, there is
nothing else than this. Do thou, Oh best of men, dispel this
wretchedness of his. As long as thou shelt not hurriedly


* The epithet Avitajnena may as well be rendered into general terms;
such as ‘who acknowledges services redered unto him.’ Here in translation J
have follwec the commentator who has renin it to the special sense suitable
to the occasion —T,


4 YODHYARINDAM. 243


depart from his presence, Oh Rama. thy father shall not
bathe, or eat anything.’ ‘Oh fie!’ ‘what affliction’ sobbing
hard with these words, the monarch, filled with sorrow, swoon-
ed away and fell down upon the sofa, embellished with gold.
Raising the king up, Rama, being directed by Kaikeyi,
began to hurry on his departure to the forest, like unto a
steed struck sharp with a whip. Hedring those cruel and
unpleasant words of the wicked Kaikeyi, Rama, not being
distressed, began to address her with the following words,
“Oh worshiplul one, being addicted to wealth do I not long
for living in this world ; like unto Rishis, know me, to be well
established in pure religion. If I can, even at the sacrifice
‘of my own life, satisfy my worshipful father rest assured it is
to be done first in all manner. There is no virtue greater
than the serving of the father and carrying out his words.
Even though not commanded by him, I shall, for thy words,
live in a solitary forest for fourteen years. Oh Kaikeyi,
certain it is that thou art not acquainted with my foremost
virtues, inasmuch as possessing full authority to rule me, thou
hast requested the monarch for this. Excusé me until I ask
my mother, and comfort Sit&; even this very day shall I wend
u1y way unto the great forest of Dandaka. It behoves thee to
do that by which Bharata may govern the kingdom and tend
our father, for this is the virtue eternal.” Hearing these
words of Rima, his father, greatly affiicted and incapable of
speaking anything on account of sorrow, began to cry
aloud. Worshipping the feet of the king lying insensible,
and those of vicious Kaikeyi, that greatly effulgent one went
out. And reverentially going round his father and Kaikeyi,
and issuing out of the female apartment, Rama saw his own
friends and relatives. Then followed him Lakshmana, the
enhancer of Sumitr&’s joy, greatly angry and with his eyes
full of tears. Going round with reverence the house of
instalation full of necessary articles, not turning away from
it his wistful look, Rima began to proceed slowly. Loss of


144 RAMAPANA.


kingdom could not diminish the great beauty of that beloved
of the people on account of its everlasting pleasantness, like
unto the wane of the moon. There was manifest in him no
change of mind, who was about to fly as an exile to the forest
and leave the world, like unto one emancipated while yet
living. Leaving aside the excellent umbrella and well adorned
chowrtes, forsaking his relatives, chariot, citizens and other
people, calmly bearing the affliction in mind and not mani-
festing the outward signs of sorrow, Rama, with a view to
communicate this unpleasant news to his mother, entered her
abode, All persons, who were present there and who adorned
themselves on accouni of the installation, did not percieve
any sign of mental agony on the face of Rama. Like unto
the rays of the fully brilliant autumnal moon, that hero of
mighty arms, having control over himself, did not forsake his
native cheerfulness. The pious Rama, having high fame,
entered into the presence of his mother, manifesting great
regards for the people with sweet speech. Then followed
him, the son of Sumitra, of mighty prowess, of equal accom-
plishments with his brother, and bearing the mental sorrow.
Rama, entering the abode of his mother, saw it filled with
all sorts of amusements ; and even though his mind was not
agitated with any méntal disturbance seeing the impending
calamity of loss of wealth, he was anxious lest the lives of his
dear relatives might be in danger.


SECTION Xx.


—00:—


Tuere arose a great uproar of cry ia the apartment of
the females, when that best of men went out with clasped
hands, “That Rama, who used to serve all the females in
all matters even without his father's permission, who was
our stay and protector, is going to the forest. Ra&ghava from


AYODHYAKINDAM. 345


his birth pays as much attention to us as to his mother
Kaugaly3, He, who being cursed, does not get angry,
pacifies the wrathful and studiously avoids words and deeds
that excite anger in others, will repair hence this day unto
the forest. Senseless is our king, who forsakes Raghava who
is the stay of all people, and thus kills his subjects.” Thus
the queens of Dagaratha, like unto the cows that have lost
their young ones, began to blame him and cry aloud. Hear-
ing this terrible uproar of cry in the female apartment, that
lord of earth, racked with sorrow on account of his son, hid
himself in the seat (with head hanging downdards). Raima
too, having control over his own self, experiencing sorrow
(for his relatives) and sobbing like an (enchained) elephant,
entered into his mother’s apartment together with his brother,
He saw a venerable old man, sitting at the gate and many
other persons, All those present, seeing Rama, began to
shower benedictions on him, the best of all victorious heroes,
saying, “Victory unto thee.” Having passed through the first
apartment he saw in the second, many old Brahmins, versed
in the Vedas and honored by the king. Having bowed down
unto them, Rama saw in the third apartment, women, boys,
and old men, all engaged in watching the gate. The female
warders honored Ram& rejoicing, and entering his mother’s
apartment, communicated unto her speedily this pleasant
news, Worshipful Kaucalya, seeking her son’s welfare,
kept up the whole night being absorbed in meditation, and
was, in the morning, worshipping the God Vishnu. Wearing
silk-cloth, pleased. and accustomed to the performance
of religious rites every day, she, performing benedictory cere-
monies, was offering oblation unto the fire. Rama entering
the auspicious abode of his mother beheld her thus engaged
in the sacrifice to the fire. The descendant of Raghu saw
there, brought for the service of the celestials, curd, graitis,
clarified butter, sweetmeats, things fit for oblations unto the
fire, fried paddy, white garlands, rice boiled in milk and, sugar,


246 RAMAYANA.


rice sesamum and pea mixtures, sacrficial fuels and jars
full of water. He saw his virtuous mother wearing white
silk, pulled down by the austere performance of religious
Tites, and engaged in propitiating the deities with
the offering of water. She seeing her son, ever ad
vancing the joy of his mother, approach, became pleased,
and stepped forward like unto a mare beholding
her young one. Seeing his mother approach, Raghava
bowed low, and (Kaucaly&) embracing him in her arms smelt
his head. Kaugaly&, out of motherly affection, spoke these
Sweet and beneficient words unto her own invincible son,
R&aghava. ‘Mayst thou obtain the life and fame of the pious,
old Rajarshis, ‘and the virtue worthy of thy family. See, Oh
R&aghava, how truthful is your father the king ! That virtuous-
souled one shall install thee this day as the heir-apparent of
the throne.” Raghava, humble by nature, who was oftered by
bis mother a seat and asked by her to eat something, strech-
ing forth a little his clasped hands, and with his head down-
wards with a view to show respects towards his mother,
touched the seat, and began to relate unto her the object of
his repairing unto the Dandaka forest. “O worshipful one, cer-
tain it is that thou knowest not the great impending calamity.
-It is for the distress of thine, Lakshmanaand Vaidehi, that shall
I wend my way unto the Dandaka forest. What is the use of
@ seat to me then ? Now is the time come when I deservea seat
made of Kusa grass. I shall live in the forest for fourteen years
abstaining from animal food and living on tuberous roots and
fruits like unto the ascetics. The king shall confer upon
Bharata the heir-appareatship and shall banish me as an ascetic
into the forest. And [shall live in that solitary forest for
eight and six years, feasting on roots, and fruits and perform-
ing the duties of a hermit.” Like unto the stem of a sa/a tree
cut asunder by an axe in a wood, like unto a female celestial
fallen down from the abode of the gods, she fell down sud-
denly (hearing these heart-rending words.) Rama seeing his


APODHYAKANDAM. 247


mother, who deserved no distress, fall down like a plantain
tree and insensible, raised her up, and finding her covered
with dust all over her body like unto a mare risen up after rol
ling on the ground on account of toil of bearing heavy burden
wiped off (her body) gently with his hand. She, deserving
happiness, being racked with the destruction of her delight
spoke thus unto Righava, that best of men, in the presence
of Lakshmana, “Oh! my son, Oh! Raghava, hadst thou
not been born for my grief I would have been sontess only,
but would not have been subject to this greater grief, A
sonless woman has only one cause of mental affliction. Her
only sorrow is “I have no child” and nothing else my son.
Ihave not experienced in my life that blessing and pleasure
which women generally feel when their husbands are devoted
to them. Ihave sustained my life so long, O Rama, only
with the hope that I'shall witness this and other happiness
when I shall haveason. Myself, being the eldest of all the
queens, shall have to hear unpleasant and heart-rending
words from the co-wives who are all younger than I. There
can be no greater misery for women than this my boundless
gtief and lamentations. Thou being present, they have
reduced me to this miserable plight, I do nut know what else
they will do, thou being away ; there i$ death certain for me,
Oh my darling! Being disregarded by my husband I have
been greatly insulted—I am equal to the maid-servants of
Kaikeyi or even inferior to them. Those who serve me or
are obedient unto me, shall not even speak with me when
they will see the son of Kaikeyi (installed). She is always
of fretful temper, how shall I, reduced to misery (on account
of thy exile), eye the face of Kaikeyi, uttering harsh words,
I have spent, Oh R&ghava, ten years and seven from thy
(second) birth* expecting a termination of my sorrow. Even


* Here the commentators differ in fixing the age of Rama at the time of
his going to the forest. Rama's age was under sixteen at the time of
masriage, and after he was married to Sita he enjoyed her company for twelve


a48 RAMAYANA.


though worn out, Oh Righava, I shall not be able to suffer
this great misery cosequent upon thy unending exile and
the contempt of the co-wives. How shall I, of miserable life
pass my days in grief not seeing thy face, effulgent like unto
the full-moon. Wretched as I am, in vain have I brought thee
up with fasts, contemplations and many other toilsome aus-
terities, Surely, 1 consider my heart is very hard, as it does
not rend like unto the bank of a great river in contact with
new water in the rainy season. There is no death for me—
no vacant place in the abode of Yama; otherwise why does
not Death take me away like unto a lion snatching away a
weeping hind ; certain it is that my heart is made of iron, as
it does not rend nor does my body being pressed down with
this sorrow and (falling) down on earth, break into pieces ;
verily have I no death before time. This distresses me that
all my religious vows, alms givings, self-restraint and austerity,
performed with a view of obtaining a son, have been fruitless,
like unto the seeds thrown on a barren soil, If any body in
this life, being pressed down with some great calamity, could
meet with death of his own accord, I would have instantly


years, when the proposal of installation was made. This makes totally an age
of twenty-seven, In the text ‘dasa saptacha’ (ten and seven) ten years fall
short which are to be made up by taking into account the age of ten being left
out, preceding Rama’s entering into the second birth which begins at maunji-
bandhana or initiation into the mysteries of the Vedic literature. Following the
example of Bhashyakara Patanjali, the commentator, Ramanuju has in the
sentence ‘dasa saptacha’ supplied another (dasa) (ten) by means of ellipsis,thus
giving an age of twenty-seven, This, hawever, contradicts the statentent of
Sita ta Ravana in guise of an anchorite, informing him of theage of ber hus.
band being twent-five. A modern annotator with great ingenuity has devised
ways to make up this discrepancy, The age of Rama was under sixteen,
when Viavamitra asked his assistance in destroying Téraké. ‘Under sixteen’
inay mean fifteen or twelve as well. After marriage at twelve, Réma enjoyed
twelve years more the pleasure of home. This giving in total twenty-four, it is
to be supposed that when ke was exiled he stepped at twenty-five, The text
‘dasa soptacha’ is correct, considering the age of eight being left out preceding
his second birth at the initiation into the mysteries of the Veda.


APODHYAKANDAM. 249


gone to the abode of death, being cut off from thee like unto
acow from her young one. Oh, thou, having a countenance
of moon-like splendour, wretched indeed is my life without
thee—I shall follow thee to the forest out of great affec-
tion, like unto an enfeebled cow following her young one,
Kaugalya like a Kinnari unable to bear this great calamity,
anticipating some great misfortune and secing Rima bound
(with a great vow), began to lament in various ways.


SECTION XXI.


Ar this time Lakshmana, sorely distressed, addressed the
weeping Kaugalya, the mother of Rama with the following
words suitable to that occasion. “I like it not, Oh worshipful
one, that Raghava, should repair unto the forest, renouncing
this grandeur of sovereignty. The king is uxorious, old
and therefore of perverted judgment and is addicted to world.
ly affairs ; being under the influence of his wife and passion
what could he not speak? Ido not see any such fault or
sin in Rama that he should be banished from the kingdom
to range in the wood. Ido not find any such man in this
world, even amongst great enemies, who, forsaken for
heinous sins, can cite, even in his absence, any fault of him.
Observing what law of righteousness does the monarch, with-
out any cause, renounce such a son who is like unto celestials,
simple, well disciplined and beloved even of the encmies ?
What son, remembering his father’s conduct, shall carry in
his heart these words of the king, who has again gone back
to childhood ? Ere people come to know this proposal of
exile, do thou secure the government of the kingdom unto
thyself with me. Who can disturb the installation, Oh
Raghava, myself protecting thee by thy side with my bows,
like unto Death himself. If any body stands here as an
enemy, surely shali !, Oh best of men, depopulate the whole

°


32


2S0 RAMEFANA.


city of Ayodhya with sharp arrows. | shall immotate all wha
shall stand by Bharata or wish him well—certainly mildness
brings about diseomfiture. If father being propitiated and
excited by Kaikeyi, turns out to be our énemy, he shall be
slain,without any hestitation. Even a spiritual leader deserves
chaslisement if he is puffed up with pride, and is devoid of
the power of judging good actions and bad, and when he is
gone astray. Teil me, Uh best cf men, by what law of virtue
and what reason does he purpose to confer this kingdom upon
Kaikeyi, which has devolved upco thee (by the law of inhe-
ritance). Who dares conferring on Bharata the kingdom,
carrying hostility with me and thee? Oh worshipful
one, verily am I attached at heart to my brother. By
truth, bow, gifts and things dear unto me, do I swear unto
thee ; if Raima shall enter into the wood, know me, Oh
worshipful one, to have entercd into the fire before that,
Like unto the sun dispelling darkness, shall I remove thy
sorrow by dint of my power; may your worshipful self and
Raghava witness it, Readily shall I despatch my father,
whose heart is unduly attached unto Kaikeyi and who is
therefore vile and being old contemptibly playing the child.”
Hearing these words of the high-souled Lakshmana, Kaugalya
weeping and being pressed with sorrow spoke these words unto
Rima. “You have heard, Oh my son, what your brother
Lakshmana said; and if you like, do what seems reason-
able unto thee. It does not behove thee, hearing the
sinful words given vent to by the co-wife, to repair hence,
leaving me who is sore distressed with sorrow. Oh thou
pious one, having knowledge of religion, if do thou wish to
acquire righteousness, serve me here and continue practising
the best of all virtues. Hear, Oh my son, the great ascetic
Kasyapa, lived in his house, serving his mother continually
and being crowned with best moral merit reached heaven.
As the monarch is worshipful unto thee in veneration so
sm. Ido not permit thee, to repair hence unto the forest.


AYODHYVAKIANDAM. ast


Separated from thee I do not need life or happiness; with
thee I would prefer faring ou grass. If do thou depart unto
the forest leaving me troubled with sorrow, I shall resort to
the vow of fasting and shail not be able to sustain my life.
And then thou shalt receive the penalty of bell, well known
to the people, as did the ocean, the lord of rivers, for like
unrighteousness, suffer the agony of Brahminicide.”* Where-
upon unto his mother Kaugalya, sorrowful and weeping, spoke
R&ma, virtuous-souled, these words of righteousness. “There
is no power in me to transgress my father’s behests; bend
low I my head unto thee—I want to proceed to the forest.
The learned Rishi Kandu, who lived in the forest keeping
the word of his father, killed a cow, knowing it to be
unrighteousness. In our line the descendants of Sagara, at
the command of fheir father, met with signal destruction,
while digging the earth. Rama the son of Jamadagni, at his
father’s words, decapitated his mother in the forest. These
and other god-like personages, Oh worshipful one, obeyed
heroically the orders of their father ; and E shall do my father’s
welfare therefore. It is not 1 alone who am carrying out my
father’s commands; those whom I have mentioned now, O
worshipful one, have done so. I am not introducing some
such righteousness, wafavourable unto’ thee, that has been
never practised before. 1am simply treading the path, that
has been upheld and followed by worthies gone before.
Surely shall I accomplish that which is worthy of being
performed in this world and nothing else—one going by his
father’s behests is not certainly degraded.”

Saying these words unto his mother, that best of men
versed in speech and best of archers, again spoke unto


The text has been here alittle freely translated to make it compatible
with the legend to which it refers. The ocean, thus goes the story, caused the
griet of his mother. Upon which, Maharshi Pippyalada, through magical
power, subjected him to agony of hell. This agony the mother of Rama relates
as the same that follows the sin of Brahminicide.


252 RAMAYANA.


Lakshmana all these words. “| know full well, Oh
Lakshmana, thy affection towards me and thy power,
strength and unconquerable force. Not knowing my settted
conviction in regard to truth and peace, my mother, Oh
beautiful Lakshmana, is so disturbed with incomparable
sorrow. Righteousness is the prime object-in this world and
in righteousness is established truth, and this excellent
utterance of my father is in keeping with righteousness. It
does not become them, O hero, who abide in righteousness to
fail to carry out the commands of father, mother ora Brahmin.
While } have been, Oh warrior, ordered by Kaikeyi at my
father’s words, I shall not be able to transgress those behests
again. Do thou relinquish therefore this unrighteous purpose
of thine consequent to the virtues of the Kshatriyas ; do thou
abide by righteousness but not cruelty, and follow my deci-
sion.” Saying these words unto Lakshmana out of fraternal
affection, spoke again R&ma to Kaugalya with clasped hands
and with his head bending low. “I do bind thee with an oath
of my life, Oh venerable one, Lo allow me to wander away hence
into the woud. Do thou perform benedictory ceremonies for my
welfare. Like unto the royal saint Yayati, in the days of yore
once falling on earth going again to the abode of celestials,
I shall, fulfilling my vows, again return home from the forest.
Do thou, Oh mother, assuage thy gricf within thy heart;
lament not thou, I shall return home again from the wood
after making good my father’s words. Myself, Lakshmana,
Vaidehi, Sumitra and thyself shall abide by father’s words,
and this is the virtue eternal. Desisting from the ceremonies
of installation and allaying thy sorrow in thy heart do thou,
Oh my mother, follow my pious decision about retiring to the
forest”. Hearing those pious, sober and reasonable words of
Rama, the venerable mother, regaining her sense like unto
the dead, and casting her look upon him, spoke to him again
the following words. “I am equally worshipful unto thee,
Oh my son, with your father, for like him have I brought thee


AYODHYAKANDAM. 253


up wih pains and like him do I love thee. I shall not allow
thee to repair unto the forest and it does not behove thee
to go leaving me behind sore distresssd with grief. Without
thee, of what avail to me is my life, my relatives, the worship
of the manes and the deities and the knowledge of divine truth
on this earth ? Prefer do I thy company even for a moment to
the presence of all creation.” Hearing these sorrowful words
of his mother, Rama was again inflamed with ire, like unto an
elephant goaded with a fire-brand,when entering into darkness.
He, abiding in righteousness spoke such pious words unto his
mother, almost insensible, and, unto the son of Sumitra, be-
wailing and racked with sorrow, as he was justified to utter
on that occasion, “I know, Oh Lakshmana, thy deep res-
pects unto me and thy power. It is not proper for thee to
pain me along with my mother, not being cognizant of my
intention. Righteousness, wealth, and the objects of desire
are looked upon with great esteem in this world of the created
but when the occasion for obtaining the result consequent
upon the virtuous deeds of a prior life appears,all these three,
T have no doubt, are fulfilled in righteousness, as the wife
alone, obedient, charming and having a son (fulfils them all).
It is not becoming for us to perform all those things where
these three do not combine—whence results righteousness
that we should resort to. A man seeking wealth becomes
despicable, and one subject to desires is not admired by any
(when bereft of righteousness). Who of us, having no ten-
dency to wickedness, shall not obey the command of
our father knowing it to be righteousness, who is old, our
monarch and preceptor in military training, be it an outcome
of his desires, anger or joy. For this it is that I am unable
to act against my father’s vow—he is our father and there-
fore can command us both like a master; and he is the
husband of this venerable one, therefore her stay and right-
eousness itself. The righteous monarch is still living and
continues in his own path when ready to redeem his vow even


aya RAMAPANA.,


by renouncing me—how can this worshipful one accompany
me like other insignificant widows? Do thou permit me
therefore, to repair unto the forest and perform benedictory
ceremonies for me so that I may again return home like unto
Yajati regaining heaven by truth. I cannot neglect eminent
fame being impelled by avarice for kingdom alone. Life is
but of short duration, Ol worshipful one, and as such I do
not long for acquiring this nether earth by means unrighteous.”
Rama, that foremost of men, with a view to range into the
forest Dandaka after patiently propitiating his mother and
instructing fully his younger brother the mysteries of righteo-
usness, went round his mother with reverence and made up
his mind to repair unto the forest.


SECTION XXIL,


Ferearrer holding the equanimity of mind with patience
self-possessed Rama spoke thus unto the son of Sumitri,
his dear brother, and friend, who was greatly sorry, had lost
his patience and was pressed down with this misfortune of
R&ma, and had his eyes inflated with anger like unto an in-
furiated elephant ;—“Subduing this anger and sorrow,
taking recourse to patience only, brooking the insult and
resorting to joy, do thou set aside all those things that have
been collected here for my installation and make preparations
speedily for my repairing to the forest, Oh son of Sumitra,
do thou take that amount of trouble for preventing now the
collection of materials for installation, as didst thou take
beforehand for collecting them. Do thou act therefore in
such a way as will remove the apprehension from the mind
of our mother (Kaikeyi), who is troubled at heart so greatly


4YODHR) AKANDAM. 255


on hearing of my installation. Ob, son of Sumitra, I
cannot neglect for a moment the trouble which has arisen in
her mind on account of this fear. 1 do not remember to have
done on any occasion wilfully or unwilfully any thing
that is displeasing unto my father or mothers. My father is
of truthful words and vows and he hes been greatly terrified
by the fear of the next world; may his fear disappear now.
If this work of installation be not stopped, my father shall
be greatly pained at heart thinking that his vows shall not
be fulfilled and his sorrow will also ache me. And it is for
this reason, Oh Lakshmana, that ] purpose speedily to retire
from this city to the forest, renouncing the preparations for
my installation. On my wandering away ‘unto the forest
to-day, the daughter of Kekaya shall have her ends attained
and shall install Bharata on the throne without any distur.
bance whatsoever. Myself going to the forest, wearing bark,
tiger-skin and matted hair, Kaikeyi shall attain the happiness
of her mind. That great One, who has inspired Kaikeyi with
this mode of mind and has kept it firm, 1 cannot offend. I
shall repair hence without any delay. Do thou regard, Oh
Lakshmana, Destiny as the only cause of this transfer of the
kingdom, although attained, and of my banishment. Had not
Destiny becn instrumental in bringing about this determina-
tion in Kaikeyi, she would not have been so much persever-
ing in the infliction of misery upon me. Knowest thou, Oh
gentle Lakshmana, that I have never made any distinction in
my mind between my mothers, nor did Kaikeyi make any
such thing before between me and her son; consequently it
is Destiny only that has made her press for the prevention of
my installation and for my exile with harsh and cruel words,
or else why should she, a daughter of a king and possessed
of an excellent temper and high accomplishments, speak
painful words unto me in the presence of her husband like
unto an ordinary woman. That which is above comprehen-
sion is Destiny and it is beyond the power of creatures to


256 RAMAYANA.


avert its consequences; and evidently it is through this
Destiny that have sprung up this distemper of Kaikeyi and.
my loss of kingdom. What man dares withstand Oh son of
Sumitra, this (terrible) Destiny hidden from our view until
known by the consequences of action. Destiny is the prime
source of those inconceivable causes which occur with
reference to happiness misery, fear, and anger, profit and
loss, birth and deliverance. Seers of great austerity being
influenced by this Destiny, succumb to the attack of anger
and desire, renouncing all their hard disciplines. The
hinderance in this world to the completion of works taken in
hand, and the origination of an unthought of event in its
stead is nothing but the action of this Destiny. The mind
brought under discipline by this true rationale, there remains
no cause of sorrow regarding my installation being put a stop
to. Do thou therefore assuage thy grief and follow me and
intercept speedily the collection of materials for my installa-
tion. The bathing ceremony, necessary before taking the
vows of asceticism, shall be performed, Oh Lakshmana, with
all these jars full of water brought for my installation. Or
what necessity have I with all these articles of installation ;
water drawn from the well by myself shall do for entering
into the vow of exile. Do thou not grieve, Oh Lakshmana,


for this loss of kingdom. Of kingdom and exile into the
forest, exile is fraught with glorious results. Knowest thou


now the mighty power of Destiny and do thou not blame
therefore my younger mother and my father !aboring under
the influence of Destiny.


AYVODHYAKANDAM. 257


SECTION Xx141.
— sees

Bewe addressed by Rama thus, Lakshmana, the mighty
hero, banging down his head with half reluctance, pondered for
sometime, and, placed midway between joy and grief, with
frown drawn in between his brows, began to sob hot and hard,
like unto an angry serpent in a cave belonging to another.
No body could eye his face, having terrible frowns, which
looked like that of an angry lion. Moving the extremities
of his hands like unto the trunk of an elephant, variously
altering the altitude of the neck above his frame, glancing a
look awry, thus spoke he unto his brother. ‘To avoid the
transgression of righteousness, and the degradation of the
people (consequent upon a bad example), thou art eager to
repair unto the forest. This thy eagerness is certainly mis-
placed. Wast not thou under error, how could one like thy-
self, being heroic among the Kshatriyas, and capable of
overcoming Destiny, speak in such a strain as behoves one
that is impotent. Why dost thou extol Destiny which is
powerless and weak. For what reason dost thou not appre-
hend (unrighteousness) in those two (Dacaratha and Kaikeyi),
addicted to vice. Dost thou not understand that there are
many people who feign piety outwardly (to deceive the
simple). With a desire to renounce thee by fraud,thcy simulate
piety which is but selfishness. Had they not purposed
thus, Oh, Raghava, things would not have taken such a turn.
If this story of the vows be true, then why had it not been
declared before. Surely has the monarch engaged in an
action hateful to the people, namely the installation of a
younger brother neglecting thee (the eldest one). Pray,pardon
me, Oh great hero; I cannot brook all this. Even that so called
virtue do I loathe, which has, O high-souled one, fascinated
thee, and made thy mind run from one extreme to another.*


* Formerly the mind was for accepting the kingdom, and now for going tq
the forest as an exile. These are the two extremes here meant—T.


33 : e


358 RAMAYANA.


Why shalt thou,being capable of work, conform these impious
and cursed words of thy father, who is sadly under the influ.
ence of Kaikeyi. Here lies my sorrow that thou dost not
admit that this disturbance of the installation has arisen
out of the pretext of boon-giving ; thy idea of virtue is indeed
an object of censure. People will mark this thy forsaking
of the kingdom for redeeming the vows of thy father, with
opprobrium. Who else, save thee, even thinks ef compassing
the desires of the monarch and the queen Kaikeyi, who are
of unrestrained habits, ever intent on our mischief and are our
enemies known by the name of parents. Even if their throwing
obstacles in the way of thy installation thou considerest, as
the inevitable action of Destiny—pray disregard it, that does
not please me. He, who is tremulous, weak and powerless,
follows the track of Destiny; they pay no regard to it who
are mighty heroes and whose prowess is held in esteem by
the people. He, who can avert the consequences of Destiny
by dint of his manliness, does not lose heart even in the face
of his interest being endangered by it. People shall witness
to-day the power of Destiny and manliness; this day shall
appear which of them is more powerful. Those who have
witnessed before the prevention of thy installation by the evil
agency of Destiny, shall sec it defeated, even this very day,
by my manliness. Thwart shall I that assailing Destiny by
my prowess like unto a terrible elephant, freed of its shackles
past the restraining power of a goading hook and inflamed
with the juice issuing out of its temples. What of the
father, not even all the protectors of the regions nor the
entire population of the three worlds shall be able to
ptesent any obstacle in the way of Rama's installation. Those
who have, with one voice, Oh king, settled about thy exile
unto the forest, shall be banished to-day for fourteen years.
Burn shall ] down that hope of my father and: Kaikeyi that
they want to place Bharata on the throne by hindering thy
justallation. Influence of destiny shall not bring my oppo-


AYODHVARANDAM. 259


nents that amount of happiness, as the misery inflicted on
them by my terrible prowess. Thyself retiring unto the
forest after governing the people for a thousand years, thy
sons shall resume the administration. Dwelling into the
forest is permitted after making over (the charge of) the
subjects unto (the hands of the)-sons, as did the Rajarshis of
old, The monarch changing his mind, the kingdom shall
be transferred into another's hands—dost thou, being afraid
of this, want to fly as an exile unto the forest? And is it for
this, that thou Oh virtuous souled Rama, dost not wish to
have kingdom for thee ? Ido promise unto thee, Oh great
hero, that I shall protect thy kingdom like unto shore pro-
tecting the sca, or else I shall not attain to the region of
Neroes. Do thou perform the rites of installation with
things necessary for benediction—do thou engage in these
affairs—myself alone shall be able by force to thwart the
opposition of the kings. These hands of mine are not in-
tended for enhancing the beauty of my body—this bow is
not meant for an ornament only, this sword is not for bind-
ing woods together with, and these arrows are not for carrying
the weight of woods—these four belonging to me are for
the use of killing the enemies. Never do I desire that I
shall not cut them into pieces with shaep-edged swords, brilli-
ant as the lightning, whom I do consider as my enemies,
though they be redoutable as Indra, the wielder of thunder-
bolt. Cover thick shall I the field of battle and make it
impassable by cutting assunder the trunks of the elephants,
thighs of the horses and heads of the infantry. Being be-
headed by my swords like unto the flaming fire and bes-
meared with blood resembling the clouds with lightning,
my enemies shall fall down to the ground. Who is there,
proud of his own prowess, that shall be able to withstand me
when I shall appear at the battle field with bows and lcathern
fences of fingers. Killing one with a number of arrows, and
sometimes many with a single one, I shall drive shafts into


the vital organs of men, horses and elephants. To-day shal I
display my skill in arms in destroying the supremacy of tae
monarch and establishing thine. That hand, which is fit for
the smearing of the Sandal, for wearing armlets, distributing
wealih and maintaining relations, shall be engaged to-day,
Oh Rama, in performing its worthy action—the discomfiture
of them who want to throw obstacles in the way of thy instal-
lation. Pray tell me now, which of your enemies shall be
cut off by me from wealth, life and relatives? Iam thy
servant: do thou give me instruction that the whole earth
may be brought under thy subjection”. That descendant of
Raghu, wiping tears off the eyes of Lakshmana and con.
soling him repeatedly, spoke unto him saying “Oh gentle
one, I have thought it to be the best way by all means that
I shall abide by my father’s orders.”


SECTION XXIV.


Sezine Rima determined upon carrying out his father’s
behests, Kaugalya with her voice choked with vapour begot
of tears, spoke unto him the following pious words.
“How shall this virtuous-souled one, beloved of people and
who has never experienced misfortune before, live on grains
gleaned, being born of me to Dagaratha? How shall
that Rama live upon fruits and roots, whose servants and
attendants fare on well cooked rice? Who shall believe,
of believing who shall not be afraid, that this highly accom-
plished descendant of Kakuthstha, favourite of the king,
is going to be exiled ? Certainly Destiny, who crowns or
afflicts people with happiness or misery, is the most power-
ful agency in the world, or why shalt thou, Oh pleasing
Rama, fly as an exile unto the forest? This great and in-
comparable fire of sorrow issuing from my mind, inflamed


AYODHYAKANDAM. 265


by the wind of thy absence, increased by the fuels of jamen-
tation and pain, kindled by hard sobs, obtaining the oblations
of tears, vomiting the smoke of vapour begotten of anxious
thoughts—the result of counting upon the days of thy return,
shall consume me, making greatly lean, when deprived of
thy presence, as does the fire burn the dry grass in summer.
Like unto a cow following its young one shall I follow thee,
Oh my darling, wherever shalt thou go.” Hearing those
words of his mother, Rama that best of men, spoke the
following words unto her, who was greatly troubled with
sorrow. “The monarch has been duped by Kaikeyi; myself
resorting to the forest, surcly shall he resign his life, if cast
off again by thee. There is nothing more cruel for women
than the forsaking of their husbands ; it does not behove thee
therefore, to think even of this opprobrious action. Do thou
serve this descendant of Kakuthstha, my father, and the lord
of the earth as long as he lives—know thou this to be the
eternal virtue.”

Thus addressed by Rama, Kaugalya of auspicious looks,
being gratified greatly, spoke unto him, the remover of her
sorrows. “Truly it is.” Rama, the foremost amongst religious
men, being spoken thus, said to his mother, who was
greatly disturbed with sorrow, agair in the following
strain. “Proper it is both for thee and me to carry out
father’s words: he is thy husband, and my best preceptor
and the lord and master of all people. With great
pleasure shall [ abide in thy words after passing these
nine and five years in the great forest.” Thus addressed,
Kaugalya, bearing great affection for her son, sorely pained
and having her eyes full of tears, spoke unto her beloved
son the following words. “Oh Rima, I shall not be able
to live amongst these co-wives, if art thou resolved to
goto the forest for the discharge of thy father’s behest;
do thou take me with thee, Oh Kakuthstha, like unto a wild
hind. Rama, supressing his feeling, spoke unto his mother


36% RAMAYANA.


who was lamenting, thus, saying :—Husband is the deity and
master of the wife as long as she lives; so the monarch being
the lord can deal with thee and me in any way he likes.
That highly intelligent lord of men living, we should nat con-
sider ourselves as without a master. Bharata is also pious and
beloved of all people in speecli—he,intent on the performance
of religious services, shall attend upon thee always. Do thou
now take care that on my retiring the monarch does not wear
away by the pangs of my separation, that this terrible sorrow
may not kill him. Do thou look after the welfare of the
old king always. The woman, who serves not her husband,
being engaged in excellent religious rites and fasts, shall fare
wretchedly in the life to come ; and a woman gets at the excel-
lent abode of the celestials by serving her husband. Even
those who do not worship and bow unto the cclestials should
serve their husbands alone being intent upon their welfare.
Such is the virtue that should be always pursued by women
according to the Vedas and Smritis. Do thou beguile thy
time, Oh worshipful one, expecting my return, by worshipping
the celestials with flowers and oblations unto the fire and
serving well the Brahmins. Engaged in discipline and fasting
and devoted to the services of thy husband thou shalt
attain thy best desires on my return, if this foremost of pious
men lives then. Being thus accosted by Rima, Kaugaly&
being distressed with the thought of separation from her son,
spoke unto him with tears in her eyes the following words.
“Oh my darling! it is beyond my power to dissuade thee
from thy firm resolution for going to the forest ; it is im-
possible to avoid this hour of separation. Go thou my son,
with an earnest heart ; may thou fare well; my anxiety shall
be removed on thy return. Attain shall I then great
happiness, when thou, Oh great one, shalt return after satis-
fying your vows and making thyself freed of debts unto
thy father. Incomprehensible is the action of Destiny in
this world, Oh my son, as it drives thee away unto the forest,


APODHYAKANDAM. 263


Oh Raghava, neglecting my request. Do thou now repair,
Oh mighty hero, and come back in peace, and console me
with soul-soothing, tender words. Oh my darling, shall that
day ever come, when I shall see thee return from the forest,
weariug bark a@d matted hair.’ With great earnestness, the
worshipful one began to eye R&ma, determined to go as an
exile unto the forest and spoke unto him auspicious words and
became desirous of performing benedictory ceremonies.


SECTION XXV.


Kaucatva subduing her sorrow,and touching holy water,
began to perform auspicious ceremonies for Rama, and spoke
unto him saying “Do thou, Oh best amongst the descendants
of Raghu, repair now, as 1 cannot dissuade thee, but do thou
return speedily and, follow the footsteps of great ones. Let
that virtue, Oh best of Raghavas, protect thee, which thou
hast followed with gladness and self-discipline.Let the deities,
whom you worship every day in the temple, together with
the Maharshis protect thee in the forest. Let those weapons
conferred upon thee by the great Vis¥&mitra protect thee
always, gifted with good qualities. Do thou of mighty hands
live forever, being protected by the truth and merit of thy
continual services to thy father and mothers, May the
holy fuel, sacrificial grass, sanctified altars and court-yards,
the sacred ground of medicant Brahmins, mountains, trees
great and small, lakes, birds, serpents and lions protect thee.
Oh best of men, may Sidhya,* Bishvadeva,t Maruta,t the
great ascetics, the sustainer, and the preserver of the creation


* An inferior deity or demigod—T.

+ Deitics of a particular class in which ten are enumerated ; their names
are Vasu, Satya, and so forth.—T.

+ A deity personifying wind.——T.


264 RAMAVANA.


Pusa* Bhaga,t Aryamé,t the Lokapdlas,§ headed by Indra
and others, the six seasons, the months, day, night,smoments
Srutis,] Smritis,|| and virtue protect thee, Oh my son, on all
sides. May the great deity Skanda, Soma, Vrikaspatt, Sap-
tarshi, Narad, Moon and other ascetics profect thee. May
the encircled regions with their lords, being pleased with my
eulogy, protect thee, Oh my son, always in the forest. When
shalt thou repair unto the wood, may the mountains, oceans,
Varuna, the heaven, sky, earth, air, things movable and im-
movable, planets and stars with their presiding deities, day,
night, and evening protect thee. May the six seasons, months
years and all the divisions of time confer upon thee
pleasure always, when thou of great intelligence shalt wander
away into the forest in the attire of an ascetic. May the
deities and demons ever minister unto thy happiness and
may not fear proceed unto thee, Oh my son, from the terrible
R&ksashas and Pisichas intent on committing cruel deeds,
and other animals living on flesh. May the apes, scorpions,
wild gnats, reptiles and insects make thee no harm; may not
the elephants, tigers, terrible looking bears, hogs, buffalos
and other horned animals hurt thee. Being worshipped by
me from here may the ferocious cannibal races of all kind
bring thee no injury. May thy course be crowned with
auspiciousness and thy powers with success. Do thou, Oh
my son, repair unto the forest, being profusely provided
with fruits, roots and other things. May all the creatures of
the sky, all those who breathe on this Earth, and all those
deities who are hostile unto thee, contribute to thy welfare.
May Sxkva Soma, Sun, the lord of wealth and Death, protect


* The sun—T,

+ The moon.—T.

$ A class of manes or deified progenitora.—T.

§ Those deities who protect the regions, vis, the sun, moon, fire wind,
Indra, Yama, Varune, Kuvera—T.

The Vedas severally or collectively—T.

ll The body of laws as delivered by Manu or others.—T.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 265


thee, Oh Rama, resorting to the forest of Dandaka. May fire,
air, smoke and the mantras uttered by the Rishis protect thee,
Oh descendant of Raghu, at the time of thy bathing. May the
lord of creation, Rishis and all the remaining deities defend
thee when dwelling in the forest.

That best of women Kaucalya, of great renown and having
expansive eyes, after propitiating the celestials with gar-
lands, fragrant odours and praises, began to offer oblations
unto the fire by the help of eminent Brahmins for the welfare
of Rama, collecting clarified butter, whiic garlands, reli-
gious fig trees and white mustard sceds for this pur-
pose. The spiritual preceptor, after offering oblations unto
the fire with due rites for his peace and health, presenting
what was then left as offerings unto the lords of the four car-
dinal points and others,* and giving the Brahmins a dish of
curd, ghee and honey, made them utter benedictory prayers
for Rama who was going unto the forest. Then that renown-
ed mother of Rama, after conferring upon the Brahmins
dakkshings, in accordance with their desires, accosted Ragha-
va with the following words. ‘May that blessing crown thee,
which was attained by the thousand eyed Indra, honored of
all the deities on the occasion of killing the mighty Asura
Vetra. May that blessing attend tiee, which was invoked
in olden times by Vinat&, for that king of birds Garuda,


* The Garhyastabali or the daily offering of the honseli.ter, meant here,
may be thus explained. After the performance of oblation unto the fire, the
householder should present offerings to the lords of the four cardinal points.—
Indra, Yama, Varuna, Soma and totheir retinue. Tho offering for the Marutas
should be placed on the threshold ; for the presiding deities of the water in
water ; for the lords of the forest unto the wooden pestle and mortar ; for Sri and
Bhadrakali on the grounds adjacent to the beddings on tha side of the head and
that of the feet respectively ; for Brahmanspati and Vastupati on the site of tha
habitation; for Visvadeva and for day and night throwa in the air of the house,
for Sarvatmabhuta scattered on the terrace. After offering to all these what
femains should be thrown on the soath for the manes, The offerings to the
dogs, the fallen, the dregs of the people, the lepers, the crows and the worms
and the insects should be placed on uncovered ground,


34 .


266 RAMAYANA.


praying for nectar. Do thow attain that blessedness, for
which Aditi prayed, on behalf of the weilder of thunder-bolt
intent on the discomfiture of the giants at the time of
ransacking the ocean for nectar. May that prosperity wait
upon thee, Oh Rama, which crowned the mighty Vishnu, while
perambolating with his three steps the heaven earth and the
regions as a dwarf. May the Rishis, the great oceans, islands,
the three worlds, Vedas, the regions, lend their might in the
advancement of thy welfare.” Saying this Kaugaly&, the
foremost of all women, having expansive eyes, placed the
gtains on Rama’s head ; sprinkled his body with fragrant
substances, and tied to his hands, as amulet, twigs of such
auspicious plants as wsalyakarani, with due mental
repetition of mantras. That excellent one of high renown,
embracing Rama and smelling his head, with her voice
choked, as if all pleased, though placed under the
influence of dire distress in reality, uttered mantras and
spoke unto him thus. “Oh my son, Oh Rama, have thy
desires attained—and do thou go, wherever thou likest. I
shall sec thee, Oh my darling, with great delight, when shalt
thou, returning Ayodhya in excellent health and having all
thy ends satisfied, resume the administration of thy kingdom.
Myself having sorrows removed and having my face glowing
with joy, shall see thee coming from the forest like unto
the rising of the full moon. Continually shall [ eye thy good
self, Oh my son sitting on an auspicious seat, and return-
ing from the forest after making good thy father's behests,
May thou returning from the forest and being dressed with
royal robes and urnaments, satisfy the desires of my daughter-
in-law. Worshipped have I deities headed by Siva and
others, the great ascetics, the genii and the snakes; may
they all and the four cardinal points, Oh R&ghava, contri-
bute to thy welfare, who, art going unto the forest for a long
time.” Kaugalya, having her eyes full of tears, and per-
forming the benedictory ceremonies with due rites, went


AYODHYAKANDAM. 267


round Raghava with solemnity, and seéing him again and
again sighed hot and hard. Being gone‘round by his mother
thus, Raghava, of great fame, and resplendent with the
spleadour of beauty, proceeded towards the abode of Sita,
after bowing down unto the feet of his mother repeatedly.


BECTION XXVI.


—00—


Rama, intent on repairing unto the forest, and treading
in pious tracks, after duly saluting Kaugaly& and beautifying
the royal road, crowded with people, captivated their hearts
by means of his high uccomplishments. Vaidehi, ever
engaged in ascetic rites, did not hear of all these affairs ;
there was in her heart only the thought of Rama’s installation,
That daughter of the king, after offering her service unto
the deities according to the proper royal rites; was eagerly
awaiting the approach of Rama with a grateful and pleased
heart. Entered Rima this beautiful abode, excelfently fur-
nished and filled with people highly delighted, having his
head banging down a little wilh shame. Sita, seeing her
husband, racked with sorrow and froubled in mind with
anxiety, rose up trembling from her seat. Sceing her, that
virtuous souled Raghava, could not bear his internal sorrow,
which manifested itself by external signs. Finding him with
face pale and perspiring, and incapable of containing grief
within, Sitd sore distressed with sorrow addressed him, saying,
“Oh my Jord, why do I perceive such a change in thee? To-
day the constellation Pushya is in conjunction with the moon,
and planet Vrihaspati is presiding over this conjunction,
this day bas been declared as the most auspicious one by
the learned Br&bmins, then why do thou cherish such a sorrow
in thy mind ? Why has not thy charming face been placed
un der the shade of an umbrella, having hundred ribs and


268 RAMAPANA.


and white as a watery foam? Why do not the servants fan
thee, having eyes like lotus’ petals, with chowries white
as the moon or a goose ?_ I do not see thee, Oh best of men,
eulogised with auspicious songs by the panegyrists, enco-
miasts and family bards. Why do not the Brahmins, versed
in the Vedas, observing the formal rites, sprinkle on thy
‘head honey and curd, after washing it duly ? Why are not
thy subjects, citizens, urbans, and leading members of society
dressed and adorned, willing to fullow thee ?_ Why does not
that excellent sport-chariot go before thec, having four fast
going steeds, adorned with golden ornaments tied unto it ?
Why does not that excellent elephant precede thee, Oh great
hero, which is gifted with auspicious marks and resembles
a mass of durk clouds and a mighty hill? Why do not the
servants ruu before thee, Oh mighty hero, with a pretty look-
ing royal seat embroidered with gold ? Why do 1 perceive
thy face so pale as never seen before, and why therein is
no mark of gladness, when every thing for thy installa-
tion has been made ready?” Wereupon spoke unto
that weeping Sita, the descendant of Raghu thus :—"Oh
Sit, Oh thou born of a great family, versed in the know-
ledge of rcligion and intent on the performance of religious
rites, my father has banished me unto the forest! Do thou
hear, Oh daughter of Janaka, how has this calamity befallen
me. In the days of yore’ was granted unto my mother,
Kaikeyi two boons by my father, king Dagaratha of truthful
vows. When every thing was made ready by my father for
my installation, Kaikeyi reminded him of his promise and
gained over him for his righteousness. I shall live in the
forest of Dandaka for fourteen years and Bharata shall be
installed by my father as the heir apparent of the throne.
And myself bound to fly as an exile unto the wood, have
come here to see thee ; do thou not praise me ever before
Bharata. Those who are crowned with prosperity cannot
bear another's praise ; it therefore behoves thee not to extol


4PODHYARANDAM. 269


my virtues in the presence of Bharata. Thou shouldst
not extol me even in the company of thy friends ; thou shalt
be then able to live with Bharata as one favourable to his
party, The monarch has granted him this lasting heir
apparentship ; it is therefore proper for thee, Oh Sita, to
please him specially for he is the king now. To day shall
I repair unto the forest for redeeming my father’s vows ; do
thou, Oh high-minded one, live here in undisturbed mind.
Do thou, Oh sinless and auspicious one, live here engaged
in religious rites and fasts, when I shall wend my way unto
the forest inhabited by the great ascetics. Rising from the
bed early in the morning, adore the deities every day, and
then bow down unto the feet of my father Dagaratha, the
lord of men. My mother Kaugalya is old and much pressed
down with sorrow ; do thou show proper respects unto her,
considering it to be a pious deed. Thou shouldst then bow
down unto my other mothers who all minister unto me, with
equal love and affection. Shouldst thou specially regard
Bharata and Satrugna like unto thy sons or brothers,
who are dearer unto me than my life itself. Thou shouldst
not do, Oh Vaidehi, any such thing as might be unpleasant
unto Bharata, for he is the king of the land as well as of
the family.

The monarchs are always propitiated by being served with
assiduity and good temper; they are offended when any
thing contrary to it happens. They renonnce even their own
son, born of their loins, when they find him bringing about
their mischicf, and admit into their favour persons devoted
to their welfare bearing no relationship whatever. It therefore
behoves thee, Oh auspicious one, to live here, abiding by
Bharata’s commands and being engaged in religious rites
and truthful vows. I am going unto the forest, Oh my dar-
ling, and thou shalt live here. Oh excellent lady, abide by
tmy word as didst thou never formerly falsify it.


270 RAMAYANA,


SECTION xxvil.


bgING addressed thus, Vaidehi, beloved and sweet speech-
ed, spoke unto her husband the following words, offended
as it were on account of her great affection. “Is it that thou
speakest me thus, thinking me, no doubt, mean minded ? I can
not but laugh at thy words, Oh best of men; what thou hast
said is not becoming of a mighty prince versed in military
arts and is really very opprobrious and infamous. What more,
it is not proper even to hear them. Oh dear husband, father,
mother, son, brother, daugther-in-law, all of them abide by
the consequences of their own actions, it is the wife alone,
Oh best of men, that shares the fate of her husband; it is
therefore that ever along with thee I have been ordered to
Tive in the forest. Neither father, mother, son, friends, not
her ownself is the stay of a woman in this or in after life,
it is the husband alone that is her only support. If dost thou
repair to-day unto the forest impregnable, I shall go before
thee, Oh R&ghava, treading upon the thorns and prickly
grass. Confident do thou take me with thee, Oh great hero,
renouncing jealousy and indignation, like unto water left
after drinking; there exists no sin in me that could justify
forsaking. Unto woman is preferable under all circumtances
the shade of her husband’s feet to the tops of a palace,
the celestial car or excursion in the airy path.* I have been
taught by my father and mother to follow my husband in all
conditions of life; and I shall carry out now what J have been
taught; I shall not abide by any othercounsel. Ishali wend
my way unto the forest impassable, devoid of men. inhabited
by various deers, tigers and other voracious animals. Happily
shall I live there as if in my paternal house, giving no thought
upon the prosperity of the three worlds, thinking only


* It was generally believed that by certain processes of Voge one acquired
power to fly in the air.—T,
r


AYODHYARKANDAN. 271


of the services that are to be rendered unto my husband. I
shall sport with thee, Oh great hero,in that forest impregnated
with the fragrance of flowers, tending thee constantly,
having my senses subdued, and being engaged in austere
performances. Oh great hero, capable art thou to maintain
many thousand others in the forest, what of me. Surely
shall I go to-day to the forest with thee ; there is no doubt
about it and thou shalt not be able, Oh great hero, to dis-
suade me from so doing. Undoubtedly I shall always live
upon roots and fruits ; living with thee always I shall not bring
about thy affliction. Always I shall precede thee when walk-
ing,and shall take my repast alter thou hast taken it. Willing
am [ to view mountains, rivulets, lakes and ponds. Being
fearless in thy company, Ob my intelligent husband and great
hero, I shall behold on all sides ponds filled with wild geese
and ducks and beautified with a collection of fullblown lotuses,
and shall bathe there every day, pursuing the same vow with
thee. ‘And greatly gratified, I shall, Oh thou having expansive
eyes, amuse there with thee, in this manner, even for hundred
or thousand years. [shall never experience the reverse of
fortune, inasmuch as I do not like to live in the abode of
celestials, Oh RAghava, if I am to dwell there without thee ;
no, it is not pleasing unto me, Oh best‘of men. I shall go
there in that dense forest full of deers, monkeys and elephants
and live there as if under my paternal roof cleaving unto thy
feet and abiding in thy pleasure. Do thou accept my entreaty
whose heart is entirely thine, knows none else, and is ever at-
tached unto thee, and who am resolved to die if forsaken by
thee ; thus repairing | shall be in no way a burden unto thee’,
That best of men, reluctant to take Siti with him, who bad
spoken thus and who was greatly attached to virtue, related
unto her about the many miseries consequent upon dwelling ia
the forest, with a view to prevent her from following him.


272 RAMAYANA,


SECTION XXVIII.


Tar lover of virtue, thinking of the miseries of the
forest, resolved not to take Sita with him, who was versed in
religious lores and had spoken thus. And consoling her whose
eyes were stained with tears, that virtuous-souled one spoke
unto her the following words with a view to prevent her
from going. “Oh Sita, thou art born of an illustrious
family and ever intent on the performance of religious deeds ;
do thou practise virtue here as it may conduce to the happi-
ness of my mind. Oh Sita, Oh thou of the weaker sex, do
thou act up to my counsels ; there are evils enough in the
forest, do thou learn them from me who am about to dwell
in it. Renounce therefore, Oh Sith, thy intention of flying
as an exile unto the forest, which for its impenitrableness
is said to abound in evils. It is for thy welfare that I give
utterance to these words; happiness there is none, it is
always covéred with miseries. The roarings of the lions
living in the caves of mountains, swelling with the sounds
of the waterfalls, produce a very painful impression upon
the ears; so the wood is full of misery. Animals, all mad-
dened, sporting in solitude, seeing (man),approach to attack
him; so the wood is full of misery. he rivers are full of
crocodiles, sharks, and other fearful animals, muddy and im-
passable and always infested with infuriated elephants ; so
the wood is full of misery. There the wayfares are covered
with creepers aud thorns: they are void of drinking water
ever resounded with the noise of the wild fowls ; so the wood
is full of misery. Being exhausted with the toil of the day,
the dwellers of the wood have to sleep in night on the bed
made of leaves fallen from the trees on the surface of the
ground ; so the wood is full of misery. With the (supply of)
fruits that have fallen from the trees man of self discipline
‘oust content himself morning and evening; so the wood,


AYODHYAKANDAN. #73


© Sit& is full of misery. One has to fast, O Maithili,
according to his might, to wear matted hair and bark, to
adore the deities and his ancestors according to due rites,
every day to serve the guests that come to him, and
observing the rules of asceticism, to bathe every day thrice,
namely, in the morning, in the mid-day and in the evening;
so the wood is full of misery. One has to offer presents
of flowers collected by his ownselfé unto the altars, O Sita,
according to the rites of the ascetics ; so the wood is full of
misery. Those that dwell in the forest will have to remain
content, having practised moderation in food, O Maithili,
with whatever edibles are attainable in the forest; so the
wood is full of misery. There are always violent winds,
darkness, hunger, and great fear; so the wood is full of
misery. Reptiles, many and of various kinds, creep there
on the path, O excellent lady, with haughtiness ; so the wood
is full of misery. And snakes living in the rivers and of
crooked course like them, always await the wayfarers,
hindering the passers-by: so the wood is full of misery.
Birds, scorpions, insects musquitos and wild gnats, always
disturb the dwellers, O fair one of the weaker sex; so the
wood is full of misery. ‘There are trees full of thorns, having
their branches moving to and fro, and the fusa and kdsa
grasses with thorny blades constantly undulating; so the
wood is full of misery. There are various physical afflictions
and divers fears and great misery consequent upon living in
the forest. Anger and desires are to be renounced, the heart
is to be set on ascetic austerities, fear in the fearful objects is
to be cast off; so the wood is full of misery. Thou shouldst
not therefore go unto the forest—it forebodes no good unto
thee. Weighing well, have 1 concluded that the forest
abounds in innumerable evils.” While the high-souled Rama,
resolved thus not to take Sila with him unto the forest, she,
greatly sorry, did not accept his words and spoke unto him in
the following way.


35


274” RAMAYANA.


SECTION xxix.


Hearne these words of Rama, Sita greatly sorry, with
tears in her eyes, spoke gently unto him the following words.
“The evils, thus enumerated by thee of living in the forest,
do thou know, appear as so many good qualities unto me,
who have been made forward by thy affection. Deer, lions,
elephants, tigers, saravas,* chamaras,t srimaras,t and other
animals which have not seen thee before, seeing thee, O
Raghava, will stand off, for they all fear thee. I shall
follow thee, taking the permission of the respected ones ;
without thee,O RAma, 1 will renounce my life. If I live
by thee, O R&ghava, Szkra, the lord of celestials, shall not
be able with his mighty power to defeat me. ‘A woman,
without her husband, cannot live’; this truth bas been pointed
out by thee, O Rama, unto me. Besides, 1 heard before,
O thou of great intelligence, in my paternal house from the
Brahmanas that I should live in the forest. I have heard
this from the Brahmanas versed in palmistry, and 1 have all
along been anxious, O mighty hero, to go to the forest; ¥
shall therefore obtain permission and go, O dearly beloved,
unto the forest with thee; nothing can make it otherwise,
T shali secure permission and follow thee; the time has
arrived; may the Brahmanas be of truthful words! I know,
O great hero, that there are many evils incident to living
in the forest; but they generally befall those men who have
not their senses subdued. I heard, when J was a girl, that
an ascetic woman of well-disciplined character, came to my
mothér and apprised her of my future abode in the forest.


* A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs and te inhabit particularly


the snowy mountains.—T.
+ A kind of deor, or rather the Bos Grriniens erroncously classed by the


Hindu writers amongst the deer—T.
+ A young deert ~T.


4YODHVAKANDAM. 275


l had requested thee, O my lord, many times before in this
house to take me to the forest with thee for enjeyment,
and thou wast pleased to agree. For thy welfare, O Raghava,
having received thy permission to follow thee, I like to serve
thee, O great hero, while living in the forest.

O thou, pure-hearted one, surely shall 1 become sinless
if I follow my husband,out of affection ; for my husband is my
Divinity. 1 have heard this pious report from the Bralimanas
of great fame that even in after life thy company is greatly
beneficial unto me. She, who has been given away as wife
by her father to one, with due rites of gift peculiar to each
class, touching holy water, shall be his, even in her after
life. For what reason then dost thou not wish to take thy
wife with thee who is of good character and devoted to her
husband? Do thou take me, O K&kuthstha, who am poor
in spirit, devoted to my husband, ever given to thy service,
and participating equally in thy joy and sorrow. If thou dost
not purpose to take me with thee, surely will Ido away with
my life by drinking poison, entering into fire, or drowning
myself in water.” She begged Rama in these and various other
means to take her with him, but that mighty hero did not
consent to lead her into the lonely forest. Being accosted
thus, Maithili was wrapt up in thought ahd bathed her breast
with tears trickling down from her eyes. And Kakuthstha
having control over his ownself, with a view to dissuade her
who was angry and engrossed in anxious thoughts, began ta
console her in divers ways.


276 RAMAPANA,


SECTION Xxx,


Bene consoled thus by Rama, maithili, the daughter
of Janaka, fearing separation, lovingly and haughtily laughed
at R&ghava of spacious breast, and spoke unto him, her
husband, the following words with a view to follow him to
the forest. “What thought of thee, O Rama, my father, the
king of Mithila, accepting thee as his son-in-law, who was
a man in form but (in deeds) a woman? Henceforth, if
people through ignorance say that the sun has not that
burning flood of light which in Rama does shine forth,
woe is them, it is falschood. Why art thou so dejected
and whence is thy fear that thou art willing to leave behind
thy wife who has none clse but thee? Know me to be
perfectly under thy influence like unto Sérifri, following
her husband Safvazdén, the son of Dimat Sen. 1 have not,
like one bringing stigma on her line, ever in my life thought
of a second person, but of thee whom 1 must follow into the
forest. Dost thou, like unto an ordinary actor, wish to hand
me over to others, who am chaste, pure as a virgin, and long
held in conjugal affection? O sinless one, do thyu become
subservient and serviceable to him whose pleasure thou biddst
me seek, and for whom thou hast suffered thyself to be im-
peded (in the installation). It does not behove thee to repair
unto the forest without taking me along with thee. Be it
the austerity of an ascetic, the forest or heaven, with
thee will Ibe everywhere. No toil shall I suffer on the way,
as if lying on a bed of luxury, while following thee in
thy footstep. When with thee, the various thorny grasses,
the Ausa, the Késa, the Sara, and the /shika, and the
thistles and brambles on the way, shall be unto me in
touch like unto linen and deer-skin. The dust that will
cover me, thrown up by the gush of wind, shad be,
O ravisher of my heart, regarded by me as the


AYODHYAKANDAMN. a7


finest sandal dust. When I shall lie down on the bed of green
grass in the forest, it shall appear to me more pleasant than
one covered with a colored blanket. Fruits, roots and leaves
which thou wilt bring thyself and give me, be they great or
small in quantity, shall be to me like unto the ambrosia-juice.
1 shall never think of my father, mother, or my abode ; I shall
enjoy fruits and flowers growing in various seasons. Thou shalt
not witness any thing disagreeable there ; for me thou shalt
not experience any sorrow,nor shall I be a burden unto thee ;
do thou take me with thee, O Rama, conceiving with
pleasure that thy company is a heaven unto me and thy ab-
sence ahell. If thou dost not take me unto the forest which
I count freed from all evils, surely I shall drink poison and
never come under the influence of my enemies.When through
affliction I shall not live after separation, better it is, O Lord,
that I die immediately at the time of my being forsaken by
thee ; I cannot bear this grief even for a moment. How shall
I be able to live without thee for fourteen years ?”

Thus lamenting, Sita, racked with sorrow, embraced
her husband and began to cry aloud. Like unto a she-
elephant,she being pierced by the poisonous shafls of R&ma’s
words, began to shed tears, long kept off, as an Aranf wood
emits fire continually. Tears caused by her sorrow and
white as the crystal began to trickle down from her eyes,
like unto water falling in drops from lotus petals. And that
beautiful face having expansive eyes and resembling the full
moon in its splendour, with tears became pale and parched,
like unto a lotus taken out of its watery bed. Finding her
almost insensible with sorrow, Rama flung his arms round
her and reviving her (with consolation) spoke the following
words unto her; “I do not long for, O worshipful one,
even the abode of celestials gained through thy affliction :
fear there is none for me like unto the self-create Brahma.
Not apprised of thy full intention, O thou of beautiful count-
enance, 1 could not, though capable of escorting thee,


278 RAMAYANA.


desire thy abode in the forest. When thou art determined
O Maithili, to repair unto the forest with me, 1 cannot
leave thee behind, as one possessing self knowledge cannot
renounce munificence. O thou, having thighs resembling
the trunks of an elephant, I shall resort to that virtue which
was exercised by great and good men going before ; do
thou follow me therefore like Suvarchala following the Sun.
I cannot but go unto the forest, O daughter of Janaka, as
the truthful word of my father leads me thereto. Obedience
unto his parents is the virtue of a son. Disobeying the
command of my father E am not eager to live, Why
should we with meditations and adorations worship Destiny,
which is not cognizable to the worshippers, neglecting our
patents, who are ever present to our senses ? In the
worship of the parents are fulfilled the triple object of
religious pursuit,and the adoration of the three regions ; there
is nothing equal to it, conducing to purity; so do I, O thou
of excellent look, resort to it.

Truth, almsgiving, honor, and sacrifices with profuse gilts
are not so strengthening (in the life to come) as the services
rendered unto the parents. Heaven, wealth, grains, learning,
son, and happinesss,—nothing remains inaccessible unto us,
Great souls followings the desires, and resorting to the
service of their parents, get at the abodes of celestials,
Gandharvas, the seats of Brahm& and Vishnu, and other
excellent regions. Therefore do I desire to follow what my
iather commands me, treading in the path of truth,—and this
is the virtue eternal. My resolution of not taking thee, O
Sita, unto the forest of Dandaka is now rent asunder, as
thou hast prepared thyself to live in the forest and follow me.
Permitted by me, O fair one of exquisite beauty, to repair
unto the forest, do thou follow me, O thou timid one, and be
the partner of my righteousness. Thy determination to follow
me, O beautiful one, is very excellent and is in perfect
keeping with myself and my family. Do thou address thyself


AYODHIAKANDASI, 279


to repairing unto the forest, for without this now even
heaven itself does not please me. Do thou give away
jewels unto the Brabmanas and edibles unto the beggars
longing for them, and make haste without delay. Confer
upon the Brahmanas, valuable ornaments, excellent clothes,
pleasant toys, beds, conveyances and other fine things in thy
possession and then what remains do thou distribute amongst
the servants.” Convinced that her going to the forest was
desired by her husband, Sit& began to distribute them speedily
with a delighted heart.


SECTION XXXI.


“Heanrine this conversation, Lakshmana, who had gone
there before; with tears in his eyes and being unable to bear.
this terrible sorrow, took hold of his brother’s feet and spoke
thus unto that greatly renowned Sitd and Raghava. “If thou
art resolved to repair unto the forest filled with deer and-
elephants, I shall accompany thee, always going before
with bows in my hands. Thou shalt range with me in
that charming part of the forest which resounds with the
music of the birds and the humming of the bees, Alienated
from thee | do not long for the abode of the celestials, nor for
eternal life, nor for the wealth of the three regions.” The son
of Sumitra, who spoke thus and was determined upon going
to the forest, bemg repeatedly requested by Rama with
consoling words to desist from his purpose, spoke unto him
the following words. “Formerly thou didst order me to
follow thee ; and why dost thou prevent me now from accom-
panying thee to the forest ? I want to learn, O sinless one,
why thou dost prevent me now from following thee. 1 enter-
tain a grave doubt in this.” Then the highly effulgent Rama


280 RIMAPANA.


spoke thus unto that sedate Lakshmana, who stood praying
before him with clasped hands. “Thou art sedate, fond
of virtue, of peaceful temper, and thou walkest always in the
paths of righteousness. I hold thee dear as my life and thou
art obedient unto me and art my friend. If thou dost accom-
pany me unto the forest, O son of Sumitra, who shall serve
Kaugalyi and the highly renowned Sumitriy That highly
effulgent lord of earth who will satisfy the world with the
fulfillment of its desires like unto rain spreading in showers
over the earth, is himself now shackled with desires unto
Kaikeyi, That daughter of Agwapati obtaining this kingdom
from the monarch, there will be no end of the miseries of
these co-wives. Bharata attaining the throne and siding his
mother, Kaikeyi will never think of Kaugalya or Sumitra
sore distressed with grief, Do thou therefore, O son of
Sumitr3, live here of thy own accord or by the favour of the
monarch, and maintain these worshipful ones. If thou dost
act thus, it will be showing thy best regard in me. O thou,
versed in the knowledge of religion, real virtue consists in
the adoration of superiors. Do this, O son of Sumitr&’, for
my sake ; if we all go away leaving her aside, she will not be
happy in any way.”

Accosted thus by Rama, Lakshmana, well versed in
speech, spoke unto him the following humble words. “Being
afraid of thy power, O hero, Bharata shall adore Kaugalya
and Sumitra—there is no doubt about this. If that wicked Bha-
rata obtaining this excellent kingdom, does not maintain and
take care of them, being impelled by haughtiness and wicked
impulses, surely shall [ kill him, that wicked-minded one,
though he be assisted by the entire population of the three re-
gions. Besides, that worshipful Kaugalya, who has made grants
of many thousand villages unto her servants, can maintain
thousands of people like us,and has enough to maintain herself
as well as my mother. Do thou therefore permit me to follow
thee; there will be no breach of virtue in this,and I shall have


AYODHVAKANDAAL. 281


my desires attained and thy interests shall be secured. [shall
go before thee pointing out thy course, with stringed bows, a
hoe, and a basket in my hands. I shall bring for thee every
day various roots and fruits and other things that grow in the
forest and which the ascetics use in their sacrifice. Thou
shalt amuse thyself with Vaidehi on the sides of the hill, and I
shall perform everything for thee whether thou art asleep or
awake.”

Being extremely gratified with these words, Rama spoke
unto him, saying,—Do thou follow me, O son of Sumitra,
obtaining permission from all thy relatives. The high-souled
Varuna himscif offered two terrible-looking bows of etherial
temper, two sets of weapons at the great sacrifice of the royal
Janaka—namely, impenetrable mail, two quivers, two inex-
haustible arrows, and two swords burnished with gold and
bright as the Sun. These things were offered unto me as
bridal presents, and I have kept them at the house of my
preceptor. Do thou, O Lakshmana, paying homage unto my
preceptor, taking all those weapons, swiftly bring them hither.
Determined upon going unto the forest, Lakshmana, taking
leave of his friends, went to the abode of the spiritual
preceptor of the Ikshwakus and took from hit those excellent
weapons. And that best of prince, the son of Sumitra,
showed Rama those heavenly arms worshipped and well
adorned with garlands. Seeing Lakshmana arrive there,
Rama, having control over his ownself, greatly pleased, spoke
unto him the following words. “Thou hast arrived, O
Lakshmana, just when [I wanted thee. I want to distribute
with thee these my riches amongst the Brahmauas and the
ascetics, There are many excellent Brahmanas having firm
reverence in their preceptor. I want to distribute my wealth
amongst them and many other personages whu depend upon
me for their maintenance. Bring here speedily the worship-
ful Sujajna, the son of Vasishtha; I want to repair unto the
forest after duly adoring him and other excellent Brahmanas.”

36


282 KAMAVANA.


SECTION xxx.


Receiwine this pleasant and beneficial mandate of bis
brother, Lakshmana specdily went unto thé abode of Sujajna,
and finding that Vipra in the chamber where the sacrificial
fire was maintained, worshipped him and addressed him,
saying ; “Friend, come and behold the abode of that one of
arduous deeds (Rama) renouncing his incoming installation.”
Finishing his prayers, Sujajna accompanied Lakshmana
and arrived at the splendid mansion of Rima, filled with
riches. No sooner Rama found that Br&hmana versed
in the Veda (Sujajna) arrive there, shining in effulgence
like unto the blazing fire, than he rose up from his seat
along with Sita, with clasped hands, and received him as
ifhe had been the sacrificial fire itself, and offered him
excellent golden Angadas, shining car-rings, necklaces of
jewels fastened together with golden strings, Keyuras,
bracelets, and various other ornaments, and spoke unto
him, being desired by Sita, the following words. “‘O my
gentle friend} do thou by some servant send unto thy wife
this necklace and Hemasutra. And Sit8, the friend of thy
wile, also intends to’ give this Rasané unto thy wife. And
on the eve of her going to the woods, she presents thyself
and thy wife with Augadas of curious workmanship and
elegant Keyuras. And Vaidehi wishes to present thee with
this fine bed-stead with its coverlet studed with various
precious jewels. And I offer thee, O great ascetic, with a
thousand gold coins, this excellent elephant, called the
destroyer of foes, which had been bestowed upon me by my
maternal uncle.””

Being addressed thus by Rama, Sujajna accepted all
those offers, and showered benedictions upon Rama, Sila,
and Lakshmana. Thereupon Rama spoke unto his beloved
considerate and fair-speaking brother, the son of Sumitra,


AYODHYARANDAM. 283


the following pleasant words, like unto Brahm& addressing
the Lord of celestials. “O son of Sumitr&, do thou invite
the excellent Brahmanas, Agastya and Viswimitra, and adore
them, O Raghava, by conferring upon them gems, as people
cherish corn with water. And O mighty armed one, do
thou worship them, O Raghava, with a thousand cows, gold,
silver, and various precious jewels. Do thou confer upon
that good Brahmana, the preceptor of the Z7étiriya portion
of the Vedas, who crowns Kaugalyi with blessings every
day, silk cloth, conveyances, maid-servants, and such
other things, till the twice-born one is satisfied. Do thou
propitiate the worshipful Chitraratha, who is our charioteer
and counsellor and of advanced years, with precious jewels
clothes, wealth, with all kinds of beasts and a thousand
cows, Do thou confer upon those Brahmanas, O son of
Sumitr’, who live under my protection, studying the Kata
section of Yayur Veda, with staffs in their hands, a grant of
eighty mules loaded with jewels, of 2 thousand miles of pines,
and of a thousand cows, for curd and clarified butter. They
are always inactive,being constantly engaged in Vedic studies,
and are greatly slothful though having a taste for delicious
food, and are always esteemed by great men; to each of
all those Brahmanas, who always come to Kaugalya, do thou,
‘O Lakshm&na,make a grant of a thousand gold coins,and offer
unto them all such gifts as may please my mother.” There-
upon Lakshmana, that best of men, distributed amongst all
these Brahmanas aH the entire riches as ordered by Rima like
unto the Lord of wealth. Seeing his dependants in a wretched
plight, shedding tears continually, Rama proferred unto them
various articles for their maintenance, and said :—"Do ye
occupy in turn until our return my rooms as well as Laksh-
mana’s.” Having spoken thus unto all those dependants who
were racked with great sorrow, Rama ordered the Treasury
officer to bring his riches there. Thereat, the scrvants brought
all his riches and collected them in great heaps. Rama, the


284 RAMAYANA.


best of men, together with Lakshm&na, distributed them
amongst the Brahmanas, boys, the old, and the poor. ‘There
lived in that quarter a Brahmana of a tawny colour, by name
Trijata, descended from the line of Garga, earning his live-
lihood by digging the earth with spades and ploughs. His
young wife with her litle children, struggling with poverty,
spoke thus unto the old Braéhmana. ‘Throwing aside thy
spades and ploughs, do thou hear my words. Go and see the
virtuous-souled Rama, and thou art sure to get something
from him now.’ Hearing these words of his wife, Trijata,
shining in effulgence like unto Vrigu and Angira, covering
his body with a torn piece of cloth,proceeded towards Rama’s
abode with his wife, and going on ina speedy and uninter-
rupted course, reached at last the royal abode and spoke
unto Rama thus :—"O mighty son of the king! a poor man
am I, having a number of children. [ maintain my family by
digging the earth ; do thou therefore look upon me mercifully.”
Whereupon Rima replied laughing :—“I have not distributed
as yet even one thousand of my cows. Do thou hurl
this rod, and thou art the master of all those cows occupying
the space at the extremity of which this rod shall fall.”
Upon this, swiftly tightening the cloth around his
waist, Trijaté firmly grasping the rod hurled it with a
mighty force. The rod, hurled off his hands, fell on
the other side of the river Saraju in the midst of
many thousand bullocks. Seeing this, the virtuous-souled
Rama despatched to the hermitage of Trijat& all the cows
that lay extending up to the banks of the river Saraju, and
consoling him afterwards accosted him with the following
words. “Be not offended, I acted thus only as a matter of
joke. I asked thee to do this only with the object of knowing
whether thou hadst the power to hurl this rod. Do thou ask
of me now any thing thou likest. Truly do I speak that thou
shouldst not hesitate. I am ready to devote my wealth to
the services of the Brahmanas. And the wealth I have


AYODHVAKANDAM. 285


earned will conduce to my favour, if 1 can apply it to your
service.”

Then Trijata, being pleased with the accession of cows,
went away along with his wife, showering happiness and
joy. Rama of great manliness afterwards distributed with
proper respect and due welcome all his wealth amassed by
righteous means amongst the Brahmanas, friends, servants
and the poor, according to the recomendation of his friends.


SECTION XXXII.


Havine distributed much wealth to the Brahmanas, the
RAghavas set out with Sité for the purpose of seeing their
father. And the two looked beautiful with a couple of hand-
maids (following them), taking the weapons that had been
decked by Sit& with flowery wreaths. Then crowds of ele-
gantly-attired citizens, mounting on the terraces of three-
storied and seven-storied houses, lvuoked on the scene with
hearts filled with sorrow. And unable to tread the streets
because of a vast concourse,they ascending the terraces of the
buildings, eyed Raghava with woe-begone eyes. And de-
prived of their senses by grief, the multitudes,* beholding
Rama proceeding on foot in company with Sita and his
younger brother, said, —‘He that used to Le followed by the
vast hody of the four-fold forces, proceeds now along with
Sita, followed by Lakshmana alone. Knowing every kind of
enjoyment, that magnanimous one who has tasted of every
luxury, for maintaining the dignity of morality, does not wish
to falsify (his father’s) word. And that Sita whom formerly
the very rangers of the sky could not see, is to-day beheld
by the passers-by. Now summer's heat and winter's: cold


* Another reading is,—Bekolding Réma without his umbrella and ‘walking
afeot—T.


286 RAMAPANA,


and the rains of the wet season will speedily stain Sita,
whose person is worthy of being dyed, and whé used to
daub her limbs with red sandal paste. Surely to-day Daga-
ratha speaks thus, possessed by some evil spirit ; for the
king ought by no means to banish his beloved son. Who
ever exiles his son, albeit he be worthless ? And what is to
be said concerning ason that has fast secured all men's hearts
by bis behavior ? Universal benevolence, kindness, learning,
goodness, the restraint of the senses, and the control of the
faculties,—these six qualities adorn that best of men, Ragha-
va. Therefore the subjects will be afflicted in consequence
vf his separation, even as aquatic animals are, when summer
dries up the waters of atank. The entire earth is distressed
on account of the distress of this Jord of the earth, even like
a tree bearing blossoms and fruits, when its roots have been
severed. Surely this highly effulgent one with virtue for his
chief good, is the root of humanity, and the latter represents
its flowers, fruits, foliage, and boughs. Therefore, accom-
panied by our wives and friends will we like Lakshmana
follow the departing Raghava by the same way that he takes.
And leaving aside our gardens and fields and abodes, will
we, making the rightcous Rama's happiness and misery our
own, follow him. Let” Kaikeyi possess herself of our deserted
mansions, deprived of their buried treasures, with their un-
swept courtyards robbed of kine and wealth, and shorn of all
substance,filled with dus:, and abandoned by the deities, man-
sions where rats will run from hole to hole, which will neithee
emit smoke nor contain water, which will not be swept by
broomsticks, from which sacrifices, and the slaughter of sacri-
ficial beasts,and the offering of oblations,and the recitation of
sacred texts, and Yaga, will be absent, and around which will
be strewn broken earthenware,as they are on occasions of poli
tical commotions or'the occurrence of natural calamities. Let
the forest to which Raghava repairs resemble a city, and let
this city renounced by us be converted into a wilderness.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 287


Inspired by the fear of us, serpents will leave their holes, and
beasts and birds the caves of mountain, and elephants
and lions the forest. Let them occupy the tracts left be-
hind by us, and let them renounce such abounding in ser-
pents, beasts, and birds, as yield grass, meat, and fruits.
Let Kaikeyi (reign in this realm) along with her sons and
adherents ; we, renouncing homes, will dwell in the forest
with Raghava.”

Raghava heard various words uttered thus by the popu-
lace; and having beard them, he did not suffer his mind
to be agitated. And that righteous one of the prowess of
a mad elephant, from a distance began to make for the
residence of his father resembling in brightness a summit
of the Kailiga mountain. Entering the king’s mansion, he
drawing nigh found the heroic Sumantra seated in dejected
mood. Seeing that well-wisher of his thus depressed, Rama
endeavouring by all means to do his father’s bidding, cheer-
fully went on, desirous of beholding his sire. And with the
view of meeting the aggrieved king before repairing to the
forest, the magnanimous son of the IkshwAku race, seeing
Sumantra, stayed there,—so that that noble-minded one might
inform his father of his visit, And making up his mind to go
to the woods in accordance with the command of his father,
Raghava seeing Sumantra, said unto him; “Do you inform
the king of my arrival.”


SECTION xxxiv.


Taex the mighty and incomparable Rama of eyes resembl-
ing lotus-petals said unto the charioteer,—“Do you announce
me to my father." Thus commissoned by Rama, the charioteer
entering the apartment, found the king heaving sighs, his
senses overwhelmed with grief. And he saw the monarch


288 RAMAYANA.


like the sun afflicted by Rabu, or like fire enveloped in ashes,
or like a tank deprived of its water. Thereupon- concluding
that the king agitated by sorrow was bewailing Rama, the
charioteer said with joined hands. And first paying homage
unto the king, invoking victory upon him, the charioteer, per-
plexed with fear, softly and sweetly addressed the monarch
thus :—“O foremost of men, your son waits at the entrance,
after having distributed wealth to Brahmanas and his retinue.
Let that one having truth for prowess, good betide you, see
you. Having greeted all his friends,he now wishes to see you.
Know that he is about to set out for the mighty forest. Do
you,O Lord of earth, see him furnished with every perfection,
like the Sun himself surrounded by his rays.” Thereupon,
that virtuous and truthful (king) resembling the ocean by
virtue of his gravity, and motionless like the welkin,answered
Sumantra, saying,—“O Sumantra, do thou bring hither my
wives.” Reaching the inner apartment, the charioteer said
unto the ladies, —'The worshipful king calls you. Do you
come speedily.”” Thus addressed by Sumantra at the man-
date of the monarch, the ladies in a body, informed of their
husband’s command, went to the king’s apartment. And three
hundred and fifty females furnished with coppery eyes and
observing vows, surrounding Kaugalya, proceeded slowly. On
the females coming there, the monarch seeing this, said unto
the charioteer,—‘O Sumantra, do you bring hither my son.”
Thereat the charioteer taking Rama, Lakshmana and Mithila’s
daughter, speedily came before the lord of earth. The
king seeing his son drawing nigh with joined hands, hastily
rose up from his seat in company with his wives. And casting
his eyes on Rama, the king rushed towards him, but before
reaching his son, the aggrieved monarch fell down to the
earth ina swoon. Rama and that migthy car-warrior Laksh-
mana swiftly neared the king striken with grief and rendered
senseless by sorrow. And there arose in the palace cries
of women by thousands of ‘Ah R&ma,” mingled with the


AYODHPAKANDAM. ~ 389]


tinkling of ornaments. Then both Rima and Lakshmana
along with Sit& took the king up with their arms, and
with tears in their eyes laid him upon the couch. When
the lord of the earth oppressed with the vapour begot of
grief and overwhelmed with emotion, had regained his senses,
Rima with joined palms said—“I ask you, O mighty
monarch, as you are the lord of all. Do you see me safely
despatched to the forest of Dandaka. Do you permit Laksh-
mana, and let Sita also follow mc to the woods ; for although
prohibited by me with various reasons, they do not wish to
be left behind. Do you, O bestower of honor, permit us all,
renouncing sorrow—Lakshmana and Sita and me,—tike
Prajapati permitting his sons." Seeing Raghava about to
set out for the forest, the lord of earth said unto the calm
Rama waiting for his orders,—'O R&ghava, I have been
deprived of my senses in consequence of my having conferred
boons on Kaikeyi. Do you therefore confining me to-day
become king in Ayodhy&.” Thus addressed by the monarch,
Rima—the best of the righteous—well versed in speech, with
joined hands addressed his father thus,-"“O king do you
tule this earth for a thousand ycars,—I will reside in the
forest. I do not wish for the kingdom. Having spent five
and nine years in the woods, | shall again embrace your feet,
O lord of men, after fulfilling your vow.” Fettered in the net
of promise, the king bewailing his beloved son, secretly
spurred on by Kaikeyi, said—Do you, my darling, with the
view of attaining welfare here and hereafter and auspicious
fortune, go calmly your fearless way,—so that you may return
hither (in time.) I dare not, O descendant of the Raghu
race, forbid you who are established in truth and who are
bent upon discharging your duty. But, O son, do not by any
means depart to-night : beholding you even for a single day,
I shall feed with you. Do you, seeing meas well as your
mother, stay here to-night. Then ministered uuto every
way, you will set out to-morrow. © son, 0 beloved Raghava


37


292 RAMAVANA.


embraced his son,—and then deprived of his consciousness,
fell down on the ground and became motionless. Thereat all
the queens save that wife of the monarch (Kaikeyi) bewailed
together; and crying Sumantra also went into a swoon.
And the place was filled all around with exclamations of
“OQ” and “Alas.”


SECTION XXXV.


Tren shaking his head and sighing again and again,
pressing palm upon palm and grinding teeth upon teeth, with
eyes reddened in wrath and an altered complexion, and sud-
denly waxing angry and moved with grief, Sumantra witness-
ing the mental condition of Dagaratha said, shaking Kaikeyi’s
heart with the sharpened shafts of his speech and piercing her
mind all over with his harsh words resembling thunderbolts,
“© worshipful one, since you have forsaken king Dagaratha,
the maintainer of this world and the mobile and the immobile
that it contains, there is nothing that is incapable of being
done by you. J consider you the murderess of your husband
and as one that has finally exterminated one's line ; inasmuch
as you have by your act afflicted the monarch invincible like
Indra, firm as a hill, and imperturbable like the deep
itself. You ought not to bring down your boon-bestowing
Jord and husband Dagaratha; for surely the wish of a
husband to a wife outweighs a £ofi of sons. The princes will
obtain the kingdom one after another according to age ;—
this custom it is your study to render nugatory even when
the lord of the Ikshawaku race is still alive. Let your son be
king ; let Bharata rule the earth: we, however, will go where
goes Rama. No Brahmana will dwell in your dominion
—such is the ungracious deed you are going to do. [Surely
we will go the way that is wended by R&ma, and what


The North Wes: Provinces text omits the lines inclosed within brackets,


AYODHVAKANDAM. 293


happiness, O revered one, will you,forsaken by friends, Brah-
manas and the saintly, reap by remaining here, allured by the
lust of dominion ? And you are going to do such an act !}
A wonder it is that { perceive, viz,—that the earth hid by a
character like you is not riven this very day. And why doth
not the flaming and dreadful censure uttered by the mighty
Brahmarshis destroy you who are bent upon banishing Rama?
Who having hewn a mangoe tree by his axe,tendeth a Nimba ?
It never turns sweet for him that waters it. Your birth is noble
indeed ; it is as much so as is your mother’s. They say that
sweet is never extracted from Nimba. I remember what I
have heard from old men concerning the vicious inclinations
of your mother.

Some one intent upon conferring boons conferred an ex-
cellent one on your father. In virtue of this, that lord of earth
could understand the import of sounds emitted by all beings,
and it is in consequence of this that he could understand the
speech even of birds and beasts. One day as your father
was lying down, he, understanding the thoughts of a gold-
hued Jrimbha bird, from its cries, laughed heartily. Thereat
your mother getting angry, wishing for the noose of death,
said—““O king, O placid one, ¥ ask you for the reason of
your laughter.’ The king replied,—‘O worshipful lady, if
¥ unfold unto you the reason of my laugh, then I shall with~
out doubt die to-day.’ But that revered one, your mother,
again urged Kekaya, saying,—‘Tell it to me, whether you
live or die ; for (when I have learnt all about it), you will not
be able to laugh at me again.’ Thus addressed by his beloved
spouse, that lord of earth Kekaya went to the saint that
had conferred the boon on him and related unto him every-
thing faithfully. Thereupon that boon-giving saint said unto
the kin ; “(Whether this one kills herself or be destroyed, do
you not, O king reveal it.” Hearing these words of his, the
king well pleased summarily forsook your mother and began
to divert himself like Kuvera. Even in the same way, you,


294 . RAMAYANA,


© you that see only evil, staying in an unrighteous course,
befouling the king's sense, endeavour to make him commit
this wrong. In this connection I remember a saying, viz..~—r
men take after their fathers, and women their, mothers. Do
not ke so,—do you even accept what the lord of earth says.
Doing the will of your lord,do you become the refuge of us
all, Do not incited by evil propensities, make your husband,
the lord of men endued with the prowess of the celestial
chief, perpetrate an unrighteous deed. That sihless one
will not for certain give practical effect to the promise jesting-
ly made by you. O worshipful one, king Dagaratha is
graceful, being furnished with eyes resembling lotuses, Let
him install his eldest son, R&ma generous and able, main-
taining his own religion—the protector of all men—and
endued with might. O revered lady, great is the obloquy that
will spread concerning you, if leaving his royal father, Rama
repaireth to the forest. Let therefore Raghava govern his
kingdom ; and do you remove your agitation. Surely save
R&ghava none residing in the kingdom will prove friendly to
you. On Rima being installed as the heir-apparent,that best
of bowmen—king Dagaratha—will depart for the forest, re-
membering ancient examples.” Thus in presence of the king,
Sumantra with clasped ‘palms, with soft yet cutting words
endeavoured to strike Kaikeyi with regret. But that noble
dame did not feel any compunction,nor was she touched with
regret. And the complexion of her countenance remained
as it was before.


SECTION XXXVI.
—o10-—
i ee that descendant of Ikshw4ku afflicted because of


his promise, sighing and his heart filled with the vapour be-
got of sorrow, again addressed Sumantra, saying—~"O chati-


4YODHVAKANDAM. 295


oteer, do you speedily marshall the army consisting of the
four kinds of forces for following Raghava. And let sweet-
speeched courtezans and opulent traders grace the extensive
army of the prince. And, giving them immense wealth, do
you also send with him those that depend on Rama, as well
as those with whom he delights to wrestle. And let the
foremost weapons, and the citizens, and cars, and fowlers
well acquainted with the forest go in the wake of KAkutstha.
Killing deer and elephants, and drinking wild honey, and
beholding various rivers, they will ultimately forget this king-
dom. And let our ‘granary and treasury follow Rima who
is to reside in the forest. Performing sacrifices at holy spots,
and dispensing the prescribed Dakshinas, let Rima happily
reside in the forest in the company of saints. The mighty-
armed Bharata will govern Ayodhya. Therefore, do you
furnish the auspicious Rima with every object of enjoyment.”
When that descendant of Kakutstha said this, Kaikeyi was
inspired with apprehension : her countenance became blank,
and her utterance was choked. Losing her complexion
and agitated with fear, with her countenauce fallen, Kaikeyi
faced the king and said,—‘“O righteous one, like unto a
liquor whose lees alone have been left, Bharata will not receive
the kingdom tasteless and denuded of all substance.” While
the shameless Kaikeyi was speaking thus siernly, king
Dacar&tha said unto that one of expansive eyes,—“O worker
of mischief, why having laid the load upon me, do you tor-
ment me? O ignoble one, why did you not ask for this,
when you did first solicit the boon ?” Hearing these wrath-
ful words of the king, that beauteous one, Kaikeyi, waxing
doubly wroth, addressed the monarch, saying,—"Even in
this line of yours,Sagara deprived his eldest son Asamanja by
name of the enjoyment of the kingdom. In this way this one
deserves to go to the forest.” Thus addressed, king Daga-
ratha said—O fie!” and all present were afficted with
shame; but Kaikeyi feigned not to understand all this. Then


296 RAMAYLANA.


a notable, aged, pure-spirited personage held in high esteem
by the monarch, named Siddhartha, addressed Kaikeyi, say-
ing,—“Asamanja by way of sport catching people on the
way, used to throw them into the waters of the Sarayu, and
that wicked-minded wretch made merry over the same. Seeing
him do so, the citizens in a body, waxing wroth spoke
unto the monarch,—'O enhancer of the kingdom’s prosperity,
do you either banish Asamanja or us.’ To them he
replied,—‘Whence is this fear of yours?’ Thus asked by
the monarch, the subjects said,—'Through his impudence
this one of perverted sense by way of diversion throwing our
sons into the Sarayu, finds extreme delight.’ Hearing these
words of his subjects, that lord of men, with the intention of
doing good to them, forsook that mischicvous son of his.
Then swiftly causing a car to be yoked, he said unto his
men,—'This one is to be banished for life in proper garb
along with his wife.’ Thereupon that worker of iniquity
went to the forest and went about seeing mountain
fastnesses. Thus did the virtuous king Sagara renounce
his son. But what offence has Rama committed that he
isto be banished? Wedo not find any fault whatever in
R&ghava. Rare is hjs fault even like the spot on the Moon.
Or it may be, O exalted lady, that you perceive some fault
in Raghava,—Do you, if so, unfold it; and then let Rama
be banished. But the renunciation of the honest cver cou-
stant in a righteous course, in consequence of its being
opposed to virtue, destroys the splendour of Sakra himself.
Therefore, O noble one, cease to persevere in this, for what
good would the marring of Rama's good fortune bring you?
And, O you of a fair countenace, you will by such a course,
escape odium.”" Hearing Siddhartha’s words, the king, his
voice waxing exceedingly fecble, addressed Kaikeyi in words
surcharged with emotion,—‘O Personation of sin, thou
relishest not this speech. Thou knowest not either thy own
good or mine. This wicked endeavour of thine, O thou that


AYODHPARINDAM. 297


strivest after harm, which thou puttest forth adopting a
narrow path, is surely divorced from the course of the good.
Forsaking my kingdom, forsaking happiness and treasures,
{ will to-day follow Rama. Do thou with Bharata for the
king, forever enjoy dominion according to thy heart’s desire.”


SECTION XXXVI.


“Hearne the words of that worthy, Rima conversant
with modesty, humbly addressed Dacaratha, saying,—‘What
O king, have I, that am renouncing everything and am going
to dwell in the forest subsisting on what the forest yields,
to do with a following? Of what avail is a person's
attachment for the tether of a goodly elephant, when the
elephant itself is renounced by him? Thus it is with
me, O foremost of righteous ones. What sball I do with
the army, O lord of men? I will confer everything on
Bharata. Let them bring me a vesture of bark, and for
me who will go to the forest and reside there for
fourteen years, bring a hoe and a “basket.” Thereupon
Kaikeyi herself brought a bark dress and that shameless
one said unto Raghava in the presence of all,—"Do you wear
this.” On this, that foremost of men taking those two
pieces of bark from Kaikeyi, left his fine attire and put on
the ascetic garb. And Lakshmana also, renouncing his
choice raiment, put on the dress of an anchoret before his
father, Then Siti clad in silk apparel, eying the ascetic
covering meant for her, became agitated, like a doe at sight
of a noose. And afflicted with shame, that one graced
with auspicious marks, Janaki, sorrowfully took from
Kaikeyi the Kuga and bark; and with tears flooding her
eyes, that one cognizant of virtue and having her gaze


38


398 RAMAYANA.


‘ever fixed upon it, thus addressed her lord resembling the
king of the Gandharbas,—How do the ascetics dwelling in
the woods put on their dress?” Saying this, Sita, ill at ease
became embrassed. And putting on one piece on her
neck and holding the other in her hand, the daughter of
Janaka, feeling uneasy, stood overpowered with shame.
Thereupon that best of righteous persons, Rama, peedily
-coming up to her, fastened the monastic garb over Sit@’s silk
attire. Beholding Rama fastening that goodly garb on Sita,
tthe females of the inner apartment began to shed tears, And
waxing exceedingly aggrieved, they spoke unto Rama flaming
in effulgence :—“Child, do not take this virtuous one to the
forest. So long as you will reside in the forest in accordance
with the wishes of your father, we shall behold her; and by
this means let our lives attain their object, O lord. O son tak-
ing Lakshmana for your help, go you to the forest, This
auspicious one does not deserve to live in the woods like an
ascetic. O son,grant our prayer. Let the fair Sith remain, Ever
steady in virtue, youdo not yourself intend to stay here.”
Hearing these words, Dagaratha’s son tied the dress on Sita
having a similar character with himself. When she had put on
the upper and under garments, the preceptor of the king,
Wasistha, his voice choxed with the vapour of sorrow, dissuad-
-ing Sit4, said unto Kaikeyi,—“O thou whose desires outrun
‘thy sense of honor, O thou of perverted understanding,
O befouler of thy line, deceiving the monarch, thou stayest
not within the pale of the promise. O thou bereft of good
behavior, that noble lady, Sit&, should not go to the forest
Sit& will occupy R&ma’s seat. Of all those that marry, the
wife is the (other) soul. Sit& will govern the earth, as she is
RAma’s self. But if Vaidehi goes to the forest with Rama, we
will follow him, and the iahabitants of the city will also repair
thither. And the warders of the inner apartment, and the
people of the kingdom and the city taking with them their
necessaties and servants will accompany R&ghava and his


APODHYAKINDAN. 9


wife. And Bharata and Satrughna wearing ascetic clothes and
ranging the forest will live like their elder brother resident in
the woods, Then alone thou of vile ways and intent upon
harming the people wilt govern this empty earth deserted
by the inhabitants, along with the trees. That can never be
a kingdom where R&ma is not the monarch, and that forest
where Rama will reside will flourish into a monarchy. Bhar-
ata never wishes to govern a kingdom that has not been
conferred upon him by his father; nor, if he has really been:
begotten by the monarch, will he any further act by you as a
son, Even if you teaving the earth fly unto the air, that one
cognizant of the character of his ancestry, will never act
otherwise. Therefore although intent en advancing your
son, you have really brought about his injury. There exists
not a person in the world that is not partialto Rima. O-
Kaikeyi, do you to-day behold beasts and snakes and
birds journeying in the wake of Rama, and even the
trees stand with their heads turned towards him. ‘Do
you, O noble lady, removing the ascetic guise, confer
elegant ornaments on your daughter-in-law, for such a
dress suits not this one.” Saying this Vasistha prevented
Kaikeyi. ‘“O daughter of king Kekaya, you have asked for
the abode of Rama in the woods;eand decked out in
ornaments let Sita daily engaged in adorning herself, reside
in the forest with Raghava. And let the daughter of the
king go to the forest, surrounded by excellent cars and:
servants, and taking with her attires and other necessary
things. When you demanded the (fulfilment of the) promise,
you had not your eye on Sita.” When that foremost of
Brahmanas, that preceptor of the king possessed of unparal-
elled potency, had said this, Sita, desirous of serving her
beloved lord, did not turn away from the ascetic dress
(Presented by Kaikeyi.)


300 RAMAPANA.


SECTION XXXVIII-


Wauen Sit&, having a husband although seeming as if
she had none, was putting on the ascetic guise, the people
got into a wrath and exclaimed, “O Dagaratha, fie on you}
Aggrieved at the uproar that arose there in consequence,
the lord of earth banished from his heart all regard for life,
virtue, and fame. And sighing hot, that descendant of
Ikshwiku spoke unto that wife of his, saying,—"O Kaikeyi,
Sit& deserves not to go in a Kuga dress. Tender, and youth.
ful, and worthy of happiness, she is by no means capable
of living in the forest. My spiritual guide has spoken the
truth, Whom has this one injured that, being the daughter
of the foremost of kings, she like a female ascetic, wearing
a meagre garb in the presence of all, will (repair to the woods
and) remain there like a beggar destitute of everything? Let
Janaka’s daughter leave off her ascetic guise. This is
not the promise that I had made to you before. Let the
princess go to the forest in comfort, furnished with all sorts
of gems. My sands run out ; by me hath this cruel promise been
made with an oath. But this (exile of Sith) has been thought
of by you through your ignorance. Let it not, however,
consume you like a bamboo flower destroying the bamboo.
If, O wicked woman, Rama has happened to do thee some-
thing unbeautiful, what wrong, O base wretch, has Vaidehi
done thee in the world? Of eyes expanded like those of a
doe, endued with a mild temperament, and virtuous, what
harm has Janaka’s daughter done thee. Surely, O nefarious
one, the banishment of Rima is enough for thee. Why then
dost thou bend thy mind to perpetrate these atrocious sins?
O noble dame, having heard you asking for the banishment
of Rima, who had at first been intended by me for being
installed, and who came here afterwards, I had promised you
(his exile alone.} But since, going beyond that promise of


4YODHVERANDAM. gor


mine, you behold Mithla’s daughter dressed in mendicant
garb, surely you wish to find your way to hell.’ Thus com-
miasioned to the forest, Rima who was seated sealing his
lips, said,—"O righteous one, this my mother is aged and
famous and of a lofty spirit. May she not meet with improper
treatment at your hands! It behoves you, O bestower of
boons, to show greater honor to her when she shall be depriv-
ed of me and be plunged into a sea of grief and afflicted
with unprecedented woe. O you comparable unto the mighty
Indra, you should so behave with my mother smitten with my
separation, that exercised by grief in consequence of my resi-
dence in the forest, she may not, renouncing life, repair to
the mansions of Yama.”


SECTION xxxIx.


—_—o10—


Hearne R&ma’s words, and seeing him dressed like an
ascetic, the king in the midst of his wives was deprived of
his senses. And hurning in grief, the king could not eye
Raghava, nor seeing him could that one of afflicted mind
answer anything. Then remaining udconscious for a while,
the mighty-armed lord of earth oppressed by grief began
to bewail, thinking of Rama. “I conclude that formerly I
deprived many a cow of her calf, and took the life of many a
creature, and it is for this that the present calamity has be-
fallen me. (I infer) that life never departs from the body
unless the time comes, for although sore tried by Kaikeyi,
my life does not go out of me, and for I can see before me
this one resembling fire, clad in the dress of an ascetic,
having left his fine vesture. These people are in trouble in
Consequence of Kaikeyi alone striving by help of this
craftiness to secure her interest.” Having said these words,
Dagaratha, his senses overpowered by the vapour of sorrow,


goa RAMAPANA,


exclaimed “Rama !’ and could not proceed further. Thett
soon regaining consciousness, the lord of earth with tearfut
eyes, addressed Sumuntra, saying,—“Yoking a riding car
with excellent horses, do you come hither; and take the
exalted one to the south of the kingdom. The virtuous and
heroic Rama is being banished by his father and mother.
Even this methinks will be asserted as the fruit of the
virtues possessed by the pious.” Receiving the mandate of
the sovereign, Sumantra endued with fleet vigour, yoking
a car adorned with horses, came there. Then the charioteer
with joined hands announced to the prince that the car
adorned with gold was ready, yoked with excellent horses.
The king, versed in time and place, and pure, speedily sum-
moning his treasurer, said unto him these words firmly,—
"Do you without delay bring unto Vaidehi excellent and
costly attires and noble ornaments, counting these (ten and
four) years.’ Thus desired by the foremost of men, that
officer repairing to the treasury, procuring all those, speed-
ily presented them to Sit8, Thereupon that pure-sprung
one, Vaidehi, ordered to the forest, adorned her goodly
limbs with those rare ornaments. And thus decked out,
Vaidehi graced that chamber like the effulgence of the
Sum irradiating the ‘welkin with his rays. Then embrac-
ing with her arms Mithila’s daughter of noble behaviour,
and smelling the crown of her head, Sita’s mother-in-
law said—“Those women that although having always
been carefully tended by their husbands, do not regard
them duriug the incident of adversity, are in this world
reckoned as unchaste.—-Even this is the nature of women:
having formerly tasted happiness (at the hands of their
husbands), they, on the accession of an inconsiderable
misfortune, take them to task,—nay, forsake them utterly.
‘Those women that are untruthful, unmindful, of evil ways,
heartless, intent on unrighteous acts, and whose, love is
evanescent, are unchaste. Neither lineage, nor benefit, nor


AYODHYAKANDAM. 303


fearning, nor gift, nor forbearance of faults, can secure the
hearts of females,—surely their hearts are unstable. But
chaste women of good character, abiding in truth, acting in
accordance with the precepts of superiors, and maintaining
the dignity of their race, single out their lords as the prime
means of compassing their spiritual welfare. Therefore
although my son is going to be banished to the woods, you
should by no means disregard him. Whether he be wealthy or
poor, he is unto you like a god.” Hearing her mother-in-
law's words fraught with virtue and interest, Sit& facing that
jady, said with joined palms,—"I will do all that the noble
one says. I know how I should act by my husband. I have
heard all about that (from my parents.) The worshipful one
ought not to place me on the same footing with unrighteous
persons. As brightness doth not depart from the moon, so
I cannot swerve from virtue. The Vin&% without strings
does not sound; and the car without wheels does not move,—
$o although having an hundred sons, a woman without her
husband cannot attain happiness. The Father gives in mea-
sure, the father and the son give in measure,—but who does
not worship that bestower of ‘riches fineless’—the husband ?
O exalted one, having learnt from my superiors the principal
as well the minor duties, shall I disregafd (my lord)? A hus-
band is a deity unto the wife.” Hearing Sita’s words which
went directly to the heart, Kaugalya endued with purity of
spirit,out of fulness of bliss and bale suddenly shed tears, Then
with joined hands that foremost of virtuous ones addressed his
mother, who, duly honored by all, was seated in the midst of
his other mothers, saying,—“O mother, without indulging in
gtief, you should minister unto my father; and the term of
my abode in the woods will shortly expire. You will find
these five and nine years pass away asif in asleep. Then
again,getting me,you will see me surrounded by my friends
and relatives.” Having spoken out his mind unto his mother,
Rima attentively eyed his three hundred and fifty mothers,


304 RAMIFANA.


And with joined hands Dacaritha’s son spake words fraught
with virtue unto his mothers afilicted like Kaugaly& herself.
“If [have said anything harsh to you in consequence of
familiarity, or done any wrong through ignorance, do you
forgive the same, I salute you all.” These calm words of
Riaghava informed with peity were heard by the ladies over-
whelmed with grief. As Raghava was speaking thus, there
arose a loud wail proceeding from those wives of that chief
of men, like unto the cries of Kraunchis. And the abode
of Dagaratha which formerly resounded with murajas,
panavas, meghas,* was now filled with cries of distress and
lamentations.


SECTION XL,


Turn exceedingly distressed, Rima, Sita and Laksh-
mana, bowing down unto the king, circumambulated him.
Then with the king’s permission, the righteous Raghava,
stupified with sorrow, in company with Sit&, paid respects
unto his mother. Following his brother, Lakshmana saluted
Kaugaly& ; then he again took hold of his mother Sumitra’s
feet. As the son of Sumitra was thus engaged in
honoring his mother, his mother smelling the crown
of his head, thus spoke unto the mighty-armed Laksh-
mana,-—“‘Although attached unto thy friends here, thou
hast my permission to go to the forest. When Rima
shall have gone (to the woods), do not, O son, show
any negligence unto him. O sinless one, whether in
prosperity or in adversity, even this one is thy way. That
a younger brother ehould follow his elder is in this world the
duty of the righteous. These are the legitimate duties ever
observed by this race—charity, ion into sacrifice, and

* Musical instruments,


AYODAYARANDAM. 305


renunciation of the body in the field of battle. Do thou con-
sider Rama as Dagaratha, and Janaka's own-begotten as my-
self; do thou regard Ayodhy& as a wilderness,—go my son,
at thy sweet pleasure.” Having thus spoken unto that dear
descendant of Raghu, who had made up his mind (to journey
to the forest), Sumitra again and again said unto him,—
“Go!Go!’ Then like unto Ma&tali addressing Vasava, that
one understanding humility, Sumantra, with joined hands
humbly said unto Kakutstha,—“O illustrious prince, good
betide you : do you ascend the car. O Rama, I will speedily
take you to wherever you will tell me. You will have to
spend fourteen years in the forest, and your stay must com-
mence from this very day. So the noble lady has
ordered.” Then having adorned her person, that best of her
sex, Sitk, with a glad heart ascended the car resembling the
sun, Counting the term of their stay in the woods, her
father-in-law furnished Sit& following her lord with attires and
ornaments, And then he placed in front of the car various
weapons, coats of mail, a basket bound in hide and a hoe.
At length the brothers Rama and Lakshmana swiftly ascend-
ed the flaming cat garnished with gold. And seeing them
with Sita for the third, mounted, Sumantra drove the car
yoked with goodly horses resembling the wind in celerity.
On R&ghava having left for the forest to stay there fora
long period, the men and beasts within the city were deprived
of their senses (by grief). And in the city there arose a
mighty tumult in consequence of the hurrying of people, the
elephants waxing mad and furious, and the neighings of
horses. And the entire city containing young and old, ex-
tremely afflicted, rushed after Rama, like persons oppressed
with the heat of the sun rushing towards water.

At his side and back, the people bending forward with
their faces covered with the vapour of grief, and sighing
hard, said unto the charioteer,—“O charioteer, rein in the
horses,—do thou proceed softly. We will see the counten-


39


306 RAMAPANA,


ance of R&ma, which we shall never see again. Surely the
heart of R&ma’s mother is made of iron, for it does not
burst on witnessing her son resembling Skanda repairing
to the forest. Vaidehi, attaining her desire, follows her
husband, like a shadow--attached to virtue, she does not
forsake him even as the Sun forsakes not meru. O
Lakshmana, you are blessed, since you will serve your
god-like brother ever speaking fair. This design of yours
is great; this is your mighty good fortune; this is
the way to heaven that you are following him.” Saying
‘this, they could not supress their fears; and the men
followed the beloved descendant of Ikshw&ku. Then the ~
king, his senses overcome by grief, surrounded by his dis-
tressed wives, went out of his house, saying—"I will behold
my dear son.” He heard before him a mighty noise proceed-
ing from weeping women like unto the roars of she-elephants,
when a great elephant has been taken captive. Thereupon
Rama's father, the graceful Kakutstha, became shorn of his
splendour, like unto the full-moon enveloped at the appointed
time during the eclipse. Then the auspicious son of Dacara-
tha of soul incapable of being comprehended, ordered
the charioteer, saying,—Do thou proceed more speedily.”
Rima saying unto the charioteer,—"Go,” and the people,—
“Stay,” thus desired on the way, the charioteer could not
‘act both ways at once. As the mighty-armed Rama proceed-
ed, the dust of the earth raised by the car-wheels were laid
by the tears of the citizens showering down. And in con.
sequence of Righava's departure, the entire city filled with
despair, and uttering with their senses lost exclamations of
“Oh” and “Alas,” became exceedingly afflicted. And the
tears begot of heart’s grief that flowed from the eyes of the_
females, resembled rain-drops scattered around from lotuses
shaken by the movements of fish. And beholding the citi-
zens absorbed in one thought, the auspicious monarch fell
down in grief like a tree whose roots have been severed.


4YODHYAKANDAM. 407


Then seeing the sovereign senseless and stricken with
exceeding sorrow, the multitudes at the rear of Rima broke
out into a loud tumult. And seeing the king weeping aloud
with the inmates of the inner apartment, some exclaiming
“Oh Rama,’ and others, “O Rama’s mother,” began to bewail.
Then turning back, Rima saw that his sorrow-stricken
and bewildered father along with his mother, was following
his track. As a colt fastened in a snare cannot see its mother,
so R&ma fastened in the bonds of virtue could not look at his
mother openly. And seeing his parents deserving of comfort
and worthy of going in a carriage, going on foot, Rama said
unto the charioteer,—"Go thou swiftly.” And that foremost
of men was incapable of bearing the looks of his father and
mother, like unto an elephant afflicted with the hook, (not
being able to luok at what is placed on its back.)

Rama’s mother rushed after him like a cow having a calf
which has been fettered, rushing towards the fold, for the
purpose of seeing it. Rama beheld his mother Kaugaly& run-
ning after the car, bewailing aloud,—“Rama, Rima, Ah Sit,
Lakshmana,” shedding tears for Rama, Lakshmana and Sita,
and appearing as if she had been dancing incessantly. The
king exclaimed,—‘‘Stay,” Raghava said,—“On, On.” Suman-
tra’s mind vascillated like that of one placed between
two hosts burning to encounter each other. Rima said unto
him,—“When taxed by the monarch (on your return), you
will say, ‘I did not hear you.’ But delay will impart me
terrible pain.” Thereupon, doing Rama's bidding, the chario.
teer, telling the people to desist, made the horses already
coursing, run faster. The retainers of the king stopped
after circumambulating Rama, but their minds did not
tur back. But the others did not return either bodily
or mentally. Then the courtiers said unto that mighty
monarch, Dagaratha,—“He that is expected back should
mot be followed far.” Hearing their words, the king
endued with every virtue, with his body covered with per-


508 RAMAPANA,


spiration and his countenance woe-begone, and exceedingly
distressed, stopped short and stood along with his wife
looking at his son.


SECTION XLI.


—~o19 ———


Wren that foremost of men had gone out of the city
with joined hands, there arose a chorus of cries proceeding
from the females residing in the inner apartment. “Where
goeth he that was the stay and refuge of the friendless, the
feeble, and the helpless? He that although falsely accused,
used not to be moved by anger, who pacified every enraged
person by renouncing things calculated to fan anger and who
felt equally for all, where goeth he? Where goeth that
highly energetic and magnanimous one who conducted him-
self with us as he did with his mother Kaucaly3? Afflicted
by Kaikeyi and commissioned by the monarch unto the woods,
where goeth the deliverer of these people—of the entire
world? Ah! the senseless monarch is sending to the woods
the stay of all creatures—the righteous and truthful Rama.”
Thus all the queens, oppressed with grief, burst out into
lamentations like kine bereft of calves, and loud was the
sound of their wailing. Hearing the loud tumult of lamenta-
tion in the inner apartment, the lord of earth burning in grief
for his son was striken with sorrow. And oblations unto the
fire had not been offered; and the Sun set ; and elephants
forsook their forage; and the kine did not suckle their
calves. Trisanku, Lohit&nga, Vrihashpati, Budha and the
other Grahas getting at the Moon, remained with fierce
aspects. The stars are shorn of their brightness ; the Grahas
deprived of sheen; and Vic&khd appeareth enveloped
in haze. And clouds driven by the wind resembled the
-sta mounting the welkin; and the city shook on Rama


AYODHVAKANDAM. 309


having departed for the forest. And the cardinal points are
distressed, and appear enveloped in darkness. And no
planet or star is to be seen. And all of a sudden the citizens
have been striken with poverty: and no one turns his
thoughts to eating or drinking. And ceaselessly burning in
grief and heaving sighs, the people in Ayodhy& rage at the
monarch. And with their faces’ washed in tears, the
wayfarers betoken no delight, but all are being exercised
with grief. And the cool air does not blow, and no moon of
mild appearance is seen, and no sun heats the world, all
the entire Earth is overwhelmed with woe. And sons depend
not upon their parents, hurbands on their wives, and brothers
on brothers; and all forsaking each other, think of Rama
only. And deprived of sense, and oppressed by the load of
sorrow, the friends of Rama forsook their rest. Like the
Earth. with her mountains bereft of Purandara, Ayodhy’,
bereft of Rama, shook, agitated by fear and grief; and the
citizens with elephants and warriors uttered exclamations of
distress,


SECTION xuit.


long as he could see the dust raised by the car of
Rama setting out for the forest, so long that best of the
Ikshwaku race did not turn his eyes from that direction.
And so long as the king could discover his exceedingly
virtuous and favorite son, so long he raised himself (on his
toes) on the earth with the view of beholding him. And when
the ruler of earth could no longer perceive even the dust
taised by Rima’s car, then pierced with sorrow, and in
heaviness of heart, he fell down to the ground. Then
(raising him up), Kaugalya held his right arm and walked
with him, while the slender-waisted Kaikeyi walked by his


310 RAMALANA.


left, Endowed with a sense of justice and with virtue
and humility, the king ‘with afflicted senses steadily eyeing
Kaikeyi, thus spake unto her,—“O Kaikeyi, that hast
decided for following sin, do thou not touch my person,—nor
do I wish to see thee. Thou art no wife of mine—not even
amaid-servant of a friend sharing his good graces. Iam
none to those that subsist on thy favour, nor are they any>
thing to me. I renounce thee who solely seekest thy interest
and hast abandoned virtue. I renounce all the advantages
pertaining either to this world or the next which I am entitled
to by virtue of having obtained thy hand and having made
thee circumambulate the sacrifical fire. If Bharata is satisfied
with receiving this entire kingdom, let not what he spends
on account of my funeral obsequies find its way to me.”
Then raising the lord of men covered with dust, the noble
Kaugalyi pierced with grief, stopped (along with the
monarch). The righteous one remembering Raghava repented
himself, as if he had slain a Brahmana through inordinate
desire, or as if he had placed his hand in fire. And having
stopped again and again, the visage of the monarch lamenting
on beholding the trazk of the car, appeared dim like
the Moon invaded by R&hu. And stricken with grief,
he lamented, rememoering his beloved son; and think-
ing that by this time he had reached the precincts
of the city, he broke out into the following,—“On the
way are traced the foot-prints of those foremost of
bearers that are carrying my son away; but that magna-~
nimous one I do not find. And that meritorious son
of mine, who, doubed with sandaJ, used to rest his head
pleasantly upon a pillow, fanned by beauteous damsels
decked in ornaments, will to-day surely take refuge
underneath a tree, and Jay his head on a wooden plank
orastone. Covered with dust, he heaving sighs will rise
from the ground in sad guise, like a leader of she-elephants
rising from the side of a mountain. The rangers of the


AYODHFARANDAM. grt


woods will now see the long-armed Rima resembling the
lord himself of the worlds, rising from the ground and going
Jike one forlorn. And that one so dearly loved by Janaka,
worthy of being constantly ministered unto with comforts,
is to-day going to the forest, fatigued in consequence of
having been pierced with thorns. Unacquainted with the
forest, she is certainly afflicted with fright on hearing the
deep roars of ferocious beasts, capable of making one’s hair
stand erect. O Kaikeyi, do thou realize thy desire,—do thou
becoming a widow, rule this kingdom. Without that best of
men I cannot live.” Thus lamenting, the king surrounded
by the multitude, like one that had performed his bath after
death, entered that best of cities filled with people enfeebled
andsmitten with grief, with its streets thined of men and its
stalls closed. And beholding that entire city, with his mind
fixed upon Rama, the king lamenting, like unto the sun enter-
ing clouds, entered that city like unto an unagitated sea rid
of serpents by Suparna,* the city without Rama or Lakshmana
or Siti. Then with tears in his eyes, the lord of earth,
lamenting, in unintelligible accents said these sad and broken
words,—'Do you speedily take me to the room of R&ma’s
mother, Kaugalya; for in no other place shall I find rest
for my heart.” When the king had spoken thus, the ushers
taking him to Kaugalya’s chamber, made him lie down in
lowly plight. And having entered Kaugaly&’s apartment,
the king having laid himself on the bed, was overwhelmed
with emotion. And the king surveyed the mansion deprived
of his two sons as well as his daughter-in-law, like unto
the welkin deprived of the Moon. Beholding this, the
puissant sovereign raising up his arm, burst out into
lamentations, saying, —“Ah | Rama, thou forsakest us both!
Ah me! surely those blessed people are happy, who having
passed this gap of time, will behold Rama returned and will
embrace him.” Then when the night had come like unto his
rc a emt rate ce AeA LOI


2 Lit, fair-feathered, @ name of Garura—T.


31a RAMAFPANA.


own fatal night, Dacaratha at mid-night addressed Kaugalya
saying,—"I do not perceive thee, O Kaugalya. Do thou
touch me with thy hand. My sight having followed Rama
doth not return yet.” Then seeing that foremost of men
absorbed in the contemplation of Rama, that noble dame sat
by him, and afflicted with greater grief, began to indulge in
sorrow,* sighing heavily.


SECTION XLII.


Tuen seeing the king lying down stupified with grief,
Kaugaly4 aggrieved for her son, spake unto the lord of
earth, saying-"O best of men, having vented her venom
upon Raghava, the crooked Kaikeyi will'go about like a she-
serpent that has cast off her slough. And that fortunate
one having by her endeavours attained her end, will frighten
me the more like a wicked serpent in one’s house. If Rama
had stayed in this city subsisting himself by alms, or had
I made my son as Kaikeyi's slave, even that would have
been preferable (before his retirement to the woods). Like
unto the sacrificial share cast unto the Rakshasas by the
sacrificers on the occasions of Parvas, that weilder of the
bow, the mighty-armed Rama, gifted with the gait of the
prince of elephants, cast off by Kaikeyi, takes refuge in the
forest in company with his wife and Lakshmana, Despatched
by you to the woods at the command of Kaikeyi, to what a
plight will they, not inured to the privations of a forest-life,
be reduced! And bereft of elegant apparel, how will they
of tender years, exiled in this time of enjoyment, pass their
lives in misery, subsisting on fruits and roots! Will such
a time present itself now that my grief removed and my

* Another text reads viniswasantan, joining it to nerendram—~foremost of


men—T,


AYODHYARANDAM. 313


desire attained, I shall here behold Raghava along with bis
wife and brother? When, hearing that those heroes have
come, will Ayodhy% adorned with standards and garlands,
attain fame, with her populace filled with joy? When,
seeing those foremost of men returned from the forest, will
the city overflow with delight, like the ocean on the occasion
of a Parva?) When will the mighty-armed hero enter the
city of Ayodhya, placing Sit& before him on the car,—like
unto a bull having his bovine mate befuie Lim? When will
people by thousands shower fried paddy upon my sons on
the road, as those repressors of foes will enter the city?
When shall I behold those (two) wearing burnished ear-rings,
entering Ayodhya, placing before them their weapons and
swords, like unto two hilis furnished with their summits ?
‘When accepting flowers from girls and fruits from Brahmanas,
will they, filled with delight, go round the palace? When
with his intelligence ripened by time, although resembling a
celestial in age, will that righteous-souled one come here,
rejoicing people like a 7rivarska?* Doubtless, O hero,
formerly of vile ways that I was, I had cut off the paps of
kine and thus prevented their calves hungering after their
mothers’ milk, from drinking it. And it is for this sin that,
O foremost of men, have I, attached to my son, been forcibly
deprived of him by Kaikeyi, like a cow deprived of her calf
by alion. Having an only son, I dare not live without him
endowed with every virtue and versed in every branch of
learning. Not seeing my beloved son and the mighty
Lakshmana, I cannot live at all. As in summer the divine
Sun furnished with fierce rays burns this earth, even so this
raging fire of grief on account of my son consumes me.’’


* Three consecutive showers, favourable to the crops.—T,


40


34 RIMAPANA.


SECTION XLIV.


As that best of ladies, Kaucalya, was thus lamenting,
Sumitr’ ever abiding in virtue, spake unto her these words
consistent with righteousness,—“O worshipful one, your son

.is crowned with all qualities,—and is the best of men. Why
then do you bewail thus, or weep bitterly? Since, O revered
one, renouncing the kingdom, your mighty son wendeth (to
the woods) with the view of fulfiling the intention of his high-
souled and truthful sire, the worthy Rama staying in the duty
that is completely observed by the good and the performance
‘of which always bringeth welfare in the next world,
should by no means be lamented. And that sinless one,
Lakshmana, kind unto al! creatures, will minister unto Rama
‘in the best way possible,—and this is to the advantage of
that high-souled one, And experiencing the hardships that
come of living in the forest, Vaidehi deserving of happiness
follows your righteous son. And what is wanting unto that
maintainer of all, your son of subdued senses, intent upon
truth and the observance of vows, who is spreading his ban-
ner of fame over the world? Acquainted with Rama’s mani-
fest purity and high magnanimity, the Sun himself will not
dare burn his body with his rays. And issuing from the
woods at all hours, the delicious air impregnated with heat
and cold will serve Raghava. And when he will lie down at
night, the Moon touching him with his beams and embracing
him even like his own father, will gladden his heart. That
hero of mighty energy on whom Brahma had conferred celes-
tial weapons, seeing that foremost of the Danavas, the son of
Timidhwaja, slain in Lattle,—that tiger-like one, relying on
the native strength of his arms, will fearlessly abide in the
forest as if in his own home. And why should not the earth
remain in the sway of him coming within the range of whose
arms enemies find destruction? Considering Rialma’s grace;


AYODHFAXZANDAM. cary


heroism and auspiciousness, {there cannot be any doubt that)
returning from the forest. he will speedily regain his own
kingdom. He is the sun of the sun, the lord of the lord,—he
is the auspiciousness of prime auspiciousness, the fame of
fame, the forbearance of forbearance, the god of the gods,—
and the foremost of creatures. What evil qualities, O noble:
lady, will be perceived in him, whether he remains in the city
or in the forest? And that best of men, Rama, will soon be
installed in the kingdom, in company with these three—
the Earth, Vaidehi, and the goddess of victory. Although
overwhelmed with grief, the people of Ayodhy%, seeing that
noble unvanquished one retiring to the woods clad in Kuca
and bark, are shedding tears begot of sorrow; yet accompani-
ed by that Lakshmi, what is there that is incapable of being
attained by him? And what is there that is incapable of
being obtained by him befure whom goeth that foremost of
bowmen himself bearing arrows, swords and other weapons ? ©
You will again see him returned from the forest. O exalted
one, chase your grief and sadness, I tell you this truly, O
blameless one, you will again, O auspicious lady, see your
son, like unto the new-risen moon, paying homage unto
your feet with his head. And again seeing him returned and
crowned with great auspiciousness, you will speedily shed
the dew of delight. O noble lady, do not grieve or lament.
Evil cannot touch Rama. You will soon behold your son
along with Sité and Lakshmana. sinless one, it is for you:
to console these people. Why then, O revered one, do you
suffer your heart to be thus overpowered? O eminent one,
you ought not to bewail, inasmuch as Raghava is your
son. In this world there is not another residing in honesty
that is superior to Rima. Beholding your son surrounded
by his friends, bowing unto you, you will soon shed blissful
tears, even like a rain-cloud. And soon will your son
conferring boons, returning (to this place), press your feet
with those soft and plump hands of his. And even as a


416 ” RAMIFANA.


chain of clouds speaks unto a hill, you will speak unto your
worshipful and heroic son, surrounded by his friends,
bowing unto you.” Having thus addressed Rama’s mother
and inspired her with hope in various words, the noble and
pleasant and blameless Sumitra, clever in speech, paused.
Hearing those words of Lakshmana’s mother, that wile of
the best of men, Rama’s mother, had her sorrow destroyed
in her person, even like an autumnal cloud surcharged with
slight rain.


SECTION xiv.


Tue people, who yarned after Rima having truth for
prowess, followed him repairing to the forest. Even when
the king in the interests of his son had with much ado
restrained himself, these, following Rima’s car, did not desist.
That illustrious one crowned with every perfection was dear
unto the inhabitants of Ayodhy& like unto the full moon
himself. Although besought by the subjects, the truthful
K&kutstha having pledged his word unto his father, kept on
going to the forest.‘ And affectionately eying them as if
drinking them with his sight, Rima touchingly addressed
those subjects as if they were his own,—“The love and
regard which the inhubitants of Ayodhy& have for me, let
them, for pleasing me, extend in full measure towards
Bharata. That enhancer of Kaikeyi’s delight bearing an
auspicious character, will duly compass your happiness and
welfare. Aged by virtue of his wisdom, although young in
years, and mild albeit furnished with heroic virtue, that
remover of fear will make a fit ruler for ye. Crowned
with every regal virtue and selected as the heir-apparent
(by the monarch), he is more meritorious by far than I am.
It behoves ye to obey the order of your master. And seeking


AYODHIAKANDAM. 317


my good, it behoves ye’ to act so that when | shall have
gone to the forest, the king may not grieve.” But as Daca-
ratha’s son was bringing home to the people that their duty
lay in obeying the royal mandate, they desired that even
Rama should rule them. And Rama in company with Sumi-
tr3's son attracted the inhabitants of the city subdued by his
virtues, who stood with tears in their eyes. And the three
kinds of the twice born ones, viz., those old by virtue, respec-
tively, of age, wisdom, and ascetic energy, the old folks with
their heads shaking through length of years,—cried from a
distance,—"'O ye fleet coursers boasting of exalted extraction
that bear Rima away, do ye desist,—do not go; do ye do
even what is for the good of your master. And more parti-
cularly being creatures furnished with ears, do ye, ye horses,
knowing our prayer, desist. And pure of spirit and heroic
and ever firm in noble promises, that master of yours should
in justice be carried (unto the city) and not unto the forest
away from it.” Suddenly seeing those old Brahmanas thus
lamenting distressfully, Rima speedily descended from his
car. And along with Lakshmana and Sit&, Rama bound for
the forest, began to walk near them on foot. Endowed with
kindness, that friend of the good, Rama, could not by pro-
ceeding on his car bear to part with the Brihmanas that were
following on foot. Seeing him thus going, the Bréhmanas
with agitated hearts, and burning in grief, addressed Rima
in these words,—"The Brahmanas in a body are following
thee ever seeking their good, and mounting on the shoulders
of the regenerate ones, the (sacrificial) Fires are walking in
thy wake. And behold these raised umbrellas of ours got
from the VAjapeya sacrifice, that like unto autumnal clouds
follow at your back. With these umbrellas got at the Vajapeya
sacrifice, we will afford shade unto R4ma destitute of his owa
white umbrella, when he shall feel the heat of the (solar) rays,
That intelligence of ours which ever followeth the Vedic
Mantras, is now, © child, ready to follow thee unto the forest


gif RAMAYANA,


in thy interests. That best of treasures, the Vedas, resides
in our bosoms ; and our wives protected by their chastity shalt
abide in our homes. As we have already made up our minds
to follow thee, it is useless to fix our hearts afresh. But if
thou overlookest virtue,what becomes of abiding by righteous-
ness ?* O thou that art ever firm in virtue,we beseech thee by
humbling unto the dust our heads covered with hair whitehned
like cranes, do thou desist. These nomerous Brahmanas that
have come hither have entered upon many a sacrifice. The
completion of these, O child, depends upon thy return, Alt
creatures mobile and immobile cherish thee with high regard.
All these beseech thee. Do thou show consideration unto
those that regard thee. Tull trees deprived of motion in con-
sequence of being fast rooted to the earth and incapable of
following thee, are prohibiting thee by sounding with the
wind. And birds staying upon trees and neither manifesting
any motion nor seeking for their food, beseech thee to have
compassion upon all creatures.” While the Brahmanas were
loudly demanding the return of Rama, he found the darkness
to descend as if forbidding him. Then Sumantra unyoked the
fatigued horses from the car, which at once fell to rolling in
the dust. And then bathing them and making them drink,
he soon as the dusk set in, set fare before them.


SECTION XLVI.


Raghava pausing on the banks of the Tamas&,look-
ed at Sit and spake unto Sumitra’s son, saying—“O son of
SumitrS, this is the first night of our exile into the forest.


Another reading is; What decomes of the virtue that we expect at thy
hands f—T,


4YODHPAKANDAM. 319


From this day it behoveth thee not,good betide thee, to suffer
thy mind to grieve (by dwelling on past joys.) The empty
forest resounding with the cries of beasts and birds returned
to their abodes, and covered with gloom, seems to weep
on all sides. Doubiless to-day the men and women of Ayo-
dhy&, the metropolis of my father, are bewailing us retired
to the forest. O foremost of men, the people are attached
unto thyself, the monarch, Bharata, Satrugbna, and myself,
because of our various good qualities. I bewail our father
as well as my illustrious mother. I fear lest lamenting cease.
lessly, they become blind. But surely the virtuous Bharata
will console our father and mother with words fraught
with virtue, interest and profit. Reflecting again and
again on Bharata’s sincerity of soul, I do not, O mighty-
armed one, bewail either my mother or my father. O
foremost of men, that thou hast followed me is what
is thy duty. (If thou hadest not done so), I should have
to seek elsewhcre for the protection of Vaidehi. O Sumitra’s
son, I will spend here this night, subsisting on water
alone. Even this recommends itself unto me, although the
forest yields various kinds of fruits.” Having said this unto
Sumitr4’s son, Raghava spake unto Sumantra, saying,—‘O
mild one, do thou vow heedfully tend the horses.” Then
at sunset, fastening the horses, Sumantra fed them plentifully
with grass, and then came back. Then seeing the night
arrived, the charioteer worshipped the beneficent Sandhya,
and then in company with Sumitra’s son, prepared
Rama’s bed. And looking at that bed on the shores of the
Tamas& surrounded by trees, Rama along with his wife and
the son of Sumitr&, lay down. When Lakshmana found that
Rama afflicted with fatigue had slept together with his spouse,
he began to speak unto the charioteer concerning the various
qualities of Rima. As remaining awake in the night, Sumitra’s
son was engaged in expatiating to the charioteer on the
virtues of Rama on the banks of the Tamas&, the sun arose,


330 RAMAYANA.


Rama abode that night along with the subjects at some
distance from the banks of the Tamas filled with kine.
Rising (from his bed), that highly energetic one, Rama, view-
ing the subjects (asleep), addressed his brother Lakshmana
gtaced with auspicious marks,—"O son of Sumitra, these that
for our sake have disregarded their own homes, are still
asleep beneath the trees. These citizens have determined
upon making me turn back from the forest,—they would
rather renounce their lives than give up their resolve. Let
us while they are asleep ascending on our car, swiftly go our
way without fear of molestation. Attached to me, the denizons
of ikshw&ku's city will not again indulge in sleep underneath
trees. A prince should deliver citizens from the calamity
they bring upon themselves; but he should by no means
drag them into those which he himself has brought on.”
Then Lakshmana spake unto R&ma like unto manifest Virtue
on earth,—"O wise one, even this is relished also by me.
Do you specdily ascend (the car.)” Rama said unto the
charioteer,—“Do thou at once yoke the car. I will repair to
the forest. Do thou, my master, swiftly go hence.” There-
upon the charioteer bestirring himself, yoking the excellent
horses unto the car, said unto Rama with joined hands,—
"Here, O mighty-armed one, is your car ready yoked, O fore-
most of car-warriors. Do you speedily ascend, good betide
you, along with Sita and Lakshmana.” Ascending the
car after equipping himself, Raghava crossed the rapidly-
rushing Tamasa abounding in eddies. Having crossed (the
stream), the auspicious and mighty-armed one came upon a
safe and goodly high way capable of inspiring even timid
people with confidence. But with the view of deluding the
citizens, Rama said unto the charioteer.—"O charioteer, do
thou ascending the car proceed northwards; and having
proceeded swiftly for a while, do thou turn the car. Do thou
carefully act so that the citizens may mot perceive
this.” Hearing Rima’s words, the chaticteer did accord-


4VODHYAKINDAM. gar


ingly, and having returned said unto Rima to ascend the
car.

Then on those perpetuators of the Raghu race having
along with Sita been seated on the car,the charioteer drove the
horses by that road which conducted to the hermitage.
Then placing the car with its face northwards for the purpose
of invoking auspiciousness on their journey, that mighty
charioteer, Dagaratha’s son, established on the vehicle, set
out for the forest.


SECTION XLVII.


Warn the night had departed and day dawned, the
citizens not finding Raghava, were overwhelmed with grief
and were deprived of their senses. With tears of grief and
afflicted with distress, they looked hither and thither, but
they could not discover even the dust raised by Rama’s car.
And those intelligent ones, extremely distressed on being
deprived of Rama endowed with understanding, with coun-
tenances betokening sorrow, spoke these piteous words,—
“Oh! fie on that sleep through which having been deprived
of senses, we shall not to-day behold Rama of broad chest
and mighty arms. How could Rima of mighty arms, resort-
ing to this undesirable course, has gone into exile as
an ascetic, leaving behind those that regard him dearly ?
Why has that foremost of Raghus, who has always
cherished us even as a father cherishes his sons begot by
his own loins, forsaking us, betaken himself to the forest ?
Here will we either renounce our lives, or direct our course
to the north to meet death. Of what good are our lives,
when we have been deprived of Rima? There are huge
trunks of dry wood to be got here in plenty. Lighting the


41


322 RAMAYANA,


pile of woods will we all enter the fire. What shall we say
(when people ask us?) How can we say,—‘'We took hence
the mighty-armed, sweet-speeched and unavenging Rama’ ?
Surely seeing us without Raghava, the forlorn city with her
women, children and grown up folks will be plunged in grief.
We had issued with that high-souled hero. Deprived of him,
how shall we behold that city ?? Thus raising up their arms,
they stricken with grief, indulged in lamentations, like unto
kine deprived of their calves—Then following for a while the
track of the car, they, missing the track,become overwhelmed
with woe, And then those intelligent ones came back by the
track of the car. “What is this? What shall we do? We
have been foiled by some supernatural agency.” Then they
returned to the city of Ayodha with its good people oppressed
with grief, by the self-same way by which they had come.
Viewing the city, they with their eyes weighed down with
grief, and minds oppressed with woe, shed plentiful tears.
“This city deprived of Rama does not look beautiful, like a
lake bereft of its serpent by Garura, or the firmament depriv-
ed of the Moon, or the ocean without its waters.” And they
disturbed in mind beheld the city sunk in sorrow. And enter-
ing their wealthy mansions, they deprived of their senses by
grief, could not recognize them for their own, nor could they
with their hearts rendered absolutely cheerless, although look-
ing at them minutely, distinguish their own from others.


SECTION XLVIII.


Tren with depressed spirits, and exceedingly afflicted,
with tears flooding their eyes, smitten with mortal grief, the
inhabitants of the city went back from Rama unto the city.


4 FODHYARANDAM. 323


And with their lives appearing as ready to go out, those
unsteady ones came to their respective homes, and surrounded
by their wives and sons, washed their faces with copious tears.
And they forgot to rejoice or make merry, and the traders
did not spread (their stores), and stalls did not grace
the place, and the householders did not cook, and people did
not rejoice on recovering lost property or gaining a profuse
accession of wealth, and mothers did not feel any delight
on beholding their first-born. And in every home females
afflicted with woe, weeping chid their husbands, coming
home, with the following words as (drivers) spur elephants
with hooks, “Of what use are their houses, and wives, and
wealth, and sons, and comforts, to those who sce not Raghava
(in their midst?) There is onc only good man in this world
even Lakshmana, who along with Sita is following Kakutstha
Rama unto the woods, Those streams, assemblage of lotuses,
and pools are blessed, by which bathing in the sacred waters,
Kakutstha will pass. And romantic forests and woods, watery
expanses of mighty volume, and mountains with flat spaces,
will grace Kakutstha. And forests and hills to which will
repair Rima cannot go without paying him homage like unto
a welcome guest. And crested with flowers of various hues
and putting forth frequent shoots, trees, swarming with bees
will show themselves unto Raghava. And hills from regard
will show unto Rama arrived there the choicest flowers and
fruits even out of season; and will supply him with fount-
ains of pure water. And prescnting him with many a charming
fountain, trees will delight Rama at the tops of mountains.*
Where R&ma is, there is not fear or failure. That mighty-
armed son of Dagaratha is heroic. Let us while he is yet.
ahead within a short distance of us, follow Raghava. Even
the shadow of the feet of our master, sv high-souled, would,
bring us happiness. He is the lord of all these—he is the

* The meaning is—Trees will please Raghava by spreading for him a bed
of leaves and flomers.—T. .


324 RAMAPANA.


refuge—he is the accomplishment of our religious duties. We
and you, will serve Sité, and Raghava.” Thus afflicted with
grief, the women of the city spake unto their husbands. “In
the forest R&ghava will attain for you the unattainable and
protect what is attained; and Siti being a female will do the
same for these (women.) Who will take pleasure in residing in
a dwelling where the heart dies within itself, which is devoid
of delight, where the people are always agitated with anxiety
and which is exceedingly disagreeable? If this kingdom
devolves on Kaikeyi it will be divested of all virtues and will
be like unto one without a master. And of what avail then is
our life itself,not to speak of sons and wealth. Whom else wil!
that stainer of her line, Kaikeyi,forsake now, who for the sake
of wealth has forsaken her son and her lord? We swear by
our sons that so long as Kaikeyi is alive, we living will never
stay in her kingdom, although we may be maintained by her.
What happiness can be ours by living with that wicked and
unrighteous one who lost to every sense of shame is bent
upon exiling the son of the foremost of kings? Troubled by
disturbances, with all its sacrifices stopped, and having no
master over it, the entire (kingdom) will meet with destruction
because of Kaikeyi., On Rima retiring to the forest, the
lord of earth will surely not live; and Dacaratha dying, it is
evident everything will come to naught. Do you, your virtue
exhausted,,and oppressed with grief pounding poison, take it,
or follow Raghava, or remove to sucha place that the very
name of Kaikeyi may not reach your ears? Rima has been
deceitfully exiled along with his wife and Lakshmana ; and we
are bound unto Bharata like unto a (sacrificial,} beast before
one that is to slaughter it. Surely that mighty car-warrior,with
deepest collar-bones having a countenance resembling the full-
moon, sable-hued, repressing his foes, with his arms reaching
unto his knees and lotus-like eyes—Rama the elder brother
of Lakshmana—always speaking first (to a visitor,) suave,
truth-telling, endowed with prowess, amiable unto all men,


AYODHYARANDAM. 325


and lovely like the moon himself, surely that foremost of men
gifted with the strength of a mad elephant, will grace the
forests, ranging it around.” Thus lamenting in the city, the
females thereof burning in grief became distressed like people
stricken with panic on the occasion of a plague.

As the women were thus bewailing Raghava in their
homes, the Sun set and night came on. And the city became
enveloped in darkness, and the light (of the sacrificial fires)
was extinguished, and the sounds of study and edifying dis-
cuurse ceased. And the shops of the tradesmen being closed,
and festive mirth having disappeared, and people becoming
defenceless, the city of Ayodhya resembled the firmament
deprived of the stars. And distressed for the sake of Rama
as if it was a son or a brother of theirs that was banished, the
women weeping forlorn, lamented with senses lost; and
R&ma was to them more than ason. And the voice of song
and festal glee and dance and sounds of instruments having
died away, and mirth having disappeared, and the shops not
displaying their wares, Ayodhya then resembled the mighty
ocean emptied of its waters.


SECTION XLix,.


Baar best of men, Rama, remembering his father’s com-
mand cleared a large tract of country before the night
terminated. And as he went on, the auspicious night was
spent. And then having offered up his devotions unto
the beneficent Sandhy3, Rama entered into another
country. And seeing villages having ploughed fields on
their skirts, and flowering woods, he by means of those
excellent horses, proceeded very fast although seeming to go


326 RAMAPANA.


slowly, And as Rama proceeded,* he heard the villagers
speaking to each other, saying,—“Fie on king Dagaratha,
who has yielded himself up unto lust! Ah! the rebutless,
fell and sinful Kaikeyi intent upon impiety,having put by her
honor, has resolved upon an exceedingly atrocious deed-—she
that exiles into the woods such a virtuous son of the
monarch, endowed with high wisdom, kind, and having his
senses under control.t Alas ! king Dacaratha has no affection
for his own son, since he wishes to dismiss from hence Rama
sinless and dear unto the subjects.” Hearing these words
of the villagers, that hero, the lord of Kogala, left Kogala
behind him. Then crossing the river Vedacruti of sacred
waters, Rama went in the direction of the quarter in which
Agastya resided. (South)

Then proceeding for a good while, he crossed the
coolflowing stream Gomati running in the direction of the
ocean, with its banks filled with kine and inundating
its edge. Having passed the Gomati, Raghava by means
of fleet-coursing horses next crossed over the river
Sandika resounding with the cries of cranes and pea-
cocks, Here Rama showed unto Vaidehi those flourish-
ing regions that had formerly been conferred by king Manu
on Ikshwaku, and which teemed with populous tracts. Then
frequently addressing the charioteer, saying, “O Suta”, that
best of men furnished with grace and endowed with a voice
like that of a mad swan, spoke,—“When shall I coming back,
range abunting the blossoming groves of the Sarayu, along
with my father and mother? I do not so much long for
hunting in the woods of the Sarayu ; but a relish (for the
pastime) is considered as beyond compare being held
in esteem by the Rajarshis. Hunting in the forest was in-


* The N. W. P. text has an additional couplet ——How will that exalied
lady, Fanaka’s daughter, ever engaged in enjoyment, bear misery PT.

+ The N. W. P. text has an additional line —And of the reprehensible Kai-
hey intent upon crue] deeds —T.


AYODRVAKANDAM. 337


troduced for the recreation of Raghavas. Yet do I not take
beyond measure to the chase which has been followed
in season by the descendants of Manu and which is ever
coveted by bowmen. Taking this subject, the descendant of
Ikshwaku passed the way, addressing sweet words unto the
charioteer.


SECTION L.


—


Havinc passed the extensive and romantic Kogala, the
intelligent elder brother of Lakshmana facing Ayodhy§ said
with joined hands,—“O best of cities, governed by Kakutstha,
T address thee as well as the deities that inhabit and guard
thee. Returaing from my abode in the woods, I will, freed
from my debt unto the lord of earth, behold thee again along
with my father and mother.” Then he furnished with grace-
ful coppery eyes raising his right hand, with tears in his
eyes and in forlorn guise addressed the people of the
Provinces, saying,—"Ye have shown due compassion and
regret for me. To grieve long is not,fit. Do ye therefore
repair to look after your interests.” Thereupon, saluting
that high-souled one and going round him, bewailing all the
while in heaviness of heart, they at times stopped on their
way. And as they kept lamenting, unsatiated in beholding
him, Raghava went beyond the range of their sight, like the
Sun disappearing at night-fall. Then that powerful one
mounted on his car left behind him Kogala abounding in
wealth and kine, inhabited by charitable people, auspicious,
free from every kind of fear, charming, containing altars and
stakes, with gardens and mango groves, furnished with
tanks teeming with burly and contented people, filled with
kine, worthy of being protected by monarchs and resounding
with the sounds of Vedic recitations. Proceeding at a


328 RAMAFANA.


middling pace, that best of those endowed with fortitude,
passed through lands smiling cheerfully, prosperous,
and crowded with elegant vvillas,—realms worthy of
being coveted by the foremost of kings. Then Raghava
saw the celestial Ganga running in three courses with
cool waters free from moss, beautiful to behold, frequented
by the sages, adorned with graceful asylums close
by, containing sacred watery: expanses haunted at the
hours of sport by delighted Apsaras, graced with celestials,
Danavas, Gandharpas and Kinnaras, ever holy, attended by
the wives of Nagas and Gandharbaé, with hills serving as
sporting-places for the celestials—the river surrounded by
gardens of the immortals—that for the behoof of the celestials
had ascended heaven, famous, furnished with assemblage
of celestial lotuses, with the rocks laughing aloud in conse-
quence of the dashing of water, laughing without blemish
with foam, sometimes having her water flowing like a braid
‘and sometimes decked by eddies, sometimes still and deep,
and sometimes rushing furiously, sometimes sounding solemn-
ly and sometimes roaring dreadfully, with crowds of deities
bathing in its water, embellished with fresh-blown lotuses,
having spacious shoals and spots covered with glittering sand,
resounding with the cries of cranes of various kinds, graced
by Chakravdkas, ever resorted to by maddened fowls, without
blame, decked by trees on its banks resembling garlands
somewhere covered with full-blown lotuses and somewhere
containing multitudes of lotuses, at places decked with tracts
of lilies, at others with opening buds, rife with the farina
of various flowers, sometimes resembling a proud female,
removing the dirt of sin, translucent like a gem to the view,
with the elephants of the quarters, wild ones, mad ones, as
well as those the best of their species, and those carrying
the foremost of celestials, roaring in the neighbouring woods,
adorned carefully with the choicest ornaments like unto a
damsel, crowded with flowers -and fruits and bushes as


4 PODHYARAN DAN. “gag


also with birds, flowing from the feet of Vishnu, divine,
without sin, capable of destroying it, filled with porpoises,
crocodiles and: snakes. drawn out from the matted locks
of Sankara by the energy of Sagara’s descendant—the
queen of the Ocean—resonant with the cries of cranes and
Araunchas. The mighty-armed Rima came to the Ganga
near Sringaverapura. And beholding (the river) with her
surging eddies, that mighty car-wgrrior said unto the chariot-
cer, Sumantra, “We will rest here today. There is hard
by the river a gigantic Ingudi tree, bearing a profusion of
flowers and fresh leaves. Here, O charioteer, will we stay
to-day. Isee (before me) the foremost of streams, whose
waters are honored (by all) and which is sacred to celestials
and men and Gandharbas and beasts and serpents and fowls,
Thereupon sayiug unto Raghava, “Very well,” Lakshmana
and Sumantra with the horses went tothe Ingudi tree. And
reaching the tree, that desendant of Ikshw&ku alighted from
the car along with his wife and Lakshmaua. Then descend-
ing, Sumatra relieved those excellent horses, and with
joined hands stood before Rima seated at the foot of the tree,
There lived at the place a king named Guha, a friend unto
Rama, dear as his own self, a Nishida by birth, powerful
‘and famed as the lord of the Nisbadas. Hearing that that
foremost of men, Rima, had arrived at the place, he (Guha)
surrounded by his aged counsellors and kindred came unto
him. Seeing the lord of the Nishadhas at a distance, Rama
came up unto him in company with Sumitra’s son. Thereat
touched, ‘Guha embracing Raghava said unto him, "O Raima,
as Ayodhy& this kingdom is unto thee. What shall 1 do for
thee? Who, O might-armed one, receives such a welcome
guest ?? Then speedily bringing various.kinds of sapid rice
and Arghyas, he said—O mighty-armed one, has thy journey
been a pleasant one? This entire earth is thine. We
are thy servants; thou art our master. Do thou rule here,
accepting the eatables and drinkables and those that are to


42° .


33° RAMEPANA.


tbe sucked and excellent beds and fodder.” When Guha had
said this, Raghava answered him, saying—"“We have been
well received by thee and are well pleased with thee, since
coming here on foot thou hast shown us affection”? Then
pressing Guha hard with his arms, Rama said, “O Guha, it
is by good luck that I see thee whole along with thy friends.
‘Is thy kingdom in peace both as regards thy friends and the
forest? Tire things that theu hast presented me with out of


Jove L accept hut cannot enjoy. Do thou know me as assum.


ing an ascetic mode of lif


in the woods, in which I am to
were Kuga and bark and live upon fruits and roots. So, with
the single excepciva of the fuud for the horses, things require
tnone; and these horses being well kept, I sha'l consider
mysclf as entertained by thee. These are the favorites of my
father, Dagaratha, and on these horses being well provided
for, I shall be well received. Thereupon Guha on the spot
commanded the men, saying, “Let the horses have without
delay meats and drinks.” Then putting his sheet over his
‘person, he (iM&ma) performed his evening devotions. Having
‘done this, he took as his sustenance the water that had been
procured by Lakshmana himself. On Rama having lain down
on the ground along with his wife, Lakshmana washed their
feet, and then remained stationed under the tree. Then bow
in aud and with his wits about him, conversing with
Sumitra’s son along with the charioteer,Guha remained awake,
watching Rama. Thus the livelong night passed away with
that illustrious, intelligent and high-souled son of Dagaratha,
unacquainted with troubles and worthy of happiness.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 33
SECTION LI.


——:00:—


As for the purpose of protecting bis brother, Lakshmana
was watching him out of sincere affection, Guha burning
in grief addressed that descendaut of Raghu, saying—"This
O child, is the easeful bed that hath been prepared for
thee. O'prince, do thou as thou listest, lie down upon it,
These (foresters) are inured to this hardship ; but thou art
worthy of ease. We will wake up during the night for guar-
ding KAkutstha. There is none on earth dearer unto me than
Rama. This I te!l thee truly and I swear by truth itself,
Through his grace | hope in this world to attain bigh fame,
and great religious merit as well as completely secure profit
and pleasure, I will bow in hand in company with my kine
dred adequately guard my dear friend repusing with Sita,
Always ranging in this forest, nothing herein is unknown to
me. I shall vanquish even any mighty body of fourfold forces
(that may come up against us.)” Therenpon Lakshmana said, —
"O sinless one, protected by thee ever having thy sight fixed
‘on virtue, we do not fear to live ia this place. But how with
Dagaratha’s son lying down on the groynd along with Sila
can I indulge in sleep or what is the use of my living and
enjoying happiness ? [im do thou behold with eave asleep on
the grass in company with Sitf, who was incupable of being
borne in fight by the rods and the Asuras. Him do thou
behold, who was obtained by Dacarati.a as his son through
various kinds of prowess, mantras and csceticism, and who
is crowned with virtues beseeming such austerities, etc.
Rima being banished, the king will not live long) and
the earth will shortly be widowed.” Having bewailed
aloud, the women have, methinks, (hy this time) ceased
through fatigue, and the king's residence is still. Ican-
not hope that Kaugalyd, the hing, and my mother are yet
alive. If they are, it is for this night only, Even if my


sit. RAMAYANA.


mother live locking up to Satrughna, yet this is my grief
that that mother of a hero, Kaugaly& will breathe ‘her last.
And that palace filled with people attached unto Rama
and flooded with the light of delight, will, visited with
the calamity that will befall the king meet with destruction.
How will the life of that high-souled king not seeing
his magnanimous son, his eldest son, remain in his body?
And the king dying, Kaucalya will die after him and then my
mother will depart this life. Frustrated in his desire, my
father, foiled in his endeavours to confer the kingdom on
Rama, will, exclaiming ‘All is lost,’ ‘All is lost,’ give up the
ghost. Surely they are blessed that when the time shall come
when the king will die, will perform the funeral rites of that
descendant of Raghu, They will happily range the capital
of my father, furnished with fairlooking terraces, with its
high ways laid out orderly, having lordly edifices and palatial
residences, graced with excellent courtezans, abounding with
cacs, elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of
trumpets—the abode of all auspiciousness—filled with portly
and contented folks, rich in gardens and villas, and celebra-
ting popular festivities. If Dagaratha live we shall returning
from the forest, behold that high-souled one observing noble
vows. If we remain in peace, we shall returning from the
forest with that one firm in promise, enter Ayodhy&.” As
the high-souled son of the king oppressed with grief was thus
lamenting sitling up, the day broke. When that son of the
foremost of men, intent on the welfare of the subjects bad
spoken thus truly, Guha, out of extreme affection for (Rima),
shed tears afflicted with grief and hurt like an clephant
suffering from fever.


AYODHYAKANDAN. 333


SECTION Lil.


Ww HEN the morning broke, that illustrious one having a
spacious chest, Rima, addressed Sumitr4's son, Lakshmana,
graced with auspicious marks,— This is the time of sunrise r
the reverend Night hath departed. O child, this gracefully.
sable-hued bird, the coel, has begun to warble, and J hear the
cries of peacocks uttering notes in the woods. O amiable
one, we will cross the Jahnavi, fast rushing to the ocean.”
Hearing R&ma’s words, that enhancer of the delight of
friends, Sumitra’s son, conveyed them unto Guha and the
charioteer; and then stood before his brother. Hearing of
Rama's speach and accepting it, that lord of the Nislidas
speedily summoning his counsellors spake unto them saying,
—"Do ye without delay bring to this bathing-place a strong
and elegent boat furnished with a rudder and stcered bya
helmsman, such as is capable of ferrying (people) comfort-
ably.” Hearing this mandate of Guha, his potent counsellors
procuring a goodly boat, informed him of it. Then with
joined hands, Guha spake unto Raghava, saying,—‘'The boat
is ready, worshipful one. What more shail I do in thy behalf?
C thou that resemblest the son of a celestial, here is
the boat for thee, O foremost of men, to cross over the
river that gocth after the ocean. O thou of excellent vows,
do thou ascend it.” Thereupon the highly energetic
R&ma said unto Guha the following words,—"1 have attained
my end through thee. Do thou at once get on board the
baggage.” Then donning on their mail and equipped with
their bows, quivers and swords, the Raghavas along with
Sit& descended unto the Ganga. Then coming forward in
humble guise before Rama cognizant of virtue, the charioteer
said with joined hands,—‘What shall I do (now) ?” There
upon Dagaritha’s son touching Sumantra by his goodly
right hand, said,—“O Sumantra, do thou again repair unto


334 RAMALTANA. :
the monarch, but let thy senses be unclouded.” “Do thou”
said he unto the chirioteer, “turn back. So farI have come
(in obedience to the order of the monarch; Now, renounc-
ing the car, will] repair unto the mighty forest on foot.”
Finding himself thus commanded, the charioteer, Sumantra
grieved at heart spoke unto that best of men, the descendant
of Ikshwiku. ‘That Destiny owing to which you will have
to pass your days in the forest like a low person, along with
your brother and wife, has in this world been withstood by
none. I decm the Brahmacharyya mode of life, or study, or
meekness or siucerity as attended with no fruit, siuce you
have come by calamity. O Raghava, living in the forest
with Vaidehi and your brother, you, O Lord, attain a state
(of supreme excellence), baving, as it were, conquered the
three worlds. O Rama, it is we, wretched that we are,
that are undone, as we, deprived of your company,
shall come under the sinful Kaikeyi expressing great
misery.” Having said this, the charioteer, Sumantra,
seeing Raima intent upon going to a distant land, wept
for a long while in heaviness of heart. Then when he
had dried up his tears, and sanctified himself by touching
the water of the Ganga. Rama again addressed the charioteer
in sweet words, saying,—“l do not find any one that is a
friend of the sons of Ikshw&ku like unto thee. Do thon so
act that king Dagaratha may not grieve (forme). The lord of
earth hath been deprived of his senses by grief, hath grown
old, and is oppressed by the weight of desires (thwarted),
Therefore it is that I tell thee this. Whatever that noble-
minded lord of earth commands for the pleasure of
Kaikeyi, should by us be done with alacrity. It is for
this that those Jords of men, kings, govern,—viz., that others
may not thiwart their purposes. O Sumantra,do thou act so,
that the mighty monarch may not come across any thing un-
pleasant, or be attacked with chagrin through grief. Do thou
saluting him for me say these words unto the aged monarch,


AYODHYAKANDAM. $85


who has his senses under complete control, and who hath
never seen misfortune before. ‘Neither I nor Lakshmana
grieve for being ejected out of Ayodhya, or that we shall have
to abide in the forest. After these fourteen years have gone
by, you will see Lakshmana, Sila and myself come to you
speedily.’ Having thus, O Sumantra, in my name again and
again spoken to the king, to my mother and to Kuikeyi along
with the other revered ladies do thou communicate unto
Kaugalya our welfare conveying unto her at the same time
Sita’s and Lakshmana’s s:lutations to her feet as well thore of
myself who am her eldest son. Do thou also tell the kiag,—
‘Do you spedily bring Bharata; and when Bharata has come,
let him be invested with royalty. And when you have
embraced Bharata and installed him in the kingdom, you
no longer be overpowered with grief on our account,’ And tell
Bharata,—-‘As thou bearest thyself unto the king,so it behoves
thee to bear thyself to all thy mothers, without making any
distinction at all. As Kaikeyi is unto thee, so without
distinction is Sumitra, and so also without distinction my
mother Kaugalya. Governing the kingdum as the heir-
apparent with the view of compassing the pleasure of our
father, be will be able to secure happiness both in this world
and the next.” Told by Rama to go back and instructed
in this wise, Sumantra having heard everything, addressed
K&kutstha from affection, saying—'‘It behoves you to forgive
what 1 say plainly from affection, without letting myself
be overwhelmed with emotion, and with due reverence
for you. How can I, O child, without you retura to
that city, which seems as if afflicted with the grief incident
to the loss of a son ? Having then seen my car with Rama on
it, the hearts of the people and the palace now will in all likeli-
hood burst when they shall see it without Rama. Surely the
city wil be distressed on beholding this empty car, like
ahost seeing acar with its hero slain and the charioteer
alone left in the field. Thinking in thejr minds that


336 RAMAVANS.:


you although actually at a great distance from them,
are before them, the subjects (not finding you) will
renounce food (and thus destroy themselves.) You
yourself witnessed how the subjects overwhelmed with
grief on your account, conducted themselves when
you were being banished unto the woods. They will on
seeing me with the car, burst out into lamentations
exceeding a hundred times in bitterness those in which they
indulged when you set out for the forest. Shall I say unto
the worshipful one,—'‘I have conveyed your son to the home
of his maternal uncle. Do you not grieve’. I will never tell
such a lie. Yet how can I speak this truth which is so
very unpleasant ¢ And ever abiding by my command and
used to carry your friends, how can these excellent horses
bear this car without you? Therefore, O sinless one, I
shall not be able to go to Ayodhy& without you ; and it
behoves you to permit me to follow you to the forest. But
if you forsake me who beseech you, I will as soon as left
by you, enter into fire along with the car. I shall, O
Raghava, by means of this car, withstand all those impedi-
‘ments that shall present themselves against your ascetic
austerities in the forest. I have through your favour
experienced the pleasure of driving the car. I expect
at your bands the pleasure of living in the woods. Be you
propitious. It is my wish to remain in (he forest with you,
and do you say, affectionately—'Do you remain by my side’.
And these horses, O hero, will attain to a supreme state if
they serve you during your abode in the forest. Living in the
forest, I will serve you with the crown of my head ; and i
will entirely renounce Ayodhy& or the celestial regions
themselves. Even as a doer of evil deeds cannot euter
dhe metropolis of the mighty Indra, J am incapable of enter-
ing Ayodhy& without you. And this is my desire that the
term of exile over, 1 may. carey you back to the palace on
this very car, Remaining with you in the forest the fourteen


AYODHVAKAINDAM. 337


years will pass away dwindled into a moment, but without
you, they shall assume the proportions of an hundred years.
O you bearing affection towards your servants, it does not
behove you to forsake your servant having regard for you,
ever abiding by the way that is wended by the son of his
master, and observing the duties of his position.” There-
upon Rama kind towards servants, said these words unto
Sumantra as he besought him thus humbly in various ways,
“O thou that bearest attachment unto thy master, I know
that thou regardest me highly. But do thou listen as to why
I send thee to the city from hence. Seeing thee returned to
the city, my youngest mother Kaikeyi will believe that Rama
has gone to the woods. Then well pleased on my having
repaired to the woods, she will not entertain any apprehen-
sion anent the righteous monarch, thinking that he is
untruthful. This is my first wish that my youngest mother
may obtain her son’s kingdom, prosperous and well protected
by Bharata. Do thou, O Sumantra, bear thyself unto the
palace to compass the end of both the king and myself, and
do thou communicate in the desired way what I have said
unto the respective parties.” Having said this unto the
charioteer and consoled him again and again, the energetic
Rama spoke unto Guha tho following’ words fraught with
reason, “‘O Guha, I should not now reside in a forest in-
habited by men. 1 should certainly now abide in an asylum
in proper guise. In harmony with the wishes of Sit& and
Lakshmana,l,imposing on myself in the interests of my father
self-denial and wearing that ornament of ascetics, a head of
matted hair, will go (to the forest). Do thou therefore bring
me starch from the banian.’ Thereupon Guha speedily
brought the starch for the prince; and prepared matted
locks for himself, Rama and Lakshmana. And that mighty-
armed chief of men wore matted locks. And those brothers
Rama and Lakshmana dressed as mendicants, and wearing
heads of matted hair,appeared like saints. Then entering upon


43 .


338 RAMAYANA,


the Vanaprastha mode of life, R&ma along with Lakshmana
assuming the vow of that life, observed unto that adherent
of his, Guha,—"Do thou, my friend, vigilantly protect the
army, the exchequer, the fort and the provinces ; for a king-
dom demands all the exertions (of the king thereof).”” Then
taking the permission of Guha, the descendant of Ikshwaku,
holding his soul in calmness, set out with his wife and Laksh-
mana. Seeing a boat at the river-side, that son of Ikshwaku
desirous of crossing the swift-coursing Gang&, spoke these
words,—"Do thou ascend, gently, O foremost of men, the
boat that stayeth here, after making the virtuous Sit& ascend
by taking her by the hand.” Hearing his brother’s command,
that strong-willed one, furthering everything, having made
Mithil&'s daughter ascend, ascended himself. Thet energetic
elder brother of Lakshmana next ascended himself. Then the
lord of the Nishadas, Guha, incited his kinsfolk. Having
got on board the boat, the exceedingly puissant Raghava for
securing his welfare, recited mantras, fit to be recited by
Kshatriyas and Brahmanas. Then that mighty car-warrior,
Lakshmana, sipping water from the river as laid down
in the scriptures, bowed down to it along with Sit& in
gladness of heart. Then telling Sumantra, Guha, and the
forces, Rama ascending the boat, ordered the boatmen
(to proceed). Then the boat decked out by the helms-
man, moved by them, and urged on by the pulls of the
goodly oars, proceeded apace in the water. Having
arrived at the middle of the BLagirathi, that blameless one,
Vaidehi, with joined hands, addressed the river, saying,—
O Ganga, protected by thce, may the sun of the intelligent
and mighty monarch, Dagaratha, execule the mandate
{of the latter). Having spent complete fourteen years
in the forest, he will return in company with his brother and
myself. Then O worshipful one, O thou of auspicious
fortune, having returned safely, E will, O Ganga, worship thee,
thou that crownst every desire. O thou that wendst in three


AYODHPARANDAM. 339


ways, O revered one, thou envelopest the regions of Brahma. !
Thou appearest in this world as the spouse of the Ocean-
king. I will, O respected one, bow down unto thee, O
beauteous one, I will hymn thee, when, with good fortune
returned, the foremost of men has obtained the kingdom,
1 will to please thee give away unto Brahmanas hundreds and
thousands of kine, cloths, sapid rice, and vessels of wine by
thousands, and fz//aos. O worshipful one, 1 will worship
thee on Rima having returned to the city. And I will
worship all the gods that dwell on thy banks, as well as the
holy spots and fanes, as soon as, O sinless one, that
mighty-armed one without sin will, coming back from his
abode in the forest, enter Ayodhya in company with
his brother and myself.” Having thus addressed the
Gangi, that blameless one ever obedient unto her husband,
swiftly went to the south bank (of the river). Going to
the (other) bank of the stream, that best of men, and subduer
of foes stood along with his brother and Vaidehi. Then
that long-armed one spoke unto the enhancer of Sumitra’s
delight,. saying,—“Be thou, whether in society or solitude,
intent upon protecting SitS. Of course it behoves us to protect
her in lone places. Do thou, O son of Sumitra go ahead ; and
let Sita follow thee. I myself will go ‘in your wake, protect-
ing both yourself and Sité. Surely, O foremost of men,
we should now protect each other. We have not yet
performed any of the arduous tasks, Today Vaidehi will
know the grief of a life in the woods. And today she will
enter’ the forest destitute of the concourse of men, devoid of
fields and gardens, uneven, and containing pits, etc.”
Hearing Rama’s words, Lakshmana went ahead ; that descend-
ant of Raghu, Rama, followed Sita.

On Rama having speedily crossed the Ganga, the
distressed Sumantra who had been gazing at him stedfastly,
being no longer able to discern him, turned away his eyes

and, overcome with grief, shed tears. And having crossed


340 RAMAPANA


that mighty river, that high-souled one, that bestower of
boons, resembling in prowess a LokapSla, without delay
entered the flourishing and smiling Vatsas crowned with
goodly crops. And then the two (brothers) having slain the
four kinds of beasts, viz., boars, risyas, prishatas aud mahé-
rurus,* and taking their flesh, in the evening took refuge
under a mighty tree, feeling the demands of appetite.


SECTION un.


Havine taken refuge under the tree and performed his
evening devotions, that foremost of those capable of charm-
ing others, Rima, addressed Lakshmana, saying,—“Today
is the first night (which we must spend) outside the
inhabited tracts without the company of Sumantra. Thou
ought not to suffer thy mind to be uneasy on that score.
From tonight forth, we shall have to guard her vigilantly;
for, O Lakshmana, the preservation of what she has as well
as the securing unto her of what she has not, rests with us.
We will, O son of Sumitra, anyhow pass the night; let us
ourselves procuring (leaves) and spreading them on the
ground, anyhow lie down on it.” Saying this, Rama lying
down on the ground although worthy of a costly bed, spoke
these excellent words unto Sumitra’s son,—"O Lakshmana,
surely the king sleeps uneasily today, and Kaikeyi
having attained her end ought to be satisfied. Will not
that revered lady, for the purpose, of having Bharata estab-
lished in the kingdom, take the king’s life, when she shall
see Bharata arrived ¢ Forlorn and old and deprived of me,
Ido not know what he will do, his soul possessed by desire,
and having come under the influence of Kaikeyi. Viewing
this calamity (that has overtaken us) and the disorder that has

* Varieties of deer.—T.


AVODHVAKANDAM. 34t


taken place in the senses of the monarch, I deem even lust
as more potent than either virtue or interest. O Lakshmana,
what man is there ignorant though he be, who for the sake of
a female forsaketh as my father has done me, his son follow-
ing his foot-steps~ Ah! Kaikeyi’s son Bharata with his wife
is really happy—he that enjoys the sole sovereignty of the
delighted _Kogalas. Now that our father has grown old and
T have taken refuge in the forest, he will alone experience
the supreme felicity in the kingdom. He that renouncing in-
terest and virtue, follows lust, speedily gets himself involved
in troubles even like king Dagaratha. O amiable one, I think
that Kaikeyi has been born for making an end of Dagaratha,
sending me into exile, and conferring the kingdom on Bharata,
At present for imparting me pain, Kaikeyi intoxicated by the
tide of good fortune, will afflict Kaugaly& and Sumitra. Thy
mother, the revered Sumitr&, will be smitten with grief on
our account. Do thou, Lakshmana, to-morrow morning repair
unto Ayodhy&: I alone will go unto Dandaka along with
Siti. Thou wilt be the protector of the helpless Kaugalya.
Kaikeyi is surely mean-minded, she perpetrates wrong
from malice. O thou cognizant of virtue, she may administer
poison unto my mother. Surely, O child, ina former birth,
women wero bereft of their sons by my mother, O son of
Sumitra ; and it is for this that this misfortune has befallen
her. Having been brought up and reared with great pains
by Kaugalya, I have left her at the time when her Sabors
ought to have borne fruit. Fie on me! Let no woman,
O son’ of Sumitra, give birth unto a son like me who have
imparted such infinite pain unto my mother, O Lakshmana,
T consider my mother’s female parrot as more sharing her
affection, since she is heard to say, ‘O Suka, do you bite the
foot of the foe ?) What am I, O repressor of foes, now to do for
her, bewailing, of slender fortune,—she that hath not profitted
in the least by her son, and who stands in no further need of
his good offices? Surely my unfortunate mother, Kaugaly’,


34a KAMATPANA,


bereft of me, lies down on the ground, overwhelmed with
woe, and plunged in an ocean of grief. O Lakshmana,
enraged, I alone, without doubt, can rid Ayodhya—the Earth
herself—by means of my arrows, But improper is the display
of prowess for no reason. O sinless one, I am afraid of
unrighteousness and of the next life; and for this it is that,
O Lakshmana, I do not install myself in the kingdom."

Having in solitude for a long while piteously bewailed
thus and in other ways, Rama sat silent in the night with
tears in his eyes. Thereupon Lakshmana consoled Rama
spent with lamentation, like unto fire deprived of its radiance
orthe ocean of its tide. ‘Surely, O Rama, O foremost of
warriors, on your having come out, the city of Ayodhya is
shorn of its splendour like the night deprived of the moon.
This is not fit that you should grieve; for thereby, O fore-
most of men, you make both Sit& and myself grieve. O
Raghava, deprived of you neither Siti nor 1 can live fora
moment, like fish taken out of water: without you, O
repressor of foes, I wish to see neither my father, nor
Satrughna, nor Sumitra, nor heaven itself.” Then viewing
from where they sat at ease their well-laid bed under the
banian, those virtuous ones (Rima and Sit8) went to it.
Hearing Lakshmana’s excellent and appropriate words with
which he gladly assumed a life in the woods. that subduer of
foes, Raghava, in the name of righteousness, at once fully
granted him the permission to dwell with him for the entire
fourteen years. Then like unto a couple of lions dwelling
on a mountain-summit, at that Jone spot of the extensive
forest, those powerful perpetuators of the Raghu race, began
to dwell without fear.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 343


SECTION LIV.


Favine passed the auspicious night underneath that
mighty tree, they, when the sun had risen in unclouded
splendour, went away from that piace. Then diving into
a mighty forest, they proceeded in the direction in which the
Bhagirathi Gang& meets with the Yamun&. And those
illustrious ones went on, viewing at intervals various fields
and delightful lands which they had never seen before. And
going on beholding various kinds of blossoming trees, Rama
when the day had declined, spoke unto Sumitra’s son,saying,
“O son of Sumitra, do thou behold the beautiful wreath of
smoke that rises in front of Prayaga—sign of the worshipful
Fire, and I infer some ascetic to be near. For certain we
have arrived at the confluence of the Gang’ and the Yamuna;
and it is for this that we hear the roar of the waters produced
by the rushing of them. And all these various trees with
their wood hewn down by foresters are seen in the asylum,”
Thus having proceeded at ease, those bowmen when the
sun stood aslant, arrived in the vicinity of the ascetic’s
residence on the delta of the Yamun& and the Ganga. And
proceeding awhile on the way, R&ma, in presence of the
asylum, came up to Bharadw&ja’s place, frightening beasts
and bisds,And arriving at the hermitage, the heroes desirous
of seeing the ascetic, stood at a distance with Sita behind
them. And as soon as entering in, that exalted one saw
that high-souled anchoret of accomplished vows, who
had attained spiritual insight through auterilies, sitting
surrounded by his disciples after having finished the
Agnihotra, Rama with joined hands saluted him along
with Sumitri’s son and Sit3. Then Lakshmana’s elder
brother imparted unto Bharadwaja a knowledge of himself.
“O worshipful one, we are the sons of -Dagaratha, Rama
and Lakshmana. This is my wife, the auspicious daughter


446 RIMIPANA.


of Janaka. This blameless one followeth me unto the solitary
forest ; and my dear younger brother, the son of Sumitra
too, observing the vow, follows me, who have been exiled
by my father. O revered one, commissioned by my father,
I will enter the forest of asceticism, and there subsisting on
fruits and roots, will practise virtue.” Hearing those words
ofthe intelligent prince, that righteous (ascetic) brought a
bull* as well as avghya and water and divers kinds of edibles
consisting of wild fruits and roots. And that one of fiery
austerities assigned quarters, along with beasts and birds as
well as ascetic, for Rama. Then paying homage unto Rama
as he proceeded by short stages, and asking him—"Has your
journey been a pleasant one ?’—the ascetic sat down. And
when Raghava had sat down after receiving the homage,
Bharadwaja spoke unto bim these words fraught with virtue,—
“QO Kakutstha, I behold thee come after a long time. I have
heard of thy causeless exile. This spot at the meeting of the
mighty river is lonely, sacred and charming. Do thou dwell
here happily.” Thus addressed by Bharadwaja,that descendant
of Raghu, Rama, intent on the welfare of all, answered in aus-
Picious, words,—"O reverend one,I apprehend that,living hard
by,the inhabitants of the city and the provinces, thinking
me as easily to be seen, will come to this asylum desirous
of beholding me and Vaidehi. It is for this reason that living
at this place does not recommend itself unto me. Do thou,
O worshipful one, hit upon a retired and agreeable asylum
where Janaka’s daughter worthy of happiness, will pass her
days pleasantly.” Hearing this auspicious speech of Raghava,
that eminent anchoret Bharadwija said these words calcu-
lated to serve Rama’s purpose,——‘‘Ten Krosas hence,my child,
isthe mountain where thou shalt dwell. It is inhabited by
maharshis, and is sacred and picturesque throughout abound-
ing in Goldagulas, monkeys and bears—known by the name


* When an eminent guest came to a person's house, he offered madhuparka,
with a bull which was killed for his entertainment.—T.


AYVODHYARANDAM. 345


of Chitrakuta—resembling Gandham&dana. On beholding
the peaks of Chitrakuta, one reaps welfare, and ignorance
does not envelope one’s mind. There innumerable saints with
the hair of their heads rendered white like skulls,having spent
hundreds of years, have through austerities ascended heaven.
That solitary spot 1 deem as one which will make a happy
residence for thee. O Rama, do thou, for living out the
term of thy banishment, dwell either here or with me.”
Bharadw&ja eniertained his welcome guest, Rama, along
with his wife and brother by extending towards them every
rite of hospitality. And at Prayiga Rima having obtained
the company of that Maharshi, and discoursing on a variety
of sacred topics, the night came on. And with Sita for the
third, Kakutstha brought up in luxury, being fatigued,
pleasantly spent that night at the romantic hermitage of
Bharadwaja. When the night had passed away and day
dawned, (Rama) approached Bharadwaja, and that chief of
men addressed that ascetic of flaming energy,—"'O reverend
sire of truthful character, we have here in thy asylum spent
the night. Do thou now permit us to set forward (for
Chitrakuta).”. On Rama having passed the night there,
Bharadwaja spoke unto him,--''Do thou trace thy steps to
Chitrakuta filled with delicious fruits antl roots. I deem that O
mighty Rama, as a fit abode for thee, being,as it is, furnished
with va.ious kinds of trees, inhabited by crowds of Kinnaras,
resounding with the cries of peacocks, and frequented by
gigantic elephants. Do thou repair unto the famed Chitra-
kuta, holy, fair to the view, and abounding in countless fruits
and roots. And in those forests range herds of elephants
and deer; and these, O Raghava, thou wilt behold. And
ranging with Sit@ rivers and rills and plateaus, caverns and
fountains, thy mind will experience delight. Delighted
with the notes of joyous Koyastivas and coels, aud the cries
of deer and countless mad elephauts, do thou, arriving at the
auspicious mountain, reside at that romantic asylum.”


44


346 RAL ANA,


SECTION LY.


Havine spent the night there,those princes—repressors
of their foes—after paying their obeisance unto the Mahar-
shi, set out for the mountain, And seeing them about to
set forth, that Maharshi performed a propitiatory ceremony
for them, even asa father does on behalf of the sons begot
from his own loins. And that mighty ascetic, Bharadwaja
having truth for his prowess, addressed them, saying—"O
best of men, do you coming to the confluence of the Gang&
and the Yamuna proceed along the Ka&lindi river flowing
westwards, Arriving at the Klindi running in a contrary
direction, you will, O Raghava,behold a goodly bathing place
well-worn by foot-passengers. There constructing a raft,
do you cross over the river who is the daughter of the Sun,
Next coming to a gigantic banian tree with green foliage,
named Syima, surrounded by various trees and inhabited by
ascetics of accomplished purposes, let Sita with joined hands
offer humble supplications to it. Having come to the tree
and, whether staying under it or proceeding along, after
passing only a Krosa, you will, @ Rama, see a wood abound-
ing in Sallakis, Vadaris, and other wild trees belonging unto
the Yamun& I went to Chitrakuta many a time by that
road, which is beautiful, sandy, and free from forest-fire.”
Having directed the way, the Maharshi paused. Thereupon
Rama, saying,~"So be it,” asked him to stop. On the
ascetic Lurning away,Rama spoke unto Lakshmana, “We had
surely acquired religious merit, good betide you, since, the
ascetic has shown compassion unto us.” Having thus con-
versed with each other, those foremost of men endowed
with intelligence, placing Sitd in their front, proceeded to-
wards the river Kalindi. And having arrived at the Kalindi
of rapid currents, they desirous of crossing over, began to
think (as to the means). Then with heaps of dry wild wood


AYODHYAKANDAM, 347


covered with grass, they constructed a large raft. And the
puissant Lakshmana tearing twigs from the ratan and the
rose-apple, made a comfortable seat for Sit. Then Daga-
tatha’s son, Rima, made his bashful wife {in power) incon-
ceivable like unto Sree herself, ascend the ralt, and carefully
laid beside Vaidehi her attires and ornaments as well as the
hoe and the basket. And first having placed Sit4 on the raft,
those sons of Dacaratha ascended themselves, and with glad
hearts began carefully to cross (the stream). Having come
near the middle of the Kalindi, Sita prayed unto her, saying,
—Hail to thee, O goddess! Icross thee. If my husband
can successfully perform his vow, I will worship thee witha
thousand cows and a hundred vessels of wino, hail unto thee,
upon Rama’s return to the city ruled by Ikshwaku.” Having
thus prayed to Kalindi with joined hands, that virtuous lady,
Siti, reached the southern bank thereof. And by means of
that raft they crossed that fleet-coursing daughter of the Sun,
heaving with billows—the river Yamuna with her banks
abounding with innumerable trees. Then renouncing the
raft, and passing by the woods adjoining the Yamuna, they
came upon a banian Syama by name, of cool shade and
verdant foliage. On coming to the banian, Vaidehi saluted
it saying,—“O mighty tree,I bow unto thee. May my husband
fulfil his vow ; and may we behold Kaugaly& and the illustrious
Sumitré.” Having thus prayed with joined hands, the
intelligent Sita went away. Seeing the blameless and beloved
Sit& ever conducting herself properly,—-praying, Rama said
unto’ Lakshmana, “Do thou, O younger brother of Bharata,
taking Sit& with thee, go forward. O best of men, furnished
with weapons, I will go in thy wake. Do thou procure
Vaidehi with whatever fruits or flawers may please her and
she may wish to have. ”Seeing every tree and shrub crowned
with blossoms-unseen before, that one belonging to the softer
sex questioned R&ma about it. And hearing Siti’s words,
Lakshmana brought unto her (fruits and flowers) of beautiful


348 RAMBPANA.


and flower-scattering trees of divers kinds. And beholding
streams with water flowing over glittering sands and resound-
ing with cranes of various kinds, the daughter of king Janaka
felt exceeding delight. And having proceeded just a Krosa,
those brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, having killed many
a sacred deer, began to range in the woods of the Yamuni.
{nd having disported in the beautiful woods resounding with
multitudes of peacocks and inhabited by elephants and
monkcys, they looking as lively as ever, comming to the level
banks of the river, took up their quarters there.


SECTION CVI.


Wren the night bad been spent, that best of Raghus
gently awakened Lakshmana from his light sleop. ‘O Sumi-
tra’s son, do thou hear the dulcet notes of the birds in the
woods. Let us procced. O repressor of foes, the time of
our departure is present.” Awakened at the proper time,
R&ma’s brother left off sleep and drowsiness and clinging
fatigue. Then they all arising touched the sacred waters of
the river, and began to proceed on the way to Chitrakuta
inhabited by ascetics. Setting out in season with
Sumitra’s son, he of eyes resembling lotus-petals spoke these
words unto Siti—“O Vaidehi, behold flowering trees,
the Kinsukas in spring appearing engarlanded with their own
flowers, and as if flaming. Do thou behold the Bhallatakas
and Vilwas bending bencath their fruits and flowers, with no
man to enjoy them, Surely, we shall be able to live here.
Behold, O Lakshmana, these honeycombs measuring about
a Drona have been hung up on trees by the bees. In the
charming woods overarched by flowers, the Ddtyuha cries,
and is responded to by the peacock. Do thou behold Chitra-
kuta frequented by mad elephants and resonant with the


AYODHYAKANDAM. 349


voice of multitudes of birds—the mountain with its towering
summits. O child, we will disport in the sacred woods of
Chitrakuta with fine level plains,and covered with divers trees.”
Then they proceeding on foot along with Sit4, arrived at the
charming and beautiful mountain Chitrakuta. And arriving at
the mountain inhabited by birds of various kinds,abounding in
fruits and roots, and furnished with watery expanses, (Rama)
said,“O amiable one,methinks this beautiful hill furnished with
innumerable fruits and roots, is fraught with subsistence. And
the hill is inhabited by high-souled ascetics. Let this, O child,
be our abode.We will dwell here.” Then Rama,Lakshmana and
Sita with joined hands presented themselves at the asylum of
Valmiki and saluted him. Thereat the Maharshi cognizant of
morality said unto them, “Be seated!’ and addressed Rama,
saying,—‘'Has thy journey been a pleasant one ?”’ Then having
duly acquainted the saint with matters pertaining to himself,
that lord, the mighty-armed elder brother of Lakshman4, said
unto the latter,"O Lakshmana,bring thou wood good and strong.
O amiable one, construct a dwelling. My mind is set upon
staying here.” Hearing his words,Sumitra’s son procured wood
of various descriptions,and then that subduer of foes reared a
cottage thatched with leaves. Beholding that goodly dwelling
walled with wood and furnished with dbors, Rama addressed
these words unto Lakshmana,intent upon ministering unto his
brother. ‘Procuring meat, we will worship the deity presiding
over this dwelling. O Sumitr3’s son, those who wish to live
long, should pacify the household gods. O Lakshmana graced
with’auspicious eyes, do thou killing deer, swiftly bring
it here. It behoves us to observe the rules prescribed
by the scriptures. Do thou follow the ordinance.” Acquainted
with the words of his brother, Lakshmana, slayer of hostile
heroes, did as he was told. Thereupon Rama addressed him
again, “Do thou cook this meat. We will worship the pre-
siding deities of this mansion. Bestir thyself,—the moment
is mild and the day is styled Déruva.” Then Lakshmana the


350 RAMAPANA,


son of Sumitri endowed with vigor, having slain a sacred
Diack deer, threw it into flaming fire. And seeing it well
scorched and hot and free from blood, Lakshmana spoke unto
that foremost of men, Raghava, saying,—“Here is the entire
black deer roasted by me, capable of serving any purpose.
Do you, O you that resemble a celestial, worship the gods.”
Having performed his ablutions, Rama conversant with the
ritual and possessing a knowledge of Yafa, restraining his
senses,performed all the mantras that are necessary for com-
pleting a sacrifice; and having in a pure spirit communed
with all the deities, entered the habitation. And (this having
been done), R&ma of immeasurable energy rejoiced exceed-
ingly. And sacrificing unto Vaicya, Rudra and Vishnu, he
performed some ceremonies for removing malign influences
from the abode. And having duly performed ¥apa and bathed
in consonance with the ordinance, Rima made an excellent
sacrifice for removing sin. And then Raghava established a
dais, and a cha:tya proportionate to the abode.* And as the
celestials enter the hall entitled Sudharm§, they together
with the view of dwelling in it, entered the mansion beautiful
to behold, thatched with the leaves of trees, built at a conve-
nient site, well-made,and keeping out the wind.t And having
come to the charming‘ Chitrakuta and the river M&lyavati
furnished with excellent bathing places,and haunted by beasts
and fowls, they rejoiced with glad hearts, and forsook the
grief incident to their exile from the city.


* The N. W. P. text reads —And in that romantic forest abounding in
various kinds of beasts and birds, with trees bearing a profusion of variegated
flowers, and resounding with the roars of beasts and serpents, those ones and,
who had conquered their senses, began to live happily.”—T.

+ Another reading is —“And having with garlands made of wild flowers,
fruits, roots, meat cooked according to the ordinance, water, Fapa as prescribed
by the Veda, grass, and faggot, worshipped the spirits, those descendants of
Raghu, the auspicious Rima and Lakshmana, in company with Sita entered
the graceful mansion."~—T.


AVODHYAKANDAM. 351


SECTION Lvl.


Have for a tong time coversed with Sumantra, Guha
distressed at heart on Rama reaching the southern bank,
retraced his steps homewards. Learning from envoys at
(Sringaverapura) all about Rama’s visit to Bharadwa&ja at
Prayaga and his reception (at Bharadwaja’s place) as well as
their destined journey (to Chitrakuta), Sumantra, taking the
permission (of Guha), yoked those excellent horses and with
a heavy heart directed his course to the city of Ayodhy&,
And beholding perfumed woods and rivers and watery
expanses and towns and villages, he eagerly proceeded on
his way. And on the third day at dusk the charioteer
arriving at Ayodhy4 saw it bereft of happiness. And behold-
ing it empty and still, Sumantra afflicted with exceeding
sorrow, and overwhelmed with grief, thought, “Perhaps the
city with her elephants and horses and men and king has
been consumed by the fire of grief on account of Rama.”
Having thus reflected, the charioteer drawing up to the city~
gate by means of those fleet-coursing horses, speedily
entered the city. Thereupon, people by hundreds and
thousands rushed alter the chariotecr, Sumantra, asking,
“Where is Rama?’ To them he replied,—“Having asked
Raghava on the Ganga and being permitted by him, 1 have
been sent away by that high-souled righteous one.” Learning
that they (Rama and the rest) had crossed over (the Gang&),
the men with tears in their eyes, sighed forth “O fie !” and
began to bewail, exclaiming, “Ah Rama.” And he heard
crowds exclaim,—‘‘Not seeing Rama in the car, we cease to
exist. We shall no longer see the righteous Rama in the
midst of mighty assemblies engaged in charity, sacrifice or
nuptial rites. What was necessary for this body? What
was dear to them and what did they delight in ?—(constantly
revolving all this in his mind), Rama ruled this city even as


352 RAMAPANS


afather.”’” Then proceeding past the stalls, Sumantra heard
the lamentations of females at windows, burning in grief for
Rama. With his face muffled, Sumantra proceeded on the
highway towards the palace of Dagaratha. Swiftly alighting
from the car and entering the royal residence, he went
past seven apartments thronged with people. And beholding
Sumantra returned to the city crowned with edifices, seven-
storied houses, and palatial mansions, the women, stricken
with the absence of Rama, set up a cry of “Oh” and “Alas.”
And waxing still more aggrieved, the females looked at each
other with their expansive and transparent eyes fast flooded
with tears. And then he heard the talk, as toned down it
proceeded from the royal mansions,of the wives of Dagaratha
afflicted with grief for Rama. "Going in company with
Rama, and returning without him, what will the charioteer
answer Kaugalya bewailing (for her son)? Surely life is
miscrable,yet is incapable of being renuunced,since, although
her son leaving (the installation) hath gone away, yet
Kaugaly& still liveth.” Having heard those words of the
queens, fraught with truth, Sumantra burning as it were
in grief, at once enterod the (next) apartment. And entering
ihe eighth apartment he beheld in a gloomy chamber the
king distressed and in a pitiable plight, woe-begone for grief
for his son. Thereupon presenting himself before the
monarch, Sumantra saluted him and then conveyed unto the
king the words of Rama as he had uttered them. Hearing
thom silently, the monarch with his mind exceedingly
wrought, dropped drown to the ground in a swoon, afflicted
with grief for Rama. On the lord of carth swooning away
and falling to the ground, the inmates of inner apartment
raising their arms burst into lamentations. Kaugaly& availing
herself of the aid of Sumantra, raised up her fallen lord and
addressed him, saying, “This, O eminently virtuous one, is
the envoy of that one of an exceedingly arduous achievement,
returned from the forest. Why do you not accost him?


AY ODHVARANDAM. 353


O descendant of Raghu, you are ashamed to-day,having done
this wrong. Do you rise: merit be yours (arising from this
act), Let not your adherents come to naught (because of
yaur sorrow). O worshipful one, she from fear of whom you
do not speak to the charioteer, Kaikeyi, is not here. Do you
therefore speak to him without fear.” Having said this unto
the monarch, Kaugaly& overwhelmed with grief,with her voice
oppressed with the vapour begot of emotion, all on a sudden
fell to the earth. Beholding Kaugaly4 fallen on the ground
bewailing, as also their husband, the ladies seated around,
began to lament. Hearing the sounds of wailing arise from the
inner apartment,old and young as wellas females, set up lamen-
tations all round; and the city was again filled with them.


SECTION tv.


HEN having been ministered unto and when his senses
had returned after the swoon, the king summoned Sumantra
for hearing tidings of Rama. Thereupon the charioteer
with joined hands spoke unto the mighty monarch, lamenting
for Rama, influenced by grief and sorrow, aged, burning in
grief, like anewly-taken elephant, sighing heavily, plunged
in thought, and resembling an elephant that is indisposed.
Then the king like one exceedingly distressed, spoke unto
the charioteer, who had presented himself, covered over with
dust, with tears starting from his eyes, and in pitiable guise,
“Where stayeth that righteous one, taking refuge under a
tree? Lapped in luxury, what, O charioteer, will Raghava
feed on? Unworthy of privations, and worthy of excellent
beds, how, O Sumantra, a king’s son, he is sleeping on the
ground like one forlorn ? How is Rama passing his days in
the fone forest--he who when he went out used to be followed


45


354 RAMAYANA.


by foot-men and elephants ? How are the princes in company
with Vaidehi, living in the woods, ranged by serpents and
beasts and inhabited by black snakes ? How, O Sumantra,
having descended from the car, the princes along with
the tender and unfortunate Sith are proceeding on foot? O
charioteer, surely thou art blessed, for thou hast beheld my
sons enter the forest, like the Agwins entering the Mandara
hill. And what did Rama say? And what did Lakshmana ?
And, O Sumantra, arriving at the forest what did Mithilé’s
daughter ? Do thou,O charioteer,describe unto me what Rima
lives on and where he lies down. Hearing this, I shall live,
like Yayati in the midst of saints.” Thus urged by the king,
the charioteer spoke unto the king with his voice faltering
and suppressed with the vapour of grief, “O mighty monarch
observing morality, Raghava with joined hands and bowing
down his head, said, 'O charioteer, do thou in my name
salute with thy head the feet of my high-souled sire worthy
of being saluted,and famed (in the world). And, O charioteer,
do thou in my mame as each deserves salute the ladies
of the inner apartment and communicate to them tidings
of my health, And having saluted my mother Kaugaly&
and conveyed unto her news of my welfare, as well as of my
unswerving adherence to morality, do thou telt her these
words,—Do you remaining steady in virtue, at the proper
hour’ bestir yourself in behalf of the chamber of sacrificial
fire. And, O revered one, do you minister unto the feet
of that worshipful one, (the king), as if they were very
deities, And banishing pride and self-love, do you bear
yourself towards my mothers. And, O mother, do you show
respect unto Kaikeyi, who is followed by the king himself.
And you should behave towards Bharata as one should
towards one's king. Kings (although juvenile), are really
senior by virtue of their royalty ; and do you remember the
duties touching sovereigns.—Do thou communicate unto
Bharata news of my welfare and say in my name,—Do you


AYODHYVAKANDAM. 355


behave properly with all your mothers—And unto that
delight of the Ikshwiku line do thou further say,—Having
been installed as the heir-apparent, be you, looking upon the
king as the supreme authority in the state, obedient to him.
Do you not deprive the king of authority,as he has grown old.
O Prince, do you grant him satisfaction in the kingdom and
do you proclaim his mandates.—And shedding copious tears,
he again addressed me,saying,—Do thou look upon my mother
aaon thy own proud of her son.—Having said this, the
mighty-armed and illustrious Rima furnished with eyes
resembling lotus-petals, shed plenteous tears. Thereupon
Lakshmana waxing wroth, breathing hard, said,—For what
fault of his has the. Prince been banished? Observing the
worthless command of Kaikeyi,whether the king has done well
or ill, we have been exceedingly pained thereby, Whether
Rama has been exiled through Kaikeyi’s lust for dominion or
through the exigencies of the bestowal of the boon, there
cannot be any doubt that the king has acted most unrighteously.
Even if this hath been done in harmony with the wish of the
Lord, I do not perceive any reason for the banishment of
Rima. The king through lack of sense has done heedlessty
what is opposed to morality ; and this banishment of Rima
will but bring upon him woe here and hereafter. Fatherhood
find I none in the monarch. My brother and feeder and friend
and father is even Raghava. Renouncing one that is
universally dear, and that is ever engaged in the good of all,
how by such an act will the king please the people? And
how by banishing the righteous Rama dear unto all the
subjecis, and thus withstanding the wishes of all, will he
retain his royalty ?—And, O mighty monarch, Janaki also,
unfortunate that she is, sighing heavily, stood wildered like
one that hed been possessed. And not having experienced
any calamity before, thé famed princess weeping because of
this misfortune, told me nothing. And looking up to her
lord with a blank countenance, she suddenly let fall tears,


356 RANMAPANA.


perceiving the destruction of the subjects. And thus said
Rama ministered unto by Lakshmana, with a tearful counte-
nance ; and thus stood the unfortunate and weeping Sita
beholding the royal car and myself.”


SECTION LIX.


)n Rama having gone to the forest, my horses as I
turned away,did not proceed vigorously on the way, and shed
warm tears. Aud having (done homage) unto both the
princes by joining my hands, I turned my back, bearing as
best I could that load of sorrow, Indulging in the hope that
Rama might again summon me by any of the envoys(of Guha
left there), I stayed there with Guha for many days, In thy
dominions, O monarch, exercised by the calamity that has
befallen Rama, even trees bearing blossoms and buds and
sprouts look sad ; the rivers and pools and liquid lapses have
their waters dried up ; and the woods and groves have their
foliage withered. Creatures do not move and beasts of prey
cease to range about ; and the forest appears to be dumb,
stupified by grief on account of Rama. And streams contain.
ing lotuses with their leaves shriveled, have their waters
stained ; and lotuses have their leaves burnt ; and fishes and
(aquatic)birds have grown lean. And flowers both on land and
water have been deprived of their freshness and fragrance ;
and they no longer retain their former condition. And
the gardens are idle with their birds drooping. And, O best
of men, I do not find the bowers beautiful (as before), And
when I entered Ayodhy&, none greeted me. And not seeing
Rama, the people sigh momentarily. And, O revered one,
seeing the royal car returned hither without Rima,the people
on the’highways from grief appear with tearful countenances.
And from mansions, cars, and lordly edifices, ladies seeing


4VODHYAKANDAM. 357


the car come back, set up a chorus of ‘Ah’ and ‘Alas,’ affticted
with the absence of Rima. And becoming more distressed
than ever, the fair sex with their expansive and clear eyes
filled with tears, began to eye each other indistinctly. And
in consequence of the general grief that prevailed, I could not
perceive any difference between friends and foes and persons
indifferent. O mighty monarch, distressed in consequence of
the exile of Rima, men appear sunk in dejection,and elephants
and horses are spiritless ; and seized with cheerlessness, they
utter doleful sounds and heave profound sighs. Ayodhy&
appeareth unto me joyless like Kaugaly& deprived of her
son.” Hearing the words of the charioteer, the king like one
exceedingly forlorn, addressed the former in words lost in the
vapour of sorrow, “Exhorted by Kaikeyi of a sinful country,
born in a2 sinful race aud cherishing sinful designs, 1 did not
take counsel with aged people capable of offering advice. With-
out consulting with friends or courtiers or persons versed in
the Vedas, I have in the interest of a woman rashly done this
thing through ignorance. Meseems, O charioteer, for the pur-
pose of destroying this line entirely, this mighty disaster hath
surely befallen us through the influence of Destiny. O chari-
oteer, if I have ever done thee any good, do thou immediately
take me to Rima: my life urges me on (in this direction). Or
let my command make Raghava turn back. I cannot live for
a moment without Rama, But if that mighty-armed one has
proceeded far, do thou placing me on a car speedily show me
unto Rama. Where is that elder brother of Lakshmana of a
mighty bow, furnished with teeth resembling Kunda flowers ?
If I live so long, I will behold him in company with Sita.
What can be sadder than this, that reduced to such a pass,
I cannot see here that descendant of Ikshw&ku, Raghava ?
Ah Rama! Ah thou younger brother of Rima! Ah thou
unfortunate Vaidehi! ‘You do not know that I am through
grief lamenting like one deserted.” Deprived of bis cons-
ciousness through that sorrow of his, the king said, “I have


358 RAMAYANA.


plunged myself into this ocean of woe hard to cross, with
grief for Rima as its mighty tide; separation from Sita, its
other shore ; sighs heaved, its furious billows and whirlpools ;
tears, rivers that rush into it; tossing of the arms, its fishes ;
lamentations its roar ; my hair flung about, its moes ; Kaikeyi,
its submarine fire; my fast-flowing tears, its current ;
the words of the hump-backed one, its terrific ravenous
animals; the boon, its continents ; and the exile of Rima, its
expanse. And, O Kaucaly4, without Raghava, I shall sink
in this ocean. O exalted dame, living, it is hard for me to
cross over this ocean. It is surely owing to my sin that to-
day wishing to behold Raghava and Lakshmana, I do not get
them (before me).” Having thus lamented, the illustrious king
all of a sudden dropped to the earth in a swoon. On the king
swooning away lamenting, that exalted lady, Rama’s mother,
hearing his words doubly bitter and more pitcous than ever
uttered for Rama, was seized with fresh apprehension.


SECTION Lx.


Turn like one possessed by an evil spirit, and trembling
again and again, Kaugalya lying down on the ground like
one dead, spoke unto the charioteer, saying, “Do thou take
me where Kakutstha is and Siti and Lakshmana: without
them, I cannot live fora moment. Do thou without delay
turn the car. Do thou take me also unto Dandaka. If I do
not follow them, I shall repair to the mansion of Yama.” There-
at the charioteer with joined hands comforted that exalted lady
with ready words faltering and choked with rising vapour,
“Do you leave grief and sorrow and the violent emotion.
Renouncing grief, Raghava is living in the woods. And in the
forest, the righteous Lakshmana, having his senses under
control, is ministering unto Rima’s feet and is thus adoring


AYODHVAKANDAM. 359


the gods for happiness in the next world. And even in the
lonely woods, Sit& as if remaining at home, having fixed her
thoughts on Rama, is living a life of love. And there appears
not the least trace of any distress afflicting her ; and Vaidehi
seems to me as if she were meant (by Nature) for a life
away from home. And as formerly going unto urban villas
she disported, she disports now even in the lonely forest.
And although living in the lone forest, that one of a counte-
nance resembling the infant moon, sports merrily like a
girl, in the garden represented by Rama’s self. Ayodhy4
without Rima would have seemed a wilderness to her whose
heart is fixed on bim and whose very life depends upon him.
Vaidehi -is now asking (Ri&ma) concerning the villages and
towns (in their way) ; and observing various trees and the
courses of the rivers, Janaki, asking Rama or Lakshmana
(for information), is learning all about them. And Sit& sports
as she used to do in arbours stationed at the distance of
only one érosa from Ayodhya. This only I remember; but
allthat she had from sudden impulse communicated unto
me concerning Kaikeyi, does not rise into consciousness.”
Suppressing this topic which had come up through heedless-
ness, the charioteer spoke sweet words cheering up that
noble lady. “Neither through the fatigue’ of travel, nor the
influence of the wind, nor excitement, nor the sun, hath
Vaidehi’s lustre resembling the lunar tight suffered any
diminution. The countenance of that fair-speaking one
vesembling the lotus and comparable unto the full-moon
in splendour, hath not waxed pale, Her feet tow without
the dye of the liquid lac, but naturally furnished with the
toseate hue of the same, are gorgeous like lotus buds.
Still Vaidehi decked in ornaments from affection for Rima,
goes gracefully, rebuking with her bangles the wavy gait
(cf cranes). Supporting herself on Rima’s arm, Sit& arrived
at the forest, is not inspired with fear on beholding either an
elephant, or a lion, or a tiger. Therefore they are not to be


360 RAMAPANA.


bewailed, nor your own self, nor the lord of men. This
history of Rama will endure for ever in this world. Renounc-
ing grief and with cheerful hearts, well established in the
life led by the Maharshis, they living in the forest on wild
fruits as their sustenance, are maintaining the noble promise
of their sire.” Consoled by the truth-telling yet sweet-
speeched charioteer, that lady oppressed with grief for her
son, ceased not to wail loudly—"My beloved,” “My son,”
“Raghava.”


SECTION LXI.


ee


On that foremost of those capable of charming people,
the righteous Rama, repairing to the forest, Kaugaly& crying
in grief said unto her husband, “Your great fame has spread
over the three worlds ; and the descendant of Raghu is kind,
munificent and fair-speaking. Why then have you forsaken
those foremost of men along with Siti? Brought up in
happiness, and now brought to misery, how can they bear it?
And how can the youthful daughter of Mithila of slender
make, tender, and deserving of happiness bear heat and cold?
Having formerly partaken of (excellent) rice with curries, how
will Sita feed on wild rice? Having heard excellent vocal and
instrumental music, how will Sita hear the frightful cries of
carnivorous lions ? Resembling the gonfalon of the great Indra,
where sleepeth the mighty-armed and exceedingly powerful
Rama, making his arm like unto a mace his pillow? When
shall I behold Rama’s countenance hued like the lotus, with
his hair ending beautifully (in curls), and his breath impreg-
nated with the fine perfume of the lotus, and his eyes resembl-
ing lotusleaves? Surely my heart, without doubt, is made of
the essence of the thunderbolt, since not beholding him, it is
not cracked in a thousand fragments. It is because of


AYODHYAKANDAM. 36e


your sad act that mine own, being thwarted, although worthy
of happiness, are miserably ranging the wilderness. If after
the expiration of the five and ten years, Raghava does, return,
it does not appear likely that Bharata will renounce the
kingdom and the exchequer. Some on the occasions of the
Sraddha (first) feast their own friends ; and having done this,
they mind the choice Brahmanas. But those twice-born
ones that are meritorious, learned, and like unto celestials, do
fot at the fast moment regard even viands resembling
ambrosia. Brihmanas of high respectibility endowed with
wisdom never bear being entertained alter the other twice-
born ones have been feasted ; even as bulls never quietly bear
to have their horns cut off. Why will not an elder brother
and one who bas ‘sterling merits, O monarch, disregard a
kingdom which hath been thus enjoyed by his younger
brother? A tiger doth not like to feed on food procured by
others. Even so that tiger-like personage does not regard
anything that has come to be tasted by another. Clarified
butter, sacrificial cakes, Kuga, and stakes of catechu, having
been used in onc sacrifice cannot be used in another,—even so
this kingdom which hath been already enjoyed, like unto
liquor deprived of its essence, or a sacaifice whose soma hath
been eaten, cannot be accepted by Rama. Such an ill treat-
ment Raghava will not put up with ; even as a powerful tiger
cannot bear the rubbing of its tail (by another). This world
aided by the gods fears to encounter him in high conflict ;
but he restrains himself, thinking any such action on his part as
unrighteous. Indeed, that righteous one brings back people
to morality. Surely, that mighty-armed one endowed with
exce¥ding prowess, can with his golden shafts burn all crea-
tures and the oceans ; like the Day of the dissolution of all.But
such a man of men, possessed of leonine strength, and graced
with the eyes of a bull, has been destroyed by his father ;
like a fish destroying his offspring. If you had believed in the
morality prescribed in the scriptures, and whjch is followed


46


362‘ RAMAYANA.


hy the twice-born ones, you would not have banished your
son. But disregarding such morality, you have banished
your virluous son. One of the refuges of a woman is her
husband, a second is her son,and a third is her relatives ; and
a fourth she has none. Bat you cease to be mine; and Rama
has been sent to the woods. Ido not like to go into the
forest ; so Tam entirely undone by you. This kingdom, your
own kingdom, has been destroyed by you ; destroyed are all
along with the counsellors ; destroyed am I with my son ; and
destroyed are the citizens : your son and your wife are alone
delighted.” Hearing these words, uttered in heart-rending
accents, Dagaratha exceedingly distressed, became senseless.
And being afflicted with grief, he again remembered his evil
act.


SECTION LX}.


Tres harshly addressed by the indignant mother of Rima,
the king, aggrieved, was plunged in thought. Having thought
for a long while, that repressor of foes, the king, who had
lost his senses through grief, regained consciousness. And
having regained his senses, he sighing hot and hard, seeing
Kaucaly& beside him, was again lost in thought. As he was
thinking, the sinful act which he had through ignorance
formerly committed by means of the shaft which hits by
sound, rose up (in his recollection). Afflicted with this grief
as well as that on account of Rama, that lord, the king, burned
in these two several griefs. Burning in grief and distressed,
he trembling and with joined hands, with his head hanging
down, addressed Kaugalya, with the view of pacifying her,
““E deprecate thy displeasure, O Kaugaly4, with joined hands.
Thou art ever affectionate and dost not treat harshly even


AYVODHYAKANDAM. 363


enemies. Verily unto women cognizant of virlue, a husband,
whether he has any merits or not, is avery deity. Ever
virtuous, thou, that hast seen both the virtuous and the vicious,
although aggrieved, ought not to say anything unpleasant
unto me who am weighed down with owe." Having beard
these piteous words of the di-t-essed king, Kaugaly& uttered
words even as a water-way Iets out fresh accession of rain.
And weeping, she drew on her head the joined hands of the
king resembling lotuscs ; and then flurried spoke these words
hurriedly informed with extreme affection, “Be thou
propitious ; I beseech with -hended) head. I bow unto thee,
falling on the ground. O reverend one, hesought by thee,
shall be undone. I do not deserve to be forgiven by
thee, She cannot be reckoned a gentlewoman, who is
propiliated by her intelligent husband, worthy of being
extolled in both the worlds. I know duty, O righteous one;
I know that thou art truth-telling, And itis because I was
exceedingly distressed on account of my son that I spoke
harshly to thee. Sorrow destroys patience, sorrow destroys
knowledge of the scriptures, sorrow destroys every thing ;
there is no enemy like unto sorrow. One can falling down
bear beating from an enemy ; but one cannot falling down
bear ever so little sorrow. This is the fifth night of the
banishment of Rama, as calculated by me; and to me rendered
cheerless by sorrow, this interval has assumed the proportions
of five years, And fostered by thought on my part, this grief
increases in my bosom, like the mighty waters of the ocean
increased by the vehement discharge of rivers.” As Kaugalya
was thus speaking auspiciously, the rays of the sun grew
milder, and the night arrived. Cheered up by the words
of Kaugaly&, the king overcome by griel, felt the influence


of sleep.


364 RAMAYANA.


SECTION Lxiit.


Srarninc in a moment from sleep,king Dagaratha deprived
(almost) of his consciousness by grief, (again) became a prey
to thought. And in consequence of the exile of Rama and
Lakshmana, the king resembling Vasava was overpowered by
grief, like the darkness of Rahu enveloping the sun, Then
on Rama's having gone along with bis wife, the lord of the
Kogalas, remembering his own misdeed, felt anxious to
communicate himself to that lady having her eyes furnished
with dark outer corners. And on the sixth night after Rima
had repaired to the forest, the king Dagaratha, when it was
midnight, remembered bis own unrighteous act. And then
unto KaugalyS aggrieved sn account of her son, he spoke
these words, ‘As are the actions of one, O auspicious one~
whether good or otherwise—are the consequences, O gentle
lady, reaped by the doer of them. He that on the eve of
beginning an action either relating to this world or the next,
does not take into consideration the fact that actions entail
consequences light or grave, disagreeable (or otherwise), is
styled a child. He that cutting down a mango grove, waters
Palfsa trees, beholding the flowers (blooming), will covet
fruits ; and grieve when their season arrives. The person
that without apprehending (the principle of causation) rushes
‘to action, grieves at the season of fruits, even like him
that watereth dinsuka trees (hewing down his mango grove),
And in this way,I fool that 1am having hewn down my grove of
mangoes and watered Palégas,—having renounced Rama in the
season of fruit, is grieving in the end. Having, O Kaugalya,
earned the expression—‘The Prince can pierce his aim by
sound alone,’—I,a prince and bowman, did this offence. There-
fore, O noble dame, I have myself brought this misfortune on
me, like a child who has eaten poison through ignorance,

* And even like another person [ascinated by the sight of sonie


AYODRVYAKANDAM. 365


Palisa trees (and doing as mentioned above), I (did this act)
not foreknowing the consequence that would follow mv shoot-
ing by sound. O lady, thou wert then unwedded ; and I wasa
youthful prince, And it was at this timé that the rainy season
increasing my desire set in. Drawing moisfure from the
ground and heated the earth by his rays, the Sun goes to the
dreadful quarter whither repair the dead. The heat was im-
mediately dispelled, and the gelid clouds showed themselves ;
and frogs and Sarangas and peacocks began to rejoice ; and,
finding it unploasant, the feathered ones bathed and with the
surface of their plumage shrunk up from the wet, took refuge
in trees shaken by the wind and rain, And the hill graced by
maddened S&rangas, covered by showers falling simultane-
ously looked like a mass of waters. And the waters.
although unstained, being mixed up with mineral substances
and ashes from the mountain, flowed in serpentine torrents
black and red. At such a sweet hour, { intent upon taking
exercise, taking my bow and arrows and mounted on my
car, Sallied out for the river Sarayu, with the intention that
1 with my senses under control, should in the watery expanse
slay any buffalo, elephant, or any other beast that might have
come there in the night. And (coming there) while it was
so dark that nothing could be discovered, I heard sounds
of a filling pitcher proceeding from the waters; resembling
the roars of an elephant. Thereupon raising up my shaft
flaming and like unto a serpent of virulent poison, I desirous
of hunting the (imaginary) elephant, let fly my shaft in the
direction of the sound. Thereupon from the spot whereto
the sharpened shaft resembling a poisonous snake had been
discharged by me in the twilight, proceeded cries of ‘Oh’ and
‘Alas’ uttered by a forester pierced to the quick by the arrow,
and falling into the watter. And when he had dropped down,
words spoken by a human being became audible. ‘Why doth
the weapon light upon me? I had come to this lone stream
for procuring water. By whom have I beep wounded by


366 RAMAYANA.


this arrow ? To whom have I done wrong ? And how can the
slaying of one like me bearing a load of matted Incks,and wear-
ing bark and deer-skin, who subsists on what the forest yields
and never injures others, be sanctioned by the scriptures »
Who can serve any purpose by slaying me ? And howcan I
have injured such an one ¢ Such a purposeless act cannot but
end in evil. This can never be reckoned as righteous ; even like
unto violating the chastity of a preceptor’s wife. 1 do not so
much lament my end as I lament it on account of my father
and mother. To what will the old couple, who have ever
been maintained by me, betake themselves when I am gone ?
My father and mother are old, and I their only son am slain.
What boy is it of uncontrolled senses that has killed us all?”
“Hearing his piteous words, I, ever anxious to follow
virtue, was exceedingly pained, and the bow with its arrow
fixed fell down from my hand to the earth, Hearing in the
night, the pathetic words of the saint thus lamenting, I
became frightened, and was deprived of my senses through
excess of grief. And coming to the quarter, I, exceedingly
unnerved and with an excited mind, discovered on the banks
of the Sarayu an ascetic wounded with a shaft, with bis mat-
ted locks scattered zbout, his pitcher of water lying by, his
body smeared with blood and dust and tortured by the dart.
Gazing with his eyes al me who was extremely agitated and ill
at ease, he said these words sternly, as if consuming me with
his energy, ‘What wrong, O monarch, had I, residing in the
woods, done thee,that coming to procure water for my parents,
T have been thus afflicted by thee y By piercing my marrow
with a shaft, thou hast slain both my aged and blind father and
mother. Surely, they, feeble and blind, who, afflicted by thirst
are remaining in expectation of me, will now bear (the stress
and tension of) the expectation as well as the parching thirst.
Surely asceticism and study carry no fruit with them, since
I lying low on the ground, my father knows nothing about
it, And what, could he dv, even if he knew it, being as he is


AVODHVAKANDAN, 367


incapable and unable to go about? One tree cannot rescue
another that is being battered (by the winds). Do thou, O
descendant of Raghu, thyself going to my father, speedily
inform of him this that has occurred. But take care that like a
fire waxing furious consuming a wood, he in his ire do not
baru thee. This narrow way, O king, will lead thee unto my
father's dwelling. Do thou going there, pacily him, so that get-
ting worth he may not curse thee. Do thou (now), O king, take
out the arrow. Thy sharpened shaft afflicts my marrow, like the
tide of ariver wearing away a hollow-heaving sand bank.’
But touching the extracting of the arrow, this thought
perplexed me: ‘If the arrow is left alone, it pains; if
extracted, death ensues.’ As I was distressed, aggrieved and
afflicted with sorrow, the son of the ascetic perceived my
anxiety. Thereupon that one well versed in the scriptures
sinking motionless, with his eyes rolling upwards, and
waxing extremely weak, said with difficulty, ‘ Restraining
sorrow, | by dint of patience become calm. Do thou remove
from thy mind the gricf caused by the consciousness of having
slaina Braéhmana. O king, I belong not lo the twice-born
race: let not thy mind be pained, O lord of the foremost
men, [ was begot by a Vaicya on a Sudra woman.’ As he,
his vitals affiicted with the shaft, his eyes rolling, inert and
trembling on the ground, with his limbs drawn in, was
speaking with difficulty, I drew out the arrow. Thereupon,
looking at me, the ascetic, growing affrighted, gave up the
ghost. On beholding him with his body dripping with water,
and mortally wounded, and breathing hard without respite,
after he had bewailed his mortal wound, lying on the
banks of the Sarayu, I lamented him and was, O gentle
lady, greatly aggrieved.”


368 RAMAYANA,
SECTICN uxiv.


— ee


Rememnzrine the extraordinary death of the Maharshi,
that righteous descendant of Raghu, lamenting his son,
thus spoke unto Kaucaly&, “ Having unwittingly committed
that great sin, I, with my senses oppressed through grief,
thought within myself as to how! could mend it. Then
taking up the [pitcher filled with excellent water, I went
by the way mentioned and (at last) reached the asylum.
There I found his aged, infirm, forlorn, parents, without any
one to help them in moving about,—like unto birds whose
wings have been severed, keeping up a talk about (their son)
without experiencing any fatigue, and like helpless ones
feeding on a hope which had been blasted by me. My senses
overpowered by grief, and my consciousness almost lost
through apprehension, I, arrived at the hermitage, was again
overwhelmed with sorrow. Hearing my footsteps, the
ascetic said, ‘Why, my son, delayest thou? Bring the drink
at once. Thy mother, O child, was exceedingly anxious in
consequence of thy sporting in the waters. Do thou speedily
enter the asylum. O child, it behoveth thee not to take to
heart any unkind action that, O son, may have been done
unto thee of high fame either by thy mother or myself. Thou
art the resource of these helpless ones; thou art the eyes
of these bereft of their sight. Our lives are bound up with
thee. Wy dost not answer?’ Seeing the ascetic witha
choked utterance indistinctly speaking thus with the letters
not articulated clearly, I, dashed in spirits, yet concealing the
teal state of my mind by assuming a doughty tongue,
communicated unto him the danger that had beffallen him in
consequence of the calamity of his son: ‘I am a Kshatriya,
Dagaratha (by name),and no son of thine,O magnanimous one.
I have come by a misfortune in consequence of an act blamed
by the good © revered one, desirous of killing some


AYODHYARANDAM. 369


beast of prey, an elephant (or some other), come to the waters,
f went to the banks of the Sarayu bow in hand. Then hear.
ing sounds from the water of a filling pitcher,I thought,—Thia
must be an elephant.—I wounded it with a shaft.Next coming
to the edge of the river, 1 saw an ascetic lying down on the
ground almost deprived of life, with his heart pierced with
an arrow. Then coming forward, {in accordance with the
direction given by him as he fay in agony, suddenty extracted
the arrow from his vitals. And as soon as the arrow had
been extracted, he ascended heaven,O reverend sir, lamenting
and bewailing you, Loth grown old. It is through ignorance
that I suddenly wounded your son. This having been past,
do you favor me with telling me what is now to be done,
© ascetic’ Having heard these cruel words, the worshipful
ascetic could weil by his curse consume me to ashes. With
eyes flooded with tears, and well nigh deprived of bis senses
by grief, that highly energetic one said unto me standing
with joined hands, ‘If, O king, thou hadst not of thyself
immediately communicated unto us this unpleasant news, thy
head would have been reduced to a thousand flaws. Not to
speak of Kshatriyas, f can even drag the very wielder of the
thunderbolt himseif from his position, if he knowingly kills
one, in especial, that has assumed the Vanaprastha mode of
fife. Thy head would have been severed in seven, if thou
hadst discharged the weapon knowingly at such an ascetic
staying in austerities and versed in the Vedas. It is because
thou hast done this through ignorance that thou (still) livest,
else the race itself of the Raghavas should be not,—and
where art thou ” He then said, ‘Do thou, O king, take us
to the scene. To-day will we look our last on our soa
besmeared with blood, his deer-skin garb falling off (from his
body), lying senseless on the earth, and come under the
subjection of the lord of righteousuess.’ Thereupon I alone
taking them exceedingly disconsolate to the spot, made the
ascetic and his wife touch their son. And having approached


47


370 RAMAYANA,


their son and tuuched him, those ascetics fell on his person,
and then his father addressed him thus, ‘Thou salutest
me not to-day, nor dost thou speak to me. Why, my child,
dost thou lie down on the ground ? Art thou angry (with us) ?
If, my son, thou dost not feel kindly to me, do thou look up
to thy virtuous mother. And why, O son, dost thou
not embrace me? Do thou speak tender words. At the
small hours, from whom engaged in study, shall I hear the
scriptures sweetly read in a way coming home to the listner’s
mind ? Who, having performed his daily devotions and off-
ered oblations unto the sacrificial fire, will bathe me, afflicted
with grief for my song And who procuring Kandas, fruits
and roots, will feed me like an welcome guest, incapable of
doing anything and furnishing provisions, and without any
one to take care of myself? And, my son, how will I
maintain this blind ascetic mother of thine, proud of her son,
who is passing her days in misery? Do thou stay, my son,
in my behalf. To-morrow thou wilt go to Yama's mansion
with me and thy mother. Distressed with grief and rendered
miserable in the forest, both of us deprived of thee shall soon
repair to the abode af Yama. Seeing Vivaswata’s son, I
will say unto him,—Do thou, O lord of justice, forgive
me, and let this my son continue to maintain us, his parents,
It behoves thee, O righteous and illustrious guardian
of the worlds, to confer on me reduced to such a pass this
one enduring dakshind capable of removing our fear.—Thou,
my son, art sinless, although slain by this one who has
done an unrighteous act; aud by the force of this truth, do
thou repair lo the world of warriors. Do thou, O son, go the
supreme way that is gone by heroes who without turning
back from the fight, are slain in open encounter.. Do thou,
O sun, go the way that has been gone by Sagara and Saivya
and Dilipa and Janamejaya and Nahusa and Dhundumfra.
Do thou, O son, go the way that is gone by all creatures, even
by ascetics engaged in the study of the Veda, by bestowers


AYODH YA RANDAMN. 370


of lands, by those performing fire-sacrifices, by tndividuals
each devoted to a single wife, men giving away a thousand
kine, persons tending their preceptors, and individuals
renouncing lives by fasting. He that is born in such a race
cannot come by any evil case. Such a condition be his that
has taken the life of thee, my friend.’

“Having thus piteously wept, he along with his wife set
about performing the watery rites on behalf of his son. There-
upon speedily assuming a celestial shape, the virtuous son
of the ascetic by his own actions ascended heaven in campany
with Sakra. Then (returning) along with Sakra, the ascetic
comforting his aged parents, addressed them, saying, ‘I have
attained a high state in consequence of having served you.
Do you also without delay come unto me.’ Having said this,
the ascetic’s son of restrained senses ascended heaven by
means of an excellent and commodious car. Having perform-
ed the watery rites, the highly energetic ascetic along with
his wife speedily said unto me staying with joined hands,
‘Do thou, O monarch, slay me on the instant. I do not
grieve to die—thou hast by thy shaft rendered me who had
an only son, absolutely sonless. Since this sorrow arising
from the calamity that has befallen my son, is at present mine
(through thy instrumentality), I curse fhee,—thou shalt even
in this way find thy death from grief for thy son, As thou
a Kshatriya hast through ignorance slain an ascetic, the sin,
O lord of men, of slaying a Br&hmana will not envelope thee
speedily ; but thou shalt shortly come by this dreadful and
mortal condition, like a donor af Dakshinds (coming by the
things given away).’ Having thus inflicted on me the corse
and piteously lamented long, the couple ascended the funeral
pile and went to heaven. O noble damé, the crime that
Thitting by help of sound, had committed in my boyhood,
has reverted to my recollection in course of thought. And,
O exalted lady, even asa disease generated by one’s taking
rice with unhealthy curry, this danger is imminent in conse-


373 MaMAYANA.


quence of that act. O gentle one, the words of that noble-
minded person are about to be verified in me.” Having said
this and weeping, the king said to his wife, “I shall renounce
life through grief for my son. And I shall wo more behold
thee with my eyes. Do thou, O Kaucaly&, touch me. People
going to the mansion of Yama no more behold (their friends).
Hf R&ma touch me directly or otherwise, obtain the exchequer,
and be installed as the heir-apparent, meseems, ! may yet
live. QO noble lady, what I have done unto Raghava is not
surely like myself; but what (on the other hand) he has
done by me is worthy of him. What sensible man forsaketh
his son, albeit he may be wicked? And what son being
banished, does not bear ill will towards his father? But I do
not see thee with my eyes, and my memory fails. These
envoys of Vivaswata’s son, O Kaucalya, urge speed upon me,
What can be an object of greater regret than that I during
my last moments cannot behold the righteous Rama having
truth for prowess? Even as the sun drieth up a drop of
water, grief for not seeing my son of incomparable acts drieth
my spirits, Those are not meu—those are gods who in the
fifteenth year shall again behold Ra&ma’s countenance graced
with elegant and burnished ear-rings. O thou of graceful
eye-brows, blessed are they who shall behold Rama’s count-
enance furnished with eyes resembling lotus-petals, with
excellent teeth and a shapely nose, like unto the lord of the
stars himself. Blessed are they that shall behold that fragrant
face of his like unto the autumnal moon, or the full-blown lotus
Thrice blessed they who with delighted hearts, shall behold
Rima returned from the forest and come back to Ayodbys,
like unto Sukra crowning the zenith. O Kaugaly&, my heart
is weighed down with grief; and Ido not perceive objects
of hearing, feeling, or taste. My senses are growing dim io
consequence of the mental stupor, like the raysofa lamp
reduced to smoke, becoming dim when the oil has been ex-
bausted. As the violence of a river wears away its banks,my


AYODHYAKANDAM. 373


gtief occasioned through my own agency is destroying me,
who am helpless and insensible. O mighty-armed Righava!
O thou remover of my troubles! O thou that dost delight
in thy father! thou art my stay,O my son, that hast gone
away. O KaugalyS, Ido not see. O wretched Sumitré! O
cruel one, thou enemy of mine, thou Kaikeyi, who hast be-
fouled thy line !” Having thus lamented in presence of Rama’s
mother and Sumitr&, king Dagaratha breathed his fast.

Thus that distressed lord of men, smitten with the exile
of his beloved son, that one possessed of a gracious presence,
when the night had been half spent, wrought up with the
vivlence of his emotion, departed this life.


SECTION LXV.


Soetae tamed


Wren the night had gone away, on the morning of the
next day, eulogists, accomplished bards, genealogists skilled
in reciting, and singers versed in musical permutation,
presenting themselves at the place of the sovereign, began to
perfom separately. And as they eulogized the monarch with
benedictions loudly uttered, the palace resounded with the
sounds of the eulogies. And as the bards hymned the
monarch, palm-players celebrating the deeds of the kings of
the Raghu race, began to play with their palms. And
awakened by those sounds, birds on boughs and in cages
worthy of the royal race, uttered notes. And the sacred
words uttered (by these), the notes of Vinds, and the
valedictory songs of singers filled that mansion. And as
on former occasions, men practising purity and well up
in serving, with numerous women and eunuchs entered
@ppearance. Persons acquainted with the ceremonials con-
nected with bath, according to the ordinance and in due
time, in golden vessels brought water impregnated with


374 RAMAYANA.


sandal powder, Pure females together with many virging’
brought kine &c, which were to be touched, Ganges water
for sipping,{ mirrors, cloths,; ornaments and other articles.
All the things that were procured (for presentation unto the
monarch) were worshipped in accordance with prescription,
were furnished with auspicious marks, and were of excellent
virtues and possessed of auspiciousness. As long as the sun
did not rise, all these people remained expecting the presence
ofthe king; but then they were alarmed as to what had
occurred,

Those ladies that were beside the bed of king Dagaratha
were consoling their husband. And engaged in tending
the monarch with mild and pliant words, those females
knowing the condition of sleep, feeling him as he lay in his
bed, did not perceive any action in the ever-moving pulse,
Thereupon apprehensive for the king’s life, they began to
tremble like a blade of grass on a torrent. Filled with doubts
at sight of the king, the ladies at last concluded that what
had heen apprehended (by the monarch) had certainly taken
place. Overcome by grief for their sons, Sumitri and
Kaugalyd were sleeping as if they were dead, and had not
yet awaked. Deprived of lustre, pallid, stricken by sorrow,
and lying with her’ limbs contracted, Kaugaly& looked
like a star enveloped in darkness. And after Kaugaly&, the
king, and alter bim, Sumitra; and with her countenance
faded from grief, this noble lady did not look particularly
lovely. Finding these two ladies asleep and the king
seeming as if sleeping, the inmates of the inner apartment
showed themselves as if their lives had departed out of
them, Thereupon exceedingly distressed, those paragons
of their sex, like she-elephants in the forest deprived of their
leader of the herd, broke out into wailing. At the sounds
of their lamentations, both Kaugalya and Sumitra suddenly
regaining consciousness, awoke from their sleep. And
Kaugaly& and Sumitsa Jooking at the king and feeling him,


AV ODHVAKANDAMM. 375


fell down to the earth, exclaiming, “Ah lord.” As the
daughter of Kogala’s lord rolled on the ground, she covered
with dust did not appear in all her loveliness, like a star fallen
from the sky to the earth below. And when the king had
departed this life, the women saw Kaugalya fallen on the
earth like the slain mate of an elephant. Then all the wives
of the monarch headed by Kaikeyi, burning with grief and
weeping, were well nigh rendered senseless. And the loud
sounds emitted by these, mingling with those (who had been
lamenting before them), attained greater proportions and
filled the hall, And the mansion of the king became filled
with people exceedingly excited and frightened, eager to
know all about the matter,—became [filled with lamentations,
with friends afflicted with distress, ils joy instantaneously
vanished—a scene of distress aud dole. Knowing that the
lord of earth had departed, his wives surrounding that
illustrious one, smitten with excess of sorrow and weeping
bitterly and piteously, holding the king’s hands indulged in
lamentations, like forlorn ones.


SECTION Lxvin,


Seeixe the king had ascended heaven, like unto a fire
that has cooled, or an ocean deprived of its waters, or the
sun shorn of his splendour, Kaugaly’ afflicted with woe,
taking on her lap the head of the king, with tears in her
eyes, said, "O Kaikeyi, attain thou thy wishes: do thou
enjoy this kingdom rid of thy thorn. O cruel one, O thon
of wicked ways, thou that forsaking the king had set thy
heart (on having thy son crowned), Rima had gone away,
forsaking me; and now my lord has ascended heaven. FE can
no longer bear to live, like one left lone in a wilderness by
her companions. What other woman except Kaikeyi lost


376 RAMAPANA,


to righteousness, having lost her deity, her lord, wishes
to carry on existence in another’s kingdom? As a covetuous
person taking poison (through anger or some other passion),
does not consider himself guilty, (so Kaikeyi) having done
this evil through Manthar&'s incitement, does not bring her
guilt home to her mind. It is through the instrumentality of
the hump-backed woman that this race of the Raghavas has
been destroyed by Kaikeyi. Hcaring that the king being
made to do an unrighteous action, has banished Rama
together with his wife, king Janaka will be filled with grief
as [have been. That virtuous one does not know that to-day
I have become helpless and been widowed. Rama of eyes
resembling totus-petals has living been removed from
my sight. The fair daughter of Videha's king unworthy of
hardship, in ascetic guise is leading a life of trouble and
terror in the woods. Hearing at night the dreadful roars
of birds and beasts crying, she exceedingly frightened takes
shelter with Raghava, Old and having an only daughter,
he revolving in his mind thoughts of Vaidehi, shall, smitten
with grief, surely renounce his life. I ever faithful to my
lord will die this very day, embracing this body ; I will enter
fire.’ As embracing the (dead) body, that unfortunate
lady was bewailing, the courtiers had the distressed (queen)
removed from there. Then placing the corpse of the king
in a (capacious) pan with oil, the courtiers performed the
mourning rites of the monarch. But well versed in every
thing, the counsellors, in the absence of his son, did not
perform the funeral obsequies of the king; and therefore
they placed his body stretched inthe pan of oil, Alas!
at length concluding it for certain that the king was
dead, the ladies burst out into lamentations. And raising
their arms, with tears trickling dowa their faces, they in
dire affliction and extremely exercised with grief, lamented,
“Q monatch, why do you forsake us, who have been already
deprived of Rama ever speaking fair and firm in promise ?


AYODHVAKANDAMN. 377


Renounced by Rama, how shall we, rendered widows, stay
with the wicked Kaikeyi, co-wile with us¢ That one of free
soul is our master, as he is the lord of yourself. Rama has
gone tothe woods, forsaking regal dignity. Deprived of
you as well as that hero, and overwhelmed with misfortune,
how shall we live reprimanded by Kaikeyi? She that has
renounced the king, Rima, and Lakshmana along with Sita—
whom can such a one not renounce?" Thus with tears in
their eyes, the wives of that descendant of Raghu, joyless
and convulsed with a huge passion, displayed signs of sorrow.
Like a night without stars, like a fair one forsaken by her
husband, the city of Ayodh& without the magnanimous
monarch did not appesr delightful as it had done before,
with the populace filled with tears, the ladies uttering excla-
mations of distress, and the terraces and courts deserted,
On the lord of men having ascended heaven from grief, and
the wives of the king remaining on the earth, the sun, bis
journey done, set, and the night began her course. The
idea of consuming the king’s corpse in the absence of his
son did not recommend itself to the assembled adherents
(of the departed). Thinking this, they in that way laid the
king endowed with an inconceivably dignified presence. And
with her terraces overflowing with tears that flooded the
throats ofthe mourners, the city appeared like the welkin
without its splendour in the absence of the sun, or the night
with the stars enveloped. And on the demise of that illus-
trious personage, in the city men and women in multitudes,
censuring Bharata’s mother, became extremely distressed,
and did not attain peace of mind.


48


378 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LXVII.


Ar length the weary night in Ayodhy& rendered cheer-
less by lamentations, and populous with men with voice
choked with tears, was spent. And when the night bad
departed and the sun had arisen, those officers of the royal
house-hlod belonging tothe twice-born order, Markandeya,
Maudgalya, Vamadeva, K&cyapa, K&ty&yana, Gautama, and
the highly famous Javali, assembled together along with the
counsellors, spoke each on different topics. Then facing the
royal priest, the eminent Vasistha, they said, “That night that
had appeared like unto an hundred years has at fast been
painfully passed. The king racked by sorrow for his son
having breathed his last, the mighty monarch has ascended
heaven, Rama has taken refuge in the woods, the energetic
Lakshmana has gone with Rama, and both Bharata and
Satrughna—repressors of foes—are staying in Kekaya in
pleasant Rajagriha, the abode of their maternal grandfather.
Do you select sume on this very day from the descendants of
Ikshwaku, to be king here, Verily doth a kingdom go to ruin,
when without a king. He that goes garlanded with lightning
and has a mighty voice, even the cloud—doth not with skyey
shower drench the Eirth in a kingdom without a king. Ina
kingless kingdom no one sows corn. Ina kingless kingdom
the son does not obey his sire, or the wife her husband. A
kingless kingdom possesses no wealth, and wives are hard to
keep in sucha place. This great fear attends a kingless
country, And where is other morality (besides that detailed
above) to be found at such a place ¢ In a kingless country men
do not form themselves into associations, nor do they, inspired
with cheerfulness, make elegant gardens or sacred edifices.
Ina kingless country, the twice-born ones do not celebrate
sacrifices. In a kingless country, in mighty sacrifices wealthy
Brahmanas do not confer (on the officiating priests) the


4 PODHVARANDAM. 379.


dakshinas (which they receive according to the ordinance).
In a kingless country, neither social gatherings, nor festivities
characterised by the presence of merry theatrical managers
and performers, increase. In a kingless country disputants
cannot decide their point; nor are persons given to hearing
Purnic recitations pleased by those delighting in the
practice. In a kingless country, bevies of virgins decked in
gold do not repair to gardens for purposes of sport. Ina
kingless country, the wealthy are not well protected; nor do
shepherds and cultivators sleep with their doors open, Ina
kingless country pleaasure-seeking people do not in company
with females go to the woods by means of swift vehicles.
In a kingless country long-tusked elephants sixty years
old, bearing bells on their necks, do not walk the high-
way. In a kingless country one hears not the clappings
of persons engaged in shooting arrows constantly. In
a kingless country traders coming from distant lands,
loaded with various kinds of merchandise, do not with
safety go along the roads. Ina kingless country the ascetic
with his subdued senses, himself his sole protector, who
makes his quarters wherever evening overtakes him, cannot
walk contemplating the Deity. In a kingless country, one
cannot protect what one has, or procure what one has not.
In a kingless country, the forces cannot bear the onslaught
of the foe. In a kingless country men cannot at will
go on excellent and high-mettled horses and ornamented
cars. Ina kingless country persons well versed in learning
can not engage in controversy,repairing to woods and groves.
In a kingless country, persons with intent hearts do not
offer garlands, sweets and dakshinds, for worshipping the
gods. In akingless country, princes smeared with sandal
and aguru, do not look graceful like trees in spring. Even as
a river without water, a wood without grass, a herd of kine
without a keeper, is a kingdom without a king. The sign
of acaris its pennon, of fire is smoke, and our banner


380 RAMAYANA.


the king, has gone to heaven. In a kingless country a person
hardly preserves his life; and like fishes people eat up one
another. Even those heretics who having disregarded the
dignity of social morality had met with chastisement at the
hands of the king, their fear removed—give themselves airs.
As the sight is engaged in the welfare of the body, the king—
that fountain of truth and religion—is engaged in compassing
the good of the kingdom. The king is truth, the king is
morality, the king is the racial dignity of those possessed of
the same, the king is the father, the king is the mother—the
king compasseth the welfare of men. By virtue of magnani+
mity of character, a king surpasses Yama and Vaigravana and
Sakra and Varuna endowed with mighty strength. If there
were nota king in this world to adjudge fair and foul,
darkness would overspread (the face of the earth) and people
could not distinguish anything whatever. As the ocean
keepeth within its continent, we even while the monarch
lived, did not disregard your words. Do you, O best of
Brahmanas, beholding our acts rendered nugatory, and this
empire become a wilderness for want of a king, install that
descendant of Ikshwaku or any other as king of this realm.”


SECTION -Lxvin.


Hearne their words, Vasishtha said unto the Brahmanas
and the adherents and counsellors (of the king), ‘Bharata, on
whom the king bas conferred the kingdom, along with his
brother Sateughna, is living happily in the house of his
maternal uncle. Let envoys by means of fleet coursers
speedily repair thither and bring those heroic brothers. What
shall we decide ?” “Let them go”—said all unto Vasishtha.
Hearing their words, Vasishtha spake unto them, saying,


AYODHYARANDAM. 38r


“Come here, thou Siddhartha, and Vijaya, and Jaynta,
and Agokanandana. Do ye hear. I will tell you what ye
are to do. First going speedily to the royal residence by
means of swift horses, do you, renouncing grief, by my order
speak these words of mine unto Bharata, ‘The priest as well
as the counsellors have equired after your welfare. Do you
at once set out. A business is at hand that brooketh no
delay on your part.’ But ye must on no account commu:
nicate unto him the exile of Rima, or the demise of the
monarch, or the destruction that hath befallen the Raghu race
through this occasion. Do ye, speedily taking silk apparel
and excellent ornaments for king Bharata, set off.” There-
upon, having been furnished with the necessaries for the
journey, they bound for Kekaya went to theic respective
abodes, mounted on goodly horses. Then having supplied
themselves with the necessaries of the journey, the envoys in
consonance with Vasistha’s injunction, speedily went away.
Having proceeded by the west of Aparatala, they in the middle
crossed the Malini, and went towards the north of Pralamva.
Then crossing the Ganga at Hastinapura and arriving at
Panchala, they proceeded westward through Kurujangala,
And beholding watery expanses filled with blown blossoms,
and rivers containing pellucid waters, the envoys proceeded
apace on account of the errand they had on hand. And
they darted past the Saradanda overflowing with delightful
water, beautiful, and haunted by fouls of various kinds.
Then on the western bank of the stream, coming upon a
tree called Satyapayachana presided by deity, and bowing
down unto the tree and going round it, they entered the
city of Kulinga. And having passed Teyobibhabana and


arrived at Abhikdla, they crossed the sacred stream
Ikshumati belonging to the Ikshwakus for generations.


Beholding here Brihmanas versed in the Vedas drinking
water with their joined hands, they went through Vabllika
towards the mount Sud&m&n. There seeing the foot-print


382 RAMAFANA.


of Vishnu, they, desirous of doing the bidding of their
master, proceeded a long way, viewing the Vipfig& and the
Salmali and rivers and tanks and pools and ponds and sheets
of water and various kinds of lions and tigers and deer
and elephants. and with their vehicles fatigued, the ambas-
sadors, on account of the great distance of the way, speedily
reached that best of cities, Girivraja. And for pleasing
their master, for the preservation of the people, and enabling
Bharata to assume the reins of Government, those envoys,
casting aside negligence, swiftly entered the city in the night.


SECTION LUxix.


Tae very same night that the envoys entered the city,
Bharata saw an evil dream. And seeing that evil dream
during the short hours, the son of that king of kings exceed.
ingly burned in grief. And finding him aggrieved, his sweet.
speeched associates, endeavouring to chase the heaviness,
began to converse ona variety of subjects. Some played
on instruments; some for the purpose of pacilying his mind,
danced (the courtezans); others performed scenes variously
fraught with the sentiment of mirth. But although his
friends intending to allay his agitation set about enacting
passages calculated to amuse family circles, that magnani-
mous descendant of Raghu did not indulge in laughter.
Then a dear friend addressed Bharata, as he sat surrounded
by his friends, “Surrounded by your friends, why do you not,
my friend, join in the mirth 7’ Thus asked by his friend,
Bharata answered, “Listen why this depression has overtaken
me. In a dream I beheld my father, pale, with his hair loosely
flowing about, plunging from the summit of a mountain
into a dirty pool filled with cow-dung. And 1 saw him


ALODHYAKANDAM. 383


floating on a sink of cow-dung, and yet with a momentary
laugh drinking oil by means of his joined hands. Then
feeding on rice mixed with sessame, he again and again
banging his head down, dives into oi! with his limbs rubbed
with oil, And in my dream I saw the ocean dried up, and
the moon fallen on the earth, and the earth as if invaded
by enfolding darkness, and the tusk of the elephant on which
the monarch rides falling in fragments, and flaming fire
suddenly extinguished, and the earth rent, and the trees
withered, and all the mountains belching smoke. And
1 saw the king seated on a sable seat of iron, clad in a sable
garb; and women black and yellow beating him. And
bearing a garland of red flowers, with his body daubed with
red sandal, he was fast proceeding to the south in a car
yoked with asses. And women clad in red garment were
laughing at him, and a grim-visaged Rakshasa was seen by
me as dragging him. This was the dream that I saw this
terrible night. Either 1, or Rima, or the king, or Lakshmana
is to breathe our last. The smoke of the funeral pyre of
him will be shortly visible that goes in the car yoked with
asses. It is for this reason that I am poor of spirit, and
that I do not respond to your words. Further, my throat
is parched, and my mind ill at ease. * Ground of fear find I
none, yet am I subject to fear. My voice is untuned, and
my grace fled, and I begin to despise my life, nor know I the
reason why. Bringing to miod this various-looking dream
which I had not thought of before, and remembering the
king of incomprehensible presence, this fear goeth not from
my heart.”


384 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LXx.


Buarata was speaking thus when the envoys with their
vehicles fatigued, entered the splendid royal residence sur-
rounded by a strong rampart. Presenting themselves before
the king, they, well received by him as well as the prince,
bowed down unto the feet of the monarch. Then they
addressed Bharata, saying,—“The priest and the counsellors
have enquired after your welfare. Do you set out speedily.

. Abusiness is on hand that brooketh no delay on your part.
And, O you of expansive eyes, do you take these costly
raiments and ornaments, and present them unto your mater~
nal uncle and grand-father. Twenty Kotis are intended for
the king and complete ten for your meternal uncle, O son
of the monarch.” Taking all these, Bharata attached to his
relatives, made the articles over unto them ; and receiving
the envoys with goodly gifts, spoke unto them, “Is my
father, king Dagaratha, welly And is it well with Rama
andthe high-souled Lakshmana? And is the mother of
the intelligent Rama, the revered Kaugaly’, conversant
with virtue and ever practising it, well? Is the virtuous
Sumitra—mother of Lakshmana and of the heroic
Satrughna—well? And that wrathful one ever intent
on her interest and setting immense store by her wisdom,
my mother Kaikeyi—is it also well with her?” Thus
addressed by the magnanimous Bharata, the envoys spoke
unto him these humble and brief words, “Those of
whose welfare you are enquiring after, are, O foremost of
men, alt well. Sree seated on the lotus asks for you.
Let your car be yoked,” Thus addressed, Bharata said unto
the envoys, “Let me tell the king that the envoys, are urging
speed on me.” Having said this, that son of the king,
Bharata, communicated unto his maternal grand-father what
the envoys had told him. “Asked by the envoys, ! shall, O


AlODHFAKANDAM. 385


monarch, go to my father. I shall come again whenever
you will remember me.” Thus accosted by Bharata, his
materoal grand-father, the king, smelling Bharat’s head,
spoke these auspicious words unto that descendant of
Raghu, “Go, my child; I permit thee. Kaikeyi is mother
ofa worthy son through thee. Do thou, O subduer of foes,
communicate our welfare unto both thy father and thy
mother. Do thou likewise communicate the same unto the
priest and the other principal Brahmanas ; as also, my child,
unto ‘those mighty bowmen, the brothers Rama and Laksh-
mana.” Then honoring Bharata, king Kekaya conferred
on Bharata wealth consisting of choice elephants maiu-
tained (at the place) and woolen sheets and deerskins.
And the king presented him with dogs brought up in
the inner apartment, resembling tigers in strength and
prowess, furnished with teeth representing weapons, and
large of body. And honouring the son of Kaikeyi, Kekaya
gave him two thousand xishtas and six hundred horses.
And for following Bharata, Agwapati without delay
assigned a number of goodly, trustworthy, and qualified
courtiers. And Bharata’s maternal uncle conferred on
Bharata wealth in the shape of graceful elephants sprung
in the Iravat mountain and the country called Indragir& ; as
well as fleet and well-broken horses. But owing to the
hurry of his departure, Bharata the son of Kaikeyi did not
appear to be so very much gratified with the gifts. Owing to
bis having seen the dream and the post haste speed of the
envoys, a mighty anxiety was present in his heart. Then
issuing from his abode, that one possessed of exceeding grace
passed the goodly thoroughfare thronged with men, horses,
and elephants. Having left it behind, Bharata saw (before
him) the inner apartment (of the king); and thereupon the
handsome Bharata entered it without let, Then alter
speaking with his maternal grandfather and uncle, Yudhajit,
Bharata ascending acar, set out with Satrughna. Thereat


49


386 - RAMAYANA.


servants by means of an hundred cars, furnished with
circular wheels, and yoked with camels, oxen, horses, and
asses, followed Bharata. Protected by the forces andthe
courtiers of his maternal grandfather dear unto him like
his ownself, the magnanimous Bharata who had his foes
removed, taking with him his brother, Satrughna, departed
from the abode (of the king), like a Siddha issuing from
the regions of Indra.


SECTION LXXE.


Assuing from the place, the blazing Bharata endowed
with prowess went in an easterly direction, and seeing before
him the river called Sudima, crossed it. Then the auspicious
descendant of Ikshw&ku crossed the broad Hr&dini coursing
westwards, as also the river Satadru. Then crossing a river
at Eladhana,* and coming to Aparaparvata,t he crossed the
Silat and the Akurvati, and arrived at Agneya§ and Salyakar-
shanam. And having purified himself and seen Sil&vahal,
that one of truthful purposes passed the Mab&gailas,J and
entered the forest of Chaitraratha. Then coming upon the
confluence of the Gang& and Saraswati, Bharata entered the
forest of Varunda lying to the north** of Virdmatsya. Next

* Some read Eladhani—r.

+ Some read Apharaparyat&.

$ The river, according to some, isso named because it transforms the
surrounding objects to stone.—T,,

$ Some make egneya an epithet to Salyakarshana, meaning, relating to
the pouth-east.—-T,

I According to Tirtha, Silavaba is a stream having Agneya on one side
and Salyakarshana on the other.—T

{ Lit, mighty mountains.—T.

** Uttaram, iit. north. Some texts read uétavan. It would mean countries
lying to the north of Viramatsya.—T.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 387


crossing the rapid river Kuling& and the Hradini surrounded
by hills, as well asthe Yamun&, he ordered the forces to
halt. Then cooling the limbs of the fatigued horses (with
water) and refreshing them, Bharata himself bathed there and
drank of the water; and then resumed the march, furnished
with the water. Then the gentle prince by means of an
excellent car, like unto the wind-god himself, entered the
mighty forest inhabited by various races of men. Seeing
that the mighty river Gang4 was hard to cross at Angudhana,
Bharata speedily went to the famous city of Pragvata. And
having crossed the Gang’ at Pragvata, he went over to the
Kutikoshtiké. Having with his forces crossed that river,
he proceeded to Dharmavarddhana. Then proceeding by
the south of orana, he came to Jamvuprastha. Then
Dagaratha’s son went to the beautiful village of Varutha,
Having for a while stayed at that romantic wood, he praceed-
ed eastwards, and presented himself at the villa of
Ujjihfyana, where abound trees (called) Priyaka, Coming to
the Priyakas, Bharata speedily yoking the horses, set out
without delay, issuing his orders to the forces. Then sojourn-
ing at Sarvatirtha and crossing the river there flowing north-
wards as well as others abounding in various kinds of
mountainous horses, Bharata arrived at Hastiprishthuka,
And at Lohitya that foremost of men crossed the Kapivati,
at Ekasala, the Sthanumati, and at Vinaya, the Gomati. And
Bharata arriving at a forest of S&la trees in the city of
Kalinga, speedily passed it with his forces way-worn. And
having passed the forest swiftly over night, he at sunrise
saw Ayodhy& built by king Manu. Having spent seven
nights on the journey, that chief of men beheld Ayodhya
before him and thus addressed the charioteer, "O charioteer,
from the distance Ayodhy& seemeth like a mass of black
earth, albeit she boasts of sacrificial priests crowned with every
virtue, Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and opulent people,
and albeit she is maintained by Rajarshis. Formerly one could


388 RAMAFANA.


hear a great and mighty tumult all round Ayodhya proceeding
from men and women ; but I do not hear this to-day. The
gardens wherefrom persuns having sported in the evening
used to rush out (at day break) wear a different aspect now.
Forsaken by the pleasure-seckers the gardens appear to
weep. And, O chariotecr, the city appears to me likea
wilderness, And Ido not as formerly behold the flower of
the city leaving or entering her on cars or elephants or
horses. Gurdens which, frequented by people inebriated
with the honey of love, met together for purposes of sport,
looked charmingly blooming. I find as utterly void of cheer
fulness, wilh the trees as if lamenting with tremulous leaves.
Still do I not hear the inarticulate though sweet and delicious
voice of beasts and birds crying in chorus.* Why, as before,
doth not the blamelesst and bland wind blow mixed with the
perfume of sandal and faint with dhwpa ? And why, again,
have the sounds of Vinas and Mridangas developed by beating
sticks, which continually flew in a never-ceasing vigorous
course, ceased to-day ? And I witness various evil, unsightly,
and unpleasant} omens, and hence my mind is depressed. O
charioteer, complete good fortune with my friends is hardly
to be realised. But although no apparent cause exists for
my depression of spirits, yet my heart droopeth,” Then
Bharata depressed and cast down and with his senses afficted,
speedily entered the city ruled by Ikshwaku. And Bharata
having his vehicles fatigued, entered by the Vaijayantag gate,
and went on, followed by the gate keepers, who enquired after
his welfare. Then courteously telling the warders to desist,
he with an agitated heart spoke unto the tired charioteer


* Some texts read mukus—momentarily.

+ Some texts read atu/a in place of emala,—incomparable.

$ The commentator renders amoguani, inauspicious. I venture to differ
from him.—7.

$ Vaijayantena. Another meaning is, By the gate resembling that of Indra's
palace.~ 7.


APODHVARANDAM. 389


of Agwapati, “O sinless one, why have I been brought
in this haste without any (adequate) reason? My heart
apprehendeth some evil; and my disposition gives way. O
charioteer, I see around me all those signs which I had heard
told as occuring on the occasion of the deaths of monarchs.
I behold the houses of the citizens unswept and unsightly
with the doors flung open,—and destitute of grace, without
sacrifices and other religious ceremonies, without the incense
of dhupa, the citizens fasting, and the people appearing with
faded countenances, displaying no flags, etc. The abodes
of the deities are not decorated with garlands, and their
courts are unclean ; and remaining vacant, they look no longer
beautiful as formerly, And the images are not worshipped;
and the places of sacrifice are in a like condition, And
garlands are not displayed in the shops where they are sold.
And traders looking anxious, with their business stopped,
do not look as before. And in temples and Chaityas birds
and beasts appear dispirited. And in the city I behold men
and women pale and woe-begone and emaciated and anxious,
with tears filling their eyes.” Having said this unto the
charioteer, Bharata, beholding these inauspicious sights,
entered the palace of the king with a depressed heart.
Beholding the city resembling the city of Indra, with her
crossings and houses aud roads void of peuple, and the
doors and hinges covered with dust, Bharata was filled with
greater grief. And witnessing many unpleasant things
which he had never seen during the life of the monarch, that
high-souled one entered the mansion of his father, bending
his head, depressed in spirits, and with his mind extremely
aggrieved.


399 RAMAFPANS.


SECTION LXxn.


Nor having seen his father in his father’s quarters,*
Bharata went to his mother’s apartment for seeing her. On
seeing her son before ber after his sojourn from home,
Kaikeyi delighted, rose up from her golden seat. On entering
his own quarter which he found deprived of grace, the virtuous
Bharata took hold of his mother’s auspicious feet. Then
smelling the crown of his head and embracing him and taking
that illustrious one on her lap, Kaikeyi addressed him,
saying, “How many days hence did you leave the residence
of the revered one? Hast thou felt any fatigue on the way
incident to the car proceeding swiftly ¢ And is the revered
one well, and thy maternaj uncle, Yudhajit? And, my son,
hast thou passed thy time pleasantly during thy sojourn ?
It behoves thee to tell me all this.” Thus asked, that son of
the king, Bharata, furnished with eyes resembling lotuses,
told his mother that all was well. “Seven nights hence I
took leave of that revered one’s residence. My mother's sire
is well, as also my maternal uncle, Yudhajit. My vehicles
had got tired in consequence of bearing the wealth and
jewels which that subduer of foes, the king, had bestowed on
me. And it is for this reason that 1 have come in advance
of them. Urged by the royal emissaries, J have come here
so swiftly. Butit behoves my mother to tell me what |
wish to ask. This sleeping bedstead of yours adorned with
gold is empty. [do not see the race of Ikshw&ku in their
usual good spirits. The king generally remains in this apart-
ment of my mother. But coming here with the desire of


© ‘The text is evidently corrupt. From the sequel it appears that Bharata had
fot seen the king at that time. The commentator, however, passes over the
point in silence, which is to be accounted for by the slovenliness of the way
of thought chrracterizing the Sanskrit commentators in general, Ao English
commentator would have considered the matter as of very great importance,
but bia Hindu brother takes it quietly, and pass on with indifference.—T,


AYODHYAKANDAM. gt


secing him, 1 do not to-day find him at this place. I would
take the feet of my father. Do youtell me who ask you.
Is he inthe apartment of my eldest mother, Kaugaly&;”
Blinded by the lust of dominion, and looking upon that as
desirable (unto Bharata) which was exceedingly disagreeable
{to him), Kaikeyi replied unto him, who did not know what
had transpired, “That high-souled and energetic one ever
engaged in sacrifice—the refuge of the good—thy father, the
king, has come by the state which pertains to all creatures.”
Hearing these words, Bharata of pure ways sprung from a
tighteous race, smit with the vehemence of sorrow on account
of his father, suddenly fell down to the earth. And exclaiming
in the anguish of spirit and in the excess of grief, the words,
“Ah me! I am undone!” that mighty-armed one endowed with
prowess, fell down, tossing about his arms. Then, overwhelm-
ed with sorrow and distressed at the death of his father,
that bighly energetic one, with his senses distracted, indulged
in lamentations, “This bed of my father used to look like
the speckless welkin at night crowned with the moon, after
the clouds have gone off. Bnt to-day, deprived of that
intelligent one, it ceases to shine, like the firmament without
the moon or the sea devoid of its waters.” Exclaiming
with tears trickling down, that foremost of victorious ones,
extremely. afflicted at heart, wept, muffling his graceful
countenance. Seeing that one resembling a celestial fallen
to the earth, striken with sorrow, like unto a bough of the
Sala that had been severed in the wood by an axe, his
mother raising up his distressed son like a mad elephant or
the sun or the moon, addressed him, ‘‘Arise, arise. Why dost
thou lie down, O illustrious son of the king 7 Persons like
(hee having their senses under perfect control, and approved
by men of culture, do not grieve. O thou endowed with
understanding, like the halo of the Sun in the solar disc,
thy sense, entitled to dispensing gifts and celebrating
Sacrifices, ever fuliows morals, the Sruti, and asceticism.”


392 KAmArawa.


Having wept for along while with his body rolling on the
earth, Bharata afflicted with manifold grief, answered his
mother, saying, ‘ ‘The king will iustall Rama and celebrate a
sacrifice’ concluding this for certain, I had joyfully gone from
hence. But it has fallen out otherwise. That [ do not behold
my father ever engaged in the dear wellare (of his subjects)
cleaves my heart, mother. Of what ailment bath the king
breathed his last during my absence? Blessed are Rama
and others who have personally performed my sire’s last rites
Surely the ‘renowned monarch doth uot know that I have
come. (If he had done so), pressing down my head, my
father would at once have smelt it. Where is now the
soft hand of that energetic one which used to rub my person
when it was covered with dust? Do you now without
delay convey the oews of my arrival unto the vigorous
Rama, who is at once my father, brother and friend, and
whose beloved servantIam. The eldest brother of one that
is noble and cognisant of morality, becomes his father,
Ishall take hold of bis fect: he is now my refuge. And, O
noble lady, what did that virtuous one cognizant of yirtue,
that pre-eminently pious one, firm in his vow, and having
truth for prowess—even my father, say? I wish to hear news
concerning us relative to the last moments of the monarch.”
Thus asked, Kaikeyi related all as it had happened, saying,
“Bewailing ‘Ah Rama!’ ‘Ab Sit4!’ ‘Ah Lakshmana!’ that
magnanimous one, the foremost of those that have attained
to excellent state (after death), has gone to the next world
coming under the law of time. ‘hy father like a mighty
elephant fast bound with a cord, said unto me these words
during his last moments,—'Blessed ure they that shall see
Rama and the mighty-armed Lakshmana returned: along with
Siw?” Hearing this, Bharata apprehending a second mis-
fortune was deeply moved ; aud with a sad countenaace, he
again asked his mother, “Where hath gone that righteous-
souled one, the enchancer of Kaugalya's joy, along with


ALODHYAKANDAM. 393


Lakshmana and Sita ?”? Thus questioned, his mother at the
same time duly said in words which although highly unwel-
come, she took as agreeable to Bharata,“O son, that son of the
king wearing bark has repaired to the forest of Dandaka,
along with Vaidehi and followed by Lakshmana.” Hearing
this, Bharata apprehending some moral lapse on the part of
his brother from the dignity of his race, asked in agitation,
“Has R&ma deprived any Brahmana of his wealth? Or has
he wronged any innocent person, whether rich or poor ?
Has the fancy of the prince gone after the wife of another ?
For what reason hath brother Rf&ma been banished ?”
Thereat his volatile mother, influenced by her feminine
nature, related faithfully unto him her own doings. Thus
asked by the magnanimous Bharata, Kaikeyi vainly pluming
herself on her wisdom, joyfully said, “Rama has deprived no
Brahmana of his property, nor bath any innocent person
rich or otherwise been wronged by him,—nor doth he ever
with his eyes look at the wife of another. Q son, as soon as
I heard of Ra&ma’s (coming) installation, I asked for the
kingdom to be conferred on thee, and Rama to be banished.
Thereupon, he, staying by his promise, did accordingly :
Rama hath been banished along with Sumitra’s son and Sita.
Not seeing his beloved son, the illustrious lord of earth,
stricken by grief on his account, has breathed his last. Do
thou now, U thou cognizant of duty, take charge of the
kingdom. 1 have done all this in thy interests. Do not
give way to sorrow. O son, assume patience. This city is
subject to thee, as well as this peaceful kingdom. Having
with the help of the principal Brahmanas headed by
Vasishtha, duly performed the funeral obsequies of the king,
do thou, without suffering thy energy to depart, install thyself
in the kingdom.”


50


394 Rauadrana,


SECTION txxin.


.EARING of his father's death and the exile of his
brothers, Bharata burning in grief, said these words, “Depriv-
ed of my father as well as my brother like unto a father,
what shall I bewailing them and undone by thee do with the
kingdom ¢ Thou, like one throwing alkali on a sore, hast,
by bringing about the death of the king and making Rama
an ascetic, heaped grief on grief. Thou hast come like
the fatal night for the destruction of this race. Not under-
standing it, my father embraced live coal. O thou that hast
thy gaze fixed on sin, it is through thee that my sovereign
has come by death ; and that, O stainer of the line, this race
has by thy infatuation been deprived of its happiness, Hav-
ing got thee, my illustrious sire intent upon truth, king
Dagaratha, afflicted by extreme sorrow, has departed this
life. Why hath the king. my father, ever Joving virtue, been
deprived of life Why hath Rama been banished ; and
wherefore hath he gone to the woods ? Afflicted with grief
for their son, even if Kaugaly& and Sumitra live, it will be
hard for them to do so in the presence of thee, my mother.
Surely the noble and virtuous Rama, well knowing his duties
towards his superiors, regards thee as highly as he doth his
own mother. In the same way, my eldest mother, the
far-sighted Kaugalyé, doing her duties by thee, bears
Nerself like a sister. Why, © sinful one, having sent
to the woods her magnanimous son, clad in bark, dost
thoa not grieve? Having exiled the famous and heroic
Rama seeing no sin, clad in bark, what benefit dost
thou perceive as thine? I deem that thou didst not know
how very highly I regarded Raghava; and therefore it is
that thou hast brought this mighty calamity. Not seeing
those chiefs of men, Rama and Lakshmana, by virtue of
whose energy can | venture to rule the kingdom? The


AYODHY3sKANDAM. 395


monarch was ever protected by that powerful one possessed
of mighty energy, as Meru is protected by its forest. Like a
calf burdened with a load capable of being burne by a mighty
ox, by what energy shall [ bear this burthen which was
borne by an exceedingly strong person? And even if this
strength be mine through yoga or vigor of intellect, I will
not crown with success the hopes of thee, proud of thy son,
Nor, had Rama not always regarded thee as his mother,
would I hesitate to renounce thee, whose heart hath been
seton sin. O thou that viewest unrighteousness, O thou
that hast fallen off from the way of the good, how could
such thoughts unworthy of our line, arise in thy mind? In
this race, the eldest brother of all is installed in the kingdom;
the other brothers remain under him. O fell one, thou dost
not, I think, know the morality of kings, or the consequence
that attends its faithful observance. Of all the princes, the
eldest is always installed as the king. Even this is the accept-
ed principle of all sovereigns—specially the descendants of
Ikshwiku. But to-day the pride of character of those whose
virtue was their sole concern,* and who shone in the
character of their line, has been humbled through thy
instrumentality. And how, O highly exglted lady, O thou that
wast born in a royal race, could such reprehensible fatuity
take possession of thy senses? But, O thou bent upon sin, I
will by no means fulfil the wish of thee by whom hath been
brought in the first instance this calamity calculated to end
my existence, Further, O sinful one, I will do this at present
to displease thee: I will bring from the forest my brother
dear unto his relatives. And having brought back Rama, I
will in a perfectly contented spirit, become the slave of that
one of flaming energy.” ‘The high-souled Bharata afflicted
(his mother) with multitudes of words causing pain; and
distressed with grief, emitted sounds like unto a lion in the
cave of Mandara.


* Another interpretation is ;—Wahose viriue is their sole pagtector.—T.


3y6 RAMA ANA.


SECTION LxXxiyv,


Havine thus reproved his mother in great wrath, Bharata
said again, ‘Do thou bear thyself from this kingdom, O heart-
Jess and wicked Kaikeyi, Having been lost to righteousness,
do not thou lament me dead, What qualities of thine were
taxed by the king or the exceedingly virtuous Rama, that
both of them simultaneously have come by death and exile
respectively through thy agency? O Kaikeyi, thou hast been
guilty of homicide in consequence of the destruction of this
race. Do thou go to hell, never to the world altained by my
father; since, renouncing Rama dear unto aij, thou hast
committed this sin by thy grim act and brought me into
fear. Through thee hath my father met with his end, and
Rima hath taken refuge in the woods ; and it is through thee
that | have come to ignominy among all creatures. © thou
enemy of mine in the guise of a mother! O [ell one! O thou
that covetest the kingdom! do thou not speak to me, O
wicked wretch! O slayer of thy husband! it. is because of
thee, stainer of thy race, that Kaugalya, Sumitra, and other
mothers of mine have been overwhelmed with a mighty
sorrow. Thou art never the daughter of the pious and
intelligent Agwapati, thou art a Rakshasi born in that race,
thou that hast destroyed my father’s race, inasmuch as the
virtuous and heroic Rama ever observing truth hath been sent
to the woods and my father hath ascended heaven through
thy agency; inasmuch as thou that hast perpetrated this
arch offence, hast taid this sin on me, who have been
forsaken by my sire, renounced by my brothers, and come
by universal disfavor. O thou of sinful ways, having separ-
ated the virtuous Kaugaly& (from her son), what world, O
thou that repairest to hell, shall be thy portion? Dost thou
not, O tortuous one, know that that one sprung from
Kaugalya’s self, my eldest brother Rama, who is like a


AYODHYARANDAM. 397


father unto me, has ever been the refuge of his friends? A
son born from all the limbs of his mother, comes out from
her heart ; and therefore it is that he is far dearer unto his
mother, albeit her friends are dear to her*. Once on a time, it
is related by persons cognizant of morality, Surabhi regarded
hy the celestials, beheld two of her sons toiling on earth and
seeming to be deprived of their senses. And, when the day
had been half spent, seeing her sons fatigued on easth, she
stricken with grief for them, Legan to weep with tears
flooding her eyes, And it came to pass that as the magnani-
mous sovereign of the celestials was passing below, her, fine
and fragrant tear-drops fell on his person, Turning his eyes
up, Sakra found Surabhi stationed in the sky, distressed and
weeping in extreme anguish of spirit. Seeing that illustrious
one burning in grief, the wielder of the thunder-bolt, Indra
the lord of the celestials, waxing anxious, with joined bands
said. ‘Is there any great danger in any quarter? Do thou,
O thou that art intent on the welfare of all, say, whence is
this grief of thine ? Thus addressed by the intelligent king of
the celestials,that one well skilled in speech,the sedate Surabhi
answered. ‘Auspiciousness, O lord of celestials ! No sin is
yours, But I mourn my sons fallen into evil plight, having
seen them lean, distressed, and burnt by the rays of the sun
Valivarddhas afflicted by the wicked-minded ploughman.
Seeing those that have been born of my body, cast down and
in trouble,] grieve: there is none that is dear like unto a son.’
Sceing her the whole earth is filled with whose sons by thou-
sands, weeping, Indra understood that none is an object of
greater affection than a son. And that lord, Indra, also consi-
dered Surabhi of a person breathing a sacred odour, whose
tears had dropped on his body, as the foremost being on
earth. Even that one yielding whatever is asked, auspicious,


* Angopratyangaja : lit, born from the limbs principal and minor. The
commentator recounts the face, the breast, the abdomen, the hands and the
feet as constituting the former ; and eyes, fingers, &c, as the latter.


398 RAMAYANA.


crowned with the choicest virtues, although having all natural
functions, showing equal kindness unto all, and of unequalled
character, who maintaineth all creatures,she who hath a thou-
sand sons, grieves (for her sons). How can then Kaugalya
carry on existence without Rama? Chaste and having an only
son, that lady has through thee been separated from her son,
(ike a cow separated from her calf).For this, thou wilt always
have to suffer misery alike in this world and the next. I shall
for my part completely minister unto my brother and father ;
and shall, without doubt, increase my fame. Bringing hither
the mighty-armed lord of Kogala endowed with immense
strength, I myself will repair to the forest inhabited by asce-
tics. O thou that hast delivered thyself over to iniquity, I
looked at by the citizens with their throats oppressed with
the vapour of grief, cannot bear this (burden of) sin heaped
on me by thee. Do thou enter fire, or dive into Dandaka,
or wound a cord round thy neck: other desirable way there
is none for thee. On Rama having truth for prowess,
obtaining the earth, I, my disgrace removed, shall be blest.”
Grieving thus, Bharata, like an elephant in the forest afflicted
with a tomara or ankusa,* fell to the earth sighing like an
enraged snake. With his eyes reddened, and his cloth falling
off, and his ornaments cast away, that subduer of foes, the.
king’s son fallen on the earth, resembled a banner of Sakra
after the festival is over.


SECTION Lxxv.


Anisinc after a long while when he had regained his cons-
ciousness, Bharata endowed with prowess, regarding his
distressed mother with eyes filled with tears, began to tax her


* Names of instruments.


AYODHYAKANDAM. 399


in the midst of the courtiers : “I had never desired the king-
dom, I had never consulted my mother. Nor did I know
the installation that had been thought of by the monarch. I
was then living in a far country in company with Satrughna.
I did not know the banishment of the magnanimous Rama to
the woods, or the exile of Sumitra’s son ; nor did ] know how
Sita came to be banished.” As the high-souled Bharata was
thus wailing, Kaugalya recognizing his voice spoke unto
Sumitra, “Come is Bharata, the son of that one of crooked
ways. I am desirous of seeing the far-sighted Bharata.”
Having said this unto Sumitra, that one emaciated and with a
pallid countenance, trembling and almost deprived of sensa-
tion, went to where Bharata was. And it came to pass that
the king's son, Bharata, along with Satrughna had just then
by the way that led to the same, been proceeding to
Kaugalya’s quarter. Then Satrughna and Bharata seeing
the aggrieved Kaugalya, embraced the stricken and fallen
lady well nigh deprived of her senses. Thereupon, weeping
from grief, the noble and intelligent Kaugalya exceedingly
afflicted, embracing them as they indulged in sorrow,
said unto Bharata, “Thus hast thou, that hadst desired the
kingdom, received it rid of its thom. Alas! it has been
speedily obtained through the crooked act of Kaikeyi. What
is the good that is perceived by Kaikeyi of tortuous sight
in sending away my son clad in bark to the woods? It
behoveth Kaikeyi to send me also speedily to where is stay-
ing my illustrious son furnished with a gold-gleaming navel.
Or first performing the fire-sacrifice, I followed by Sumitra,
will myself happily seek the way by which Raghav (has
gone to the woods). Or it behoveth thee to thyself bring
me unto the place where that foremost of men, my son, is
performing austerities. This spacious kingdom abounding
in corn and wealth, and filled with elephants, horses, and
cars, is thine, having been conferred on thee (by Kaikeyi).”
Thus reproached by many a harsh word, the sipless Bharata


460 ee RAMAYANA,


felt exceeding pain like unto that produced by pricking
a sore wilh a needie. Exceedingly agitated, he fell at
Kaugaly4's feet, lamentiog much, and well nigh deprived of
his senses. Bharata then regained his consciousness, and
with joined hands answered Kaucaly& lamenting thus and
overcome with excess of sorrow, saying—"O noble lady
what for dost thou censure me who am without sin and whe
know nothing of this? Thou knowest that profuse is my
delight in Raghava. May the sense of him never follow
scripture, that had approved the exile into the woods of that
foremost of the good, the noble Rama intent on truth! May
such a person as had approved the exile unto the woods
of the noble one undergo servitude at the hands of the
sinful, answer the calls of nature facing the Sun, and kick a
sleeping cow with his feet! May he that had approved the
exile of the noble one into the woods come by the sin that is
reaped by 2 master who withholds salary from servants after
the ceremony is over! May that one that had approved the
exile of the noble Rima to the woods, be guilty of the sin
that is his that injures a sovereign engaged in ruling his
subjects like sons! May the person that had approved the
exile of the noble one to the woods, reap the sin of his that
having taken a sixth part of their incomes, does not protect
his subjects! * May he that had approved the exile of the
noble one to the woods, come by the demerit that is his that
denies dakshinds unto ascetics in a sacrifice, after having
promised them the same! May he that had approved the exile
into the woods of the noble one, never discharge the duty of
the good in the field thronged with elephants and horges and
cars, and bristling with arms! May the wicked wight that
had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods bring
to naught the subtle scriptural knowledge which has been
carefully taught him by his intelligent preceptor! May that
one that had approved the exile of the noble (R&ma) to the
woods never: behold the long-armed and broad-shouldered


4! ODHyYAKANDAM. aot


(Righava) resembling the Sun and the Moon in energy
seated :on the throne)! May that one void of aversion, that
had approved of the exile of the noble one to the woods feed
on Paydca, Krisara, and goat's flesh, which have not been
offered in sacrifice ; and may he insult his spiritual precept-
or! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one
to the woods touch a cow with his feet, revile his superiors,
and injure his’ friendst May that one of wicked soul that
had approved of the exile of the noble one into the
woods divulge any defects (of another’s character) that
have been communicated to him in strict confidence! May
he that had approved the exile of Rama to the woods,
never repay any good act, be ungrateful, abandoned by all,—
the object of universal execration! May he that had
approved of the exile into the woods of the noble one, eat
alone in his home, although surrounded by sons and wives
and servitors! May he that had approved of the exile
of the noble one, die without obtaining wives worthy of him,
without sons, without any good works performed! May he
that had approved the exile of the noble ‘one into the woods,
never see his own offspring, and not attaining ripe age, may
he mourn his wives! And may hescome by the sin that is
reaped by slaying a king, a woman, a boy, or an old man, or
by renouncing those who have claims on his maintenance |
May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the
woods always feed his family with lac, honey, meat, iron, and
poison! May that one that had approved the exile of the
noble one into the woods, while flying from the engagement
while it is waxing furious with the foe, come to be killed !
May he that had approved of the exile of the noble one into
the woods, clad in tatters with a skull in hand,like a madman
range the earth abegging! May he that had approved the
exile of the noble one into the woods, be always addicted
to wine, to women, and to dice; and may he be swayed
by lust, anger, &c! May he that had approved of the


402 RAMAYANA.


exile of that noble one into the woods, never relish virtue,
and go after unrighteousness; and may he shower his
wealth on the unworthy! May he that had approved
the exile of the noble one into the woods, have his
various accumulated riches by thousands carried off by
robbers! May he that had approved of the exile into
the woods of that noble one, come by the demerit that is
his who sleepeth during both the twilights! May he reap
the sin that is reaped by an incendiary or him that tieth
with his preceptor’s wife ; or him that wrongs his friend!
May he that had approved the exile of that noble one into the
woods, never serve the gods or the manes of the ancestors
or his father and mother! May he that had approved the
exile of that noble one into the woods, be speedily shut out
irom the world of the good, from their fame, and from their
vacts ! May he that had approved the exile of that long armed
and broad breasted one, renouncing the ministration of his
mother, turn his thoughts to evil ! May he that had approved
the exile of the noble one, becoming impoverished yet
having to support a large family, and suffering from fever,
be always miserable! May he that had approved the exile
of that noble one render fruitless the hopes of poor people
cherishing them and looking up (wistfully)! May he that had
approved the exile into the woods of the noble one remain-
ing (always) wicked, cruel and impure, leading an unrigh-
teous life and being in continual) fear of his sovereign,
maintain himself by deceit for ever andaday! May that
wicked person that had approved the exile into the woods
of the noble one disregard his chaste wife remaining near,
alter she has performed her ablutions at the end of her
season. May his that had approved the banishment into the
woods of that noble one be the sin that is incurred by a
Br&hmana that has rendered himself sonless. May that one of
befouled senses that had approved of the exile into the woods
of that noble one disturb the worship of Brahmana and


AYVODHVAKANDAM. 403


milch a cow that has a calf. May that foolish person that
had approved the exile of that noble one forsaking all plea-
sure in virtue, seek others wives, renouncing his own wedded
with sacred rites! May he that had approved the exile into
the woods of that noble one come by the sin that attaches
to a wine biber or one that administers poison to another!
May he that had approved of the exile into the woods of the
noble one bear the sin that is his that serves a thirsty soul
with deceit. May he that had approved the exile into the
woods of that noble one reap the demerit of them that from
devotion to their respective faiths wrangle from their own
points of view, as well as that of them that listen to the
disputation !” Having thus consoled Kaugaly& bereft of
her son and husband, the prince afflicted with distress fell
down. Then Kaugaly& addressed the aggrieved Bharata
(wellnigh) deprived of his senses, swearing strong oaths,
saying, “O son, it grieves me more that thou art afflicting
my heart by taking oaths. Lucky it is that graced with
auspicious marks, thou swervest not from virtue. My child,
for this reason thou wilt attain the regions of pious persons.
Saying this, Kaugalya overpowered with emotion, drawing
into her lap Bharata attached to his brother, and embracing
the mighty-armed one, gave way to “grief. And bewailing
thus, the mind of the high souled (Bharata) wrought with
sorrow, was overcome with the burden of grief, And fallen
on the ground, lamenting, senseless, with his intellect
overpowered, and momentarily heaving sighs, Bharata passed
away night in grief.


404 KAad rans.


SECTION LXXVI


AAs Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi was thus burning in grief,
that foremost of those skilled in speech, the saint Vasishtha,
endowed with excellence of language, said, "Do not weep,
good betide thee, O illustrious prince. Do thou perform the
funeral rites of the departed king.” Hearing Vasishtha’s
words, Bharata cognisant of duty, bowed down to the ground
and despatched the ministers for performing the last rites.
And raising from ‘under the oil the body of the king with a
sallow countenance, and appearing to be asleep, Bharata
placed it on the ground upon a couch in front adorned with
various gems. Then overwhelmed with grief, Dagaratha’s
son bewailed him thus, “O king, what was it that thou hadst
intended to do, | absent and away from home, by banishing
righteous Rama and the powerful Lakshmana? Whither
wendest thou, O mighty monarch, forsaking these aggrieved
people, who have already been deprived of the lion like
Rama energetic in action ? O father, thou having ascended
heaven and Rama’ having taken refuge in the woods, who
now in this city of thine shall protect what the people possess
and secure unto them ‘what they have not? Widowed in
consequence of losing thee, this earth does not Jook graceful.
The city appeareth unto me like the night deprived of the
Moon. As Bharata was lamenting thus in dejected mood,
the mighty ascetic Vasishtha again addressed him, saying, “O
mighty armed one, do thou without indulging in any reflec-
tions, perform those funeral ceremonies of the monarch
which ought to be performed.” Thereupon honoring his
words by saying, ‘So be it,” he urged speed upon all the
Ritwigas, priests, and Acharyas. And then those that
had brought the king’s corpse outside from the fire chamber,
instructed by the Ritwigas and priests according to the
ordinance began to offer oblations into the fire. Next placing


AYODHVARANDAM. 405


the king deprived of life on a car, the servants with their
throats oppressed with vapour and with their minds weighed
down with dejection carried him. And scattering gold and
silver and various kinds of cloth, on the way, people went in
front of the king. Others procuring sandal, eguru and other
resinous incenses, sarala, padmaka and devadurw, cast it
(on the earth). And drawing near the king there, Ritwigas
laid various other fragrant substances on the funeral pile.
Then offering oblations into the fire, the Ritwigas began to
recite japa ; and as laid down in the scriptures, Sima singers
chanted Simas. And by means of litters and other convey-
ances, each mounted according to her rank, the wives of the
king went out from the city, surrounded by aged men, And
Ritwigas went round the corpse of the king who performed
many sacrifices leaving it on the left side, And kindling with
grief, the females also headed by Kaugaly& (circumambulated
the pyre). And then there was heard the wail of women
distressed with grief weeping piteously by thousands like unto
Kraunchis. Weeping again and again with their sense lost,
the wives of the king alighted from the cer on the banks of
the Sarayu. Having performed the watery rites, the wives
of the monarch as well as the counsellors and priests, in
company with Bharata entering the city with tears in their
eyes, spent ten days* in mourning lying down on the ground.


SECTION LXXVII.


Wrex the ten days had gone by, the king’s son his
uncleanness (consequent on the demise of his father) removed,


pearl pata oe ance SRE USE
"The Smrifi laya down twelve days of mourning for kings, aud sixteen for
Kehatriyss, Parasara, however, fixes fen days for Kehatriyas in geueral.—T.


4c RAMAYANA.


performed the srdddha on the twelfth day. On the
vccasion of the ceremonies for the welfare of the departed
spirit, the son of the king conferred on Brahmanas wealth
and gems, and rice in abundance, and herds of goats, and
silver in profusion, and countless kine, and maid-servants and
man-servants, and vehicles and spacious mansions. And on
the thirteenth day, the long-armed Bharata, overwhelmed
with grief, burst into lamentation. And coming to the foot of
the funeral pyre for gathering the bones of the departed, he
overcome with grief, with his throat obstructed with the
sounds of lamentation, said, “My father, on brother Rima,
to whom I had been consigned by thee, having gone to the
forest, I have been cast by thee into vacancy. My father,
forsaking forlorn mother Kaugaly3, whose stay her son,
had gone to the forest, where hast thou gone, O king ¢”
And seeing the spot where lay the bones of his father mixed
with ashes and embers, Bharata looking at the place where
occurred the dissolution of his father’s frame, carried away by
emotion, indulged in sorrow. And seeing this, he exceeding-
ly distressed, crying fell down tothe ground. And raised”
up (by others) he looked like an uplifted banner of Sakra
bound to an engine. And his counsellors rushed towards
that one of pure vows, like the saints making towards Jayati
as he was falling on the extinction of his merit. Seeing
Bharata plunged in grief, Satrughna remembering the king,
fell down to the ground deprived of consciousness. And
devoid of sense and like a madman, he in grief of heart began
to lament remembering all the virtues of his father again
and again. “This terrible sea of grief owing its ori
Manthar&, containing its ferocious aquatic animal in the
shape of Kaikeyi, and incapable of being disturbed in
consequence of the bestowal of the boon drowns (us). O
father, where hast thou gone, leaving the tender and youthful
Bharata fondled by thee, to lament {thy loss). Thou didst
use to confer on us eatables and drinkables and aitires and


AlVODHYARANDAM. 407,


ornaments. Who will now do so? Deprived of thee, the
high-souled king cognisant of duty, the earth albeit her time
of riving is come, is not yet riven. My father having gone
to heaven and Rama having sought the woods, how can I
live? I will enter fire. Bereft of my brother and sire, 1 will
not enter the empty Ayodhya governed by the Ikehwakus.
I will repair to the forest of asceticism.” Hearing his
lamentations and secing that disaster, all the followers became
all the more distressed. Then depressed and exhausted,
both Satrughna and Bharata rolled on the earth like two
bulls with their horns fractured. Then the all-knowing
Priest of their father possessed of sterling worth, Vasishtha,
raising Bharata, said unto him, “O Lord this is the thirteenth
day since the cremation of thy sire. Why dost thou delay,
when thou hast to collect the bones ¢ Three couples* pertain
in especial to all creatures and these being inevitable, thou
ought not to bear yourself thus. And Sumantra also versed
in the nature of things, raising up Satrughna and pacifying
him, discoursed the birth and death of all beings. Being
raised up, those renowned chiefs of men Wboked like Indra’s
banner stained by shine and shower. And as the princes
stood there shedding tears, with reddened eyes, and speaking
sadly, the courtiers urged them on in behalf of the rites that
remained.


SECTION LXXVIIL.


Tran Satrughna, the younger brother of Lakshmana
spoke unto Bharata burning in grief as he was revolving in
his mind the (intended) journey (to Rima), “Need it be said
that Rima is the refuge both of himself and all creatures in


* Hunger and thirst, Ignorance and grief, sickness anddeath.


408 RAMATANA.


trouble? That Rima possessed of strength hath beed exiled
into the woods by a woman! And powerful and baving
prowess, why did not Lakshmana deliver Rama by checking
out father? The king bent upon following an unrighteous
course through the influence of a woman, should, the justice
or otherwise Of the measure being fully weighed, at the very
outset have been checked.” As Lakshmana’s younger brother
Satrughna was speaking thus, appeared there at the door in
front the hump-backed one adorned with every kind of
ornament, with her body besmeared with sanda! paste,
wearing regal apparel, and variously decked out with a
variety of oranaments. And adorned with clegant zones,
and divers other superb ornaments, she looked like a female
monkey tethered with a rope. At that time seeing that
one of horrible misdeeds, (Bharata) who stood near the
door, seizing the hump-backed one ruthlessly, took her unto
Satrughna, and said, “That one through whom Rima has
gone tu the wood and our father has renounced his body
this is that wicked and remorseless one. Do thou deal with
her as thou likest.” At Bharata’s command Satrughna
observing vows waxing exceedingly aggrieved, addressed
all the inmates of the inner apartment, saying, “This one
has occasioned intense misery unto my father and brothers.
Let her now take the fruit of her fell deed.” Having said
this, he furiously fell upon the hump-backed one surrounded
by her maids. Thereupon she with her cries made the
chamber resound. Concluding Satrughna fired with rage,
her associates extremely pained, fled away in all directions,
Then her companions in a body took counsel of each other,
saying, “Considering the way in which he has entered upon
it, he will annihilate us quite. Let us therefore seek the
protection of the tender-hearted generous, pious and illustri-
ous Kaugalyi. Even she is our sure refuge. Overpowered
with rage, that chastiser of foes, Satrughna, dragged the
shrieking hump-backed one to the ground, As Manthard


AYODHYAKANDAM. —~ 409


was pushed this way and- that, her various ornaments were
scattered over the floor. And strewn with those ornaments,
the graceful chamber of the palace looked like the autumnal
firmament. And that foremost of men possessed of strength
holding her, began to reprove Kaikeyi with harsh speech.
Extremely hurt by those rough words, Kaikeyi terrified on
account of Satrughna, took refuge with her son. Thereupon
casting his eyes on Satrughna, Bharata said, “A woman is
incapable of being slain by any. Do thou therefore excuse
her. I myself would have slain this wicked Kaikeyi of impious
deeds, if the righteous Rama should not be displeased with
me on account of my slaying my mother. And if Raghava
knows that the hump-backed one hath been slain, he surely
will speak neither with thee nor me.” Hearing Bharata’s
words, Satrughna, younger brother unto Lakshmana, refrained
from that wrong and set free the hump-backed woman ina
swoon. Thereat, sighing hard in exceeding grief, Manthar’
flung herself at Kaikeyi’s feet, weeping piteously. Seeing
the hump-backed one deprived of her senses in consequence
ofthe pushing she had received at the Hands of Satrughna,
Bharata’s mother consoled that distressed woman, who
appeared like a Kraunchi that had beer entrapped.


SECTION LXxIx.


Tren on the morning of the fourteenth day, the ministers
of the king assembled addressed Bharata in the following
words, “Having exiled his eldest son and the exceedingly
strong Lakshmana, Dagaratha who was the superior of our
superiors hath gone to heaven. Do thou, therefore, O
illustrious prince, become our king. Having been permitted
by the king, thou wilt commit no fault (by doing so), as this
kingdom is without a master. O Raghava, haying procured


52


410 RAwAraN4s,


all these necessaries for the installation, the counsellors and
others as well as the citizens wait, O king’s son. Do thou,
O Bharata, take charge of this secure kingdom bequeathed
by thy father and grand-father. Do thou, O foremost of men,
have thyself sprinkled, and rule over us.” Thereupon,
having gone round all the things procured for the sprinkling
Bharata firm in his vows addressed those persons, saying,
“In our line it is ever fit for the first-born alone to perform
the task of government. It doth not behove ye who are
wise to say so unto me. Certainly Rima our eldest brother
shall become the king; and I will abide in the forest for
five and nine years. Do ye array the grand and mighty
army consisting of fourfold forces. 1 will bring back from
tthe forest my eldest brother Raghava. And taking all these
mecessaries for the investiture in front, I will go in the
‘direction of the forest for Rama. And sprinkling that chief
of men on the spot, I will placing him in our front, bring
Rama back, like unto fire brought in from the sacrifice. I
will never fulfil the desire of this lady proud of herson. I
will inhabit the impracticable wouds, and Rama shall become
the monarch. Let workmen lay out level roads in uneven
tracts ; and let those men that are adepts in threading places
difficult to pass through, follow us.” When the prince had
spoken thus in behalf of Rama, all those persons answered
him in these excellent words, “For saying this, may Lakshmi
seated on the lotus remain at thy side; inasmuch as thou
wishest to confer the earth on the eldest son of the
monarch!” Hearing that graceful speech of the king’s son,
tear-drops, begot of delight began to trickle from their eyes
and adorned those noble countenances. And their grief
removed, with cheerful hearts, the counsellors, courtiers,
and others hearing that speech (of the prince), said, “O best
of men, according to thy order, artizans as well as people
cherishing a high regard for thee have been directed to lay
out a road.” .


AVYODHPARANDAM. arr


SECTION Lxxx.


eens ed


Traen set out in advance person having a knowledge of
the humidity or otherwise of the soil, men skilled in making
tents, brave delvers engaged in their proper work; those
capable of constructing canals and water courses, people on
pay, car-makers, men preparing machines, carpenters, those
intended to guard the ways, pioneers, cooks, perfumers, -
makers of wicker-ware and able guides, And as the
mighty throng began to proceed, it resembled the swell
of the sea on the occasion of a parva. And numbers
of men skilled in road-constructing went betore furnished
with various implements. And hewing away boughs, and
plants and shrubs and-woody projections, stones, and diverse
trees, they went on preparing a road. And they set up trees
where there were none, and at places they felled trees by
means of axes, fankas, and daos, others possessed of greater
strength and more powerful, with their hands uprooted masses
of Virana and here and there leveled a riging ground. And
others filled up with dust wells and capacious hollows, and
speedily leveled deep places all around. And those men
threw bridges wherever they became necessary, and broke the
earth wherever such a process was required, and excavated
whenever it was necessary. In a short time, they made places
poor of water overflow with many and various expanses
resembling the ocean. And in tracts void of water, they
digged divers receptacles of water, decorated with daises.
And the way of the army, furnished with pavements of
bricks and clay, with trees bearing blossoms, eloquent with
the tunes of birds, decorated with pennons, sprinkled with
sandal showers, and garnished with flowers of various kinds,
locked exceedingly beautiful, like unto the way of the celes-
tials. Then having received the command of Bharata the
men that were in charge of the tents, ordered (the workmen}


au RAMAPANA.


to pitch the tents, and when they had been pitched ata
romantic spot filled with tasteful fruits, in consonance with
the injunction of the high-souled Bharata, the men decorated
splendidly the tents which themselves were like the orna-
ments of the road. And under an auspicious star and at a
favorable hour, men well up in the work set the encampment
of the high-souled Bharata. And the tents surrounded by an
entrenchment paved with dust, containing images made of
sapphires, graced with goodly thoroughfares, lined with
edifices, encircled by towers and walls, decorated with
streamers, having well-made high-ways, and appearing
like celestial daises and containing stately mansions
with dove-cotes, resembled the metropolis of Sakra him-
self. And passing by the Jahnavi abounding in various
trees and woods, of cool and crystal waters, and filled with
mighty fishes, that way of the chief of men constructed by
artizans, looked more and more lovely as it proceeded, as the
unclouded sky looks beautiful at night, adorned with innu-
merable stars.


SECTION Uexxxt


Tren seeing that the night in which had been performed
the auspicious preliminary ceremonies, was about to be spent,
eulogists and genealogists hymned Bharata with consecrated
hymns, And then sounded the kettle-drum, beaten by a golden
stick, announcing the departure of the night ; and people
sounded conchs and other instruments by hundreds furnish-
ed with soft and loud sounds. And as if filling the heavens,
those powerful blasts of the trumpet repeatedly rendered
Bharata burning in grief the more aggrieved. Then awaking
and silencing those sounds with saying—‘T am not the king,”
he said unto Satrughna, “Behold, O Satrughna, in what a


AYODHy4KANDAM. 413


mighty wrong the people are engaged, on account of Kaikeyi.
The king Dacaratha has gone away throwing down on me
(the burden of) this misery. The royal grace founded in
righteousness of that magnanimous and virtuous monarch is
wandering even like a boat on water having no helmsman.
And he who is our mighty master hath been banished into the
woods by this mother of mine, who had (in doing so)
renounced virtue.’ Seeing Bharata lamenting thus senseless,
the ladies afflicted with sorrow began to wail in winsome
accents. As Bharata was mourning thus, the highly famous
and virtuous Vasishtha accompanied by his disciples entered
the court of the Ikshwfku king : built of entire gold, charming,
dazzling with gems and gold: like unto Sudharmf itself.
Sitting down on a golden scat furnished with an elegant
cover, that one versed in all the Vedas commanded the
envoys, saying,—"Do ye speedily with collected minds bring
hither Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and warriors and counsel-
lors and generals of forces and Satrughna with the other
princes, and the famous Bharata and Yudhajit* and Sumantra
and others that are engaged in our welfare.” Then there
arose a mighty hubbub occasioned by people coming up in
cars, horses and elephants. And wheg Bharata arrived, the
subjects rejoiced as they used to rejoice on Dagaratha’s
arrival; and as rejoiced the immortals on the arrival of him
of an hundred sacrifices, And then the court resembling a
moveless ocean containing whales and serpents,t} and gems
and conchs and gold-mines, being graced with the presence
of Dagaratha’s son, looked splendid as it formerly did with
that of Dacaratha himself.


* One of the counseliors.—T.
+ Ndga may also mean hypopotamus.—T.


4i4 REMAFANA.


SECTION LExxxn.


Anv then the intelligent Bharata surveyed that assembly
filled with noble, and worthy personages, resembling the
night of the full moon. And that august assembly was
ablaze with the brilliant hues proceeding from the attires of
the honorable persons seated according to rank, And that
aplendid assembly filled with learned people looked like the
night of the full moon after the clouds have dispersed. And
seeing all the subjects of the sovereign gathered together,
the priest cognizant of virtue softly spoke unto ,Bharata,
“My child, leaving unto thee this prosperous earth abounding
in corn and wealth, king Dagaratha having performed his
duties, hath gone to heaven. And Rama of truthful character
observing the virtue of the righteous hath not set aside his
father’s commands, even as the risen moon doth not
renounce the moonlight. Loved by the courtiers, do thou,
having been installed, enjoy this kingdom conferred on
thee by thy father and mother, rid of its thorn. Let
princes throned as well as those without thrones, from east,
and west, north and south, and also persons ranging
the sea, procure countless gems for presenting them
unto thee.” Hearing this speech, Bharata cognizant of
virtue, filled with sorrow, mentally repaired to Rama desir-
ous of reaping merit. Then in words choked with the melo-
dious voice of a swan, lamented and taxed the priest, in the
midst of the assembly “Who ‘ike myself ever deprives one
that hath led a Brabmacharyya mode of life, that is endowed
with understanding and performed his bath after having
acquired learning, and that is always intent on righteous-
ness, of one’s kingdom ¢ How begot of Dagaratha, shall
Ideprive Bama of his kingdom. It behoveth thee to speak
righteousness before this assembly. First-born, and fore-
most in merit, righteous-souled, and comparable unto Dilipa


APODRVAKANDAM., ais


and Nahusha, Kakutstha deserves the kingdom, just as
Dagaratha did. If 1 commit myself to this sin dishonorable
and calculated to bring me to perdition, I shall in this world
bring disgrace on the race of Ikshw&kus. I do not at
all relish the sin that has been committed by my mother.
Remaining here with joined hands [ bow down unto Rama
gone to the forest fastness. I will follow Rama. That best
of men is theking. Raghava deserves the domibion of the
three worlds themselves.” Hearing those words informed
with righteousness, the entire assembly with their minds
intent upon Rama, from joy shed tears. “If I fail to bring
back the noble one from the forest, I will like the exalted
Lakshmana remain even in that forest, I will in presence
of this mixed assembly of pious and honorable persons
following every perfection, adopt every expedient to bring
back Rama. { have already despatched beforehand persons
serving for love as well as those for money,and layers of roads
and their keepers ; and I intend setting out now.” Having
said this, the virtuous Bharata attached unto his brother spoke
to Sumantra skilled in counsel, who was by, saying, “Up, and
go,O Sumantra, at my command. Do thou make known
this journey and bring the forces.” Téhus accosted by the
magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra with a cheerful heart issued
orders concerning everything desirable as he was ordered.
Hearing that the army had been ordered to march forth for
bringing back Rama, the subjects as well as the generals of
the forces became exceedingly delighted. Hearing of the
journey to Rama, for bringing him back the wives of the sol-
diers apprised of the order that had been issued to the latter,
being exceedingly delighted, burried on. And the generals
expeditiously despatched their forces with warriors by means
of horses and carts and cars fleet as the mind. Seeing those
forces marshalled, Bharata staying near his preceptor, said
unto Sumantra who was at his side, “Do thou speedily bring
my car.” {n obedience to the mandate of Bharata, Sumantra


416 RAMAYANA,


exceedingly rejoiced, appeared with the car yoked with
superb steeds. Then that powerful descendant of Raghu
of truthful character, and having unswerving truth for his
prowess, Bharata, having said what was fit, spoke words
calculated to gladden his illustrious superior gone to the
mighty forest, “OQ Sumantra, arise thou speedily and, thy
desire fully attained, go by my command, and tell the chiefs
of the army, and our principal adherents to array the forces.”
Thereat rising, R&yanyas and Vai¢yas, and Vrishalas ; and
Vipras in every house began to yoke camels and cars and
mules and elephants and excellent steeds.


SECTION LXXXII1.


Risine with the morrow, Bharata anxious to behold
Raima, speedily set out ascending an excellent car. Before
him went the counsellors and priests, ascending cars resembl-
ing that of the Sun yoked with steeds. And a thousand
elephants duly consecrated went in the wake of that son of
the Ikshw&ku line as he was proceeding. And six thousand
cars with bow-men furnished with various weapons followed
the illustrious prince Bharata as he was proceeding. And
a hundred thousand horses mounted (by riders) went in
the wake of that descendant of Raghu intent upon truth
and having his senses under control. And Kaikeyi and
Sumitr& and the bighly famous Kaugaly& rejoicing at the
prospect of the bringing of Rama, went in an effulgent car.
And the honorable persons (belonging to al! the three orders)
went with the object of beholding Rama in company with
Lakshmana. And they with glad hearts variously conversed
with each other, “When shall we see the mighty-armed Rama
sable like unto a cloud. of steady strength, firm in vows,
the remover of the world’s grief? As soon as we shall see


AYODHFAKANDAM. 417


him, Raghava will remove our sorrow; even as the Sun
arising dispells the darkness of the entire world.” Thus cheer-
fully carrying on an auspicious talk, the citizens embracing
each other went along. And all others, and the foremost
merchants as well as all the principal classes,joyfully went in
quest of Rama. And a number of gem-cutters, and goodly
potters, weavers, and armourers, and peacock-dancers, sawers,
and perforators of gems, glass-makers, and workers in ivory,
cooks, incense-sellers, well-known goldsmiths, and wool-
manufacturers, bathers in tepid water, shampooers,pbysicians,
makers of Dkupas, and wine-seHers, washermen, and tailors,
and actors, in numbers with femates, and Kaiwartas, and
persons versed in Vedas having their minds in control, and
Brahmanas of reputed character, and persons well dressed
and attired in pure habits, with their bodies daubed with
soppery unguents, by thousands followed Bharata on carts,
All these gradually followed Bharata by means of excellent
vehicles. And the army delighted and in high spirits went
in the wake of Kaikeyi's son attached unto his brother,
going to bring back his brother. Going fae by means of cars,
vehicles, elephants, and horses,they arrived at the Ganga near
Sringaverapura, where was peacefully, staying that friend of
Rama, the heroic Guha, surrounded by his relatives, ruling
the realm. Having come to the banks of the Gang4 graced
with Chakravaikas, the army which was following Bharata
halted. Seeing the army inactive as well as the Gang& of
sacred waters, Bharata versed in speech spoke unto the
courtiers, “Do you communicating unto all our intentions,
encamp the army. Having been fatigued, we shall cross the
ocean-going Gang& on the morrow. Having crossed the
stream, I am anxious to offer its water unto the monarch, who
has gone to heaven, in behalf of his spiritual body.” When
he had said this, the courtiers with collected minds saying,
“Be it so,” disposed their forces, each according to his wish,
Having on the mighty stream, Ganga, quariereg his forces
53


418 RAMAYANA.


furnished with all appliances for the journey,Bharata remained
there, revolving the means of making the high-souled Rima
turn back,


SECTION LXXXIV.


Ss the forces with banners flying quartered on the
banks of the river Gang4,and engaged in various occupations,
the lord of the Nishadas, Guha, said unto his relatives ranged
around, “This mighty host here appeareth like an ocean,
I do not find its end even by thinking of it in my mind.
Surely the foolish Bharata hath come hither himself: on his
car appears the huge Kovidara banner. Belike, le will either
bind us by nooses or slay us and next Dagaratha’s son Rima
banished from the kingdom by his sire. Desirous of taking
complete possession of the rare regal fortune of that
sovereign (Rama), Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, comes to destroy
him. Rama the gon of Dagaratha is both my maintainer
and friend. Do ye in his interests, donning on your mail,
wait on the banks of the river. And stationed on the river
Gangi, let my powerful retainers subsisting on fruits and
roots and meat, be prepared for opposing Bharata’s passage
over the river. And let hundreds upon hundreds of Kaivarta
youths accoutred in mail remain in each of five hundred
parks.”-Guha issued this order. “But if Bharata be well
disposed towards Rima, this host shalt to-day safely cross
the Gang&.” Having said this, the lord of the Nishadas,
Guha, taking a present of flesh, fish and honey, went out for
interviewing Bharata. Seeing Guha approaching, the power-
ful gon of the charioteer knowing season, humbly informed
Bharata of it, saying, “This lord (that approaches) surrounded
by his relatives, is very potent in Dandaka and is an old
irierd of your brother. Therefore let Guha, the lord of the


AFODHY 4KANDAM. 41g


Nishidas, see you, O K&kutstha. He indubitably knows
where Rima and Lakshmana are.” Hearing these wise nods
of Sumantra, Bharata at once said,—“Let Guha see me”
Receiving permission, Guha, right glad, appeared defore
Bharata, bending low, and said, ‘This place is thy home. Bat
thou hast stolen a march over us. We dedicate all this unto
thee. Do thou reside in the abode of thy servant. Here are
fruits and roots gathered by the Nishadas and meat dry and
moist and various other produces of the forest. I pray that
entertained in various ways and heartily partaking of meats
and drinks, this army may spend the night here. To-morrow
morning, thou wilt go along with thy forces.”


SECTION Lxxxv.


‘Lvs addressed, the exceedingly wise Bharata answered
the lord of the Nishadas, in words frayght with sense and
reason, “Thy great desire, O friend of my superior, is surely
as good as attained ; since thou of mighty energy hast set thy
heart on entertaining my army.” Having said these fair
words unto Guha, the graceful and highly energetic Bharata
again addressed the lord of Nishadas, “By what way shall I
go to Bharadwaja’s hermitage? These lands watered by the
Ganga are dense and hard to track.” Hearing these words of
the intelligent son of the king, Guha well acquainted with the
forest, said with joined hands, ‘My servant well acquainted
with the place shall attentively follow thee; and, O prince
possessed of mighty strength, I myself will also walk in thy
wake, But dost thou go after Rama of energelic acts with
some evil intention? This vast force of thine-raiseth my
apprehension.” When Guha had asked this, Bharata with a
presence unclouded like ihe sky, spoke unto Guha these sweet


420 RAMEPANA.


words, “May a time never come when I shall do wrong unto
Raghava! It behoveth thee not to fear me. Raghava ia
my eldest brother dear unto me even as my sire himself. 1
go to make Kakutstha dwelling in the woods, turn back.
Other intention cherish I none. O Guba, this I tell thee
truly.” Having heard Bharata’s speech, Guha with a counten-
ance lighted up with delight, again cheerfully addressed
Bharata, saying, “Blessed art thou! Thy like find £ none
on earth, inasmuch as thou wishest to resign a kingdom
that comes to thee without search, Thy eternal fame will
certainly range this world, since thou wishest to bring back
Rama passing through misfortune.” As Guha was speaking
thus unto Rharata, the Sun became shorn of his splendour
and night fell. Thereupon, having disposed his troops, the
auspicious Bharata gratified by Guha, went to bed along with
Satrughna, Then arose thoughts of Rama in the mind of
the magnanimous Bharata ever having his gaze fixed on
virtue and undeserving (of hardship). Then even as a tree
already heated by a forest-fire burns with a fire hidden in its
cavity, that descendant of Raghu began to burn with the fire
of grief inflamed in his heart. And perspiration produced
by the fire of sorrow issued out of all his limbs, as the
Himavat heated by the solar warmth generates water. And
Kaikeyi’s son was overpowered and drowned by the mountain
of grief, having thoughts (of Rama) for its entire crags,
sighs for its mineral substance, disgust with the avocations
of life, for its trees, mental feebleness through grief for its
summits, stupor for the animals inhabiting it, and burning
for its annual shrubs and bamboos. And sighing heavily with
a heart oppressed with sorrow, well nigh deprived of
consciousness, and involved in high peril, that best of men,
oppressed by the fever of his heart, like unto a mighty leader
of a herd, separated from it, did not attain peace of mind.
Meeting with Guha, the magnanimous Bharata accompanied
by his people, engrossed with the thoughts of Rama,


AVODRPARANDAM. 42r


became oppressed with grief. (Seeing this’, Guha by and
by encouraged Bharata concerning his elder brother.


SECTION LULxxxvi.


Guna, acquainted with the forest, described unto Bharata
of immeasurable prowess the regard the high-souled Laksh-
mana bore unto Rama. “To Lakshmana crowned with every
virtue, waking up, holding the bow with the arrow fixed on
it for the purpose of guarding well his brother, I said, ‘This
easeful bed has been prepared for thee, my child, O son of
Raghu’s descendant, cheer up? Do thou lie down at ease.
All these people can bear hardship; but thou art meant for
comfort, For protecting him religiously, we shall wake.
To me also there is none that is dearer on earth than Rama.
Do not be anxious. This I tell thee truly, through his grace
1 expect high fame among men, and immense religious merit,
and interest and desire in entirety, Bow in hand I shall
along with my kin protect Rama lying down with Sita To
me always ranging in this forest, nothing whatever is un-
known. Ican even cope in baétle with an army of fourfold
forces.’ Thus accosted by us, the magnanimous Lakehmana
with his gaze ever fixed on virtue, humbly observed, ‘How,
Dagaratha’s son sleeping on the earth with Sit&, can I attain
steep, or life, or happiness? How see him who is capable
of bearing in battle the onslaught of the gods and the
Assuras combined, sleeping in a cave on grass? It is by
virtue of mighty austerities and uncommon exertions that
Dagaratha has obtained this son of his crowned with every
auspicious sign. He being banished, the king shall not live
long; and the Earth shall certainly be widowed soon.
Having bewailed aloud, by this time have the women got
exhausted; and surely the king’s mansion is to-day still, I


azz RAMAPANS.


do not expect that either Kaugaly& or the king or my mother
is alive. Ifthey live, itcan be for this night only. Even
if my mother live seeing Satrughna, that mother of a hero,
the afflicted Kaucalya, will (surely) resign her existence. Say-
ing—All is lost,—all is lost,—with his desire unattained, my
father having failed to install Rama in the kingdom, will resign
his existence. Blessed are they that when the time shall come
for the same, shall perform the funeral ceremonies of the king
my deceased sire. Then shall they with happy hearts range
the metropolis of my father, furnished with fair-looking
terraces, with the highways laid out orderly, crowned with
lordly edifices, adorned with various gems, crowded by cars
and elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of trum-
pets, abounding in auspicious things, filled with fat and con-
tented people, having gardens and pleasure-houses, and poss-
essed of divers classes of men indulging festal mirth, Shall we
on the occasion of Rima’s return, with glad hearts peacefully
enter the city in company with that one firm in his promise ?’
As the magnanimous son of the king was thus lamenting, the
night passed away. In the morning, with an unclouded sun,
both, having made matted locks on the banks of the Bhagira-
thi, crossed the river along with me. Wearing matted locks
and clad in barks of trees, those persons possessed of mighty
strength, like unto Jeaders of elephant herds, equipped with
excellent arrows and quivers and bows—those repressors of
foes, expecting (their return from exile), departed with Sita.”


SECTION Lxxxvil.


.EARING the words of Guha, exceedingly unpleasant,
Bharata as soon as he heard them, became plunged in thought.
And then taking heart for a while, that tender-framed one
possessed of immense strength, gifted with leonine shoulders


AVYODHYARANDAM. 433


and length of arms, having expansive eyes resembling white’
lotuses, young in years, and endowed with a handsome
presence, affected with great grief, was overpowered, like an
elephant wounded in the heart with a goad. Seeing Bharata
deprived of his senses with his countenance covered with
pallor, Guha became exceedingly agitated, like a tree
during an earthquake. Seeing Bharata in that condition,
Satrughna who was near, taking the former on his lap, began
to cry, almost deprived of his senses and oppressed with grief.
Thereat, all the mothers of Bharata, fasting, undergoing
distress, and afflicted with the calamity that had befallen their
lord, came forward, and surrounding Bharata,began to lament
him fallen on the ground. And the distressed Kaugaly&
drawing nigh embraced him like a cow approaching her calf ;
and weeping from excess of griefspoke unto Bharata, saying,
“My son, doth any malady afftict thy body ? Now the life
of this royal race is, without doubt, in thy hands. Rama
having gone away along with his brother, I shall, O son, live,
seeing thee. King Dagaratha having departed this life, thou
alone art our lord. Hast thou, my son, heard anything
unpleasant concerning Lakshmana ; or the son of that one
having an only son,* who has gone to the forest along with
his wife 7’ Having taken comfort for a while, that one of
high fame weeping, and solacing Kaugaly&, spoke unto Guha,
saying, “Where did my brother pass the nighty And where
did Siti? And where did, again, Lakshmana? And in what
bed did he sleep, and what did be previously partake of ? Do
thou, O Guha, tell me this.” Thereat, well pleased, Guha,
the lord of Nishfdas, related unto Bharata how he had acted
in respect of Rama, his dear guest, studious of his welfare. “I
procured for Raima’s use rice and fruits and roots and various
kinds of food, All these Rima having truth for his prowess
accepted, but observing Kshatriya morality, he did not take
them, ‘O friend, we ought not to take anything : ours is always


* Meaning herself.


ame KadALANA,


to give.’ Thus did that magnanimous one beseech us. On
the high-souled. Lakshmana bringing water, Raghava having
drunk it, fasted along with Sits. Then Lakshmana drank
up the water that remained. Then the three with fixed minds
silently performed their adorations unto the Twilight. After
that, Sumitra’s son prepared a goodly bed for Raghava, him-
self bringing Kuga grass. And in that bed lay down Rima
in company with Sita. Next washing their feet, Lakshmana
turned away. This is the foot of the Ingudi, and this that
grass. Onit both R&ma and Sit’ lay down that night,
Fastening on his back a pair of quivers filled with arrows,
furnished with finger-fences, and taking his mighty bow,
Lakshmana all night kept watch around. I also taking an
excellent bow, remained where remained Lakshmana, and
surrounded by my kindred who stayed there vigilantly, equip-
ped with bows, guarded him that resembled the mighty Indra.”


SECTION Uxxxvill.


Havine heard everything, Bharata in company with the
counsellors went to the foot of the Ingudi tree and saw the
bed of Rima. And he said unto his mothers, “That high-
souled one lay down here on the ground during the night,
and his limbs pressed this spot. Begot of that foremost of
monarchs, the exalted and intelligent Dagaratha, Rima does
not deserve to sleep on the earth. How can that chief of
men having reposed in beds furnished with pillows made
of deer-skins and having superb cloths, have lain down on
the earth? Always reposing in mansions and in upper
apartments paved with silver and gold and supplied with
excellent bed-cloths, decked with heaps of flowers, perfumed
with sandal and aguru, hued like unto pale clouds, resonant
with the notes of many parrots,—in palaces going before


APODHVYAKANDAM. 425


the cheicest of their class,ringing with music,and perfumed—
like unto Meru itself, with their bases composed of gold,
Rima used to be awakened with vocal and instrumental
music, the tinklings of elegant ornaments and the peals of
goodly mridangas—that subduer of foes being in due season
hhymned by the eulogists, and friends, bards and genealogists,
with worthy ballads and penegerycs. This assertion of
Bama’s lying down on the ground} appears to me incredible ;
it doth by no means look unto me like truth. Forsooth, I
am amazed. I take it, this is a vision. Verily, no destiny
is superior to Time, since Dagaratha’s son, Rama himeelf,
had to repose on the earth,—and the beauteous beloved
daughter of Videha’s king, and the daughter-in-law of
Dagaratha, had to lie down on the ground. This was the bed
of my brother ; on this hard spot did he turn his lovely libs,
and this grass was pressed by them, [ tkink that the graceful
Sit adorned with ornaments slept in this bed, for here and
there are scattered particles of gold. It is clear that Sita had
spread her sheet at this spot,—hence it is that fibres of silk
are discoverable here. I deem that the bed of her lord
appeareth agreeable unto a wife, since a girl tender and in
affliction, the chaste daughter of Mithila experienced no
inconvenience (in sleeping in ene such.) Ah, I am undone!
Baleful am I, for it is on my account that Raghava along wilh
his wife, lay down in such a bed, like one forlorn. Born in the
imperial race, and capable of conferring happiness on all, the
bringer-about of all good, why did Raghava of dark blue
hue like that of a lotus, graceful, and crowned with red eyes,
the inheriter of happiness and undeserving of misery,—having
left his dear consummate kingdom, lie down on the ground ?
Surely the mighty-armed Lakshmana graced with auspicious
marks is blessed,—he who in the time of dire adversity
followeth his brother Rima. And blessed is Videha’s daughter
who followeth her husband into the woods. Bereft of that
magnanimous one, we have all been brought into jeopardy,
54


426 Kau ArANA,


The Earth without her helmsman seemeth unto me quite
empty, on Dagaratha having ascended the celestial regions
and Rama taken refuge in the wilderness. On Rama having
set up his dwelling in the forest, one (like me) doth not even
mentally covet this earth which had been protected by the
immense prowess (of Raghava). With her walls undefended,
her horses and elephants unrestrained, and her gates teft
open, the defenceless metropolis deprived of her power,placed
in peril and without any protection, is surely not regarded by
the enemies, like food mixed with poison. From this day
forth 1 will lie down on the ground, or on the grass, daily
subsisting on fruits and roots, and bearing matted locks and
a cloth of bark. And for his sake I will in future live happily
in the woods. (By my doing so), the promise of that high-
minded one shall not be rendered null. Me residing in the
forest in the interests of my brother, Satrughna shall bear
company ; while my noble one will rule Ayodhy& assisted by
Lakshmana. The twice-born ones will sprinkle Kakutstha in
Ayodhy&. May the deities realize this desire of mine!
Propitiated by me personally in various ways with bent head,
if he do not consent, then shall I ever stay with Raghava in
the woods, Surely he cannot long persist in putting me off.”


SECTION LXXxXXIX.


Hawine spent the night there on the banks of the Ganga,
that descendant of Raghu rising carly in the morning, said
these words unto Satrughna,“O Satrughna, arise | Why sleep-
est thou ? Bring thou at once that lord of the Nishfidhas,Guha,
Good betide thee! He will take the army (over the stream).”
Thus urged by his brother, Satrughna said, “Thinking of


AYODHVAKANDAM. 427


that noble one (Rima), I have not slept, but have remained
awake in alike manner.”* As those chiefs of men were
thus conversing with each other, Guha appearing in time
with joined hands, remarked, “O Kakutstha, hast thou spent
the night happily on the banks of the river? And is it
continuous good fortune with thee along with thy (forces ?”
Hearing Guha’s speech fraught with affection, Bharata ever
obedient unto Rama, spoke on his part, saying, “Happily
have we spent the night; and we have also been well
received by thee. Now let thy servants take us over by
means of many boats.” Thereat, hearing Bharata’s mandate,
Guha, bestirring himself, re-entered the city and addressed his
kinsfolk, saying, “Arise ye ! Awake ! May good always attend
you! Do ye draw up the boats; I shall ferry the forces over.”
Thus asked, they arising and bestirring tiemselves in con-
sequence of the king’s command, brought up five hundred
boats around. Others also known by the name of Swastika,
bearing large bells on their prows, and banners, well decked
out, furnished with oars, and manned by bargemen, with their
joints firmly constructed, (were brought up}. and Guha him-
self brought a graceful barge called Swastika, covered with
pale woolen cloth, and resounding with music. On this boat
ascended Bharata, the mighty Sutrughna, Kaugalya, Sumittr&,
and other wives of the king. The priests, and preceptors
belonging unto’ the Brahmana order, had already ascended.
After (Bharata and others had got up), ascended the wives of
auxiliary princes, and cars and provisions were got on board.
And the upro ir consequent on the troops burning down dwell-
ings, pressing down descents unto the river, and loading
goods, spread on all sides. Then those boats hung with pen-
nons, managed by the kinsfolk (of Guha), set of at speed with
the teeming folks that had got on board. And some of these
were filled with women, and some with horses, and some
conveyed cars and cattle of great value. and going to the


* 4. ¢, as thon bast dene—T, .


428 RAMAYANA.


ether bank and fanding the crowds on the shore, the friends
and slaves (of Guha) while returning, displayed various
movenients (of the boats). And elephants graced with flags
being spurred on by their riders, began to cross the stream,
appearing like (so many) winged hills. Others ascended boats
and others crossed on rafts, others crossed by means of
reversed pitchers, and others by their arms alone. Ferried
ever the Ganga by the servants (of Guha), that beautiful
army graced with streamers, at the third mwuhurta arrived
at the romanting woods of Prayaga. Having made the army
take rest at its ease, and encamped it (at the woods of
Pray&ga), that magnanimous onc, Bharata, for the purpose
of seeing the asylum of the ascetic Bharadwja, went thither
accompanied by Ritwsjas and Sadasyas.


SECTION LXXXX


‘Havine arrived at (the neighbourhood of) Bharadwaja,
asylum, that foremost of men while it was a droca (to the des-
tination), left his forces behiad and went thither, accompanied
by his counsellors alone. And leaving his attire and arms,
and clad ina silk cloth, that pious one placing the priest
in front, went on foot. Then with the view of seeing
Bharadwaja, that descendant of Raghu leaving behind the
counsellors also, went in the wake of the priest. Ag
soon as Bharadwaja of rigid austerities saw Vasishtha, he
at once rose from his seat, saying unto his desciples
“Arghyal’? on being called upon by Vasishtha, that
highly energetic one understood that it was Dagaratha’a
son, Having offered them (the guests) water to wash
their feet and arghya, as well as fruits subsequently, that
virtuous one (Bharadw Bja) successively enquired after the


ALVODHVARANDAM. 429


welfare of their (respective) homes; and after that, of the
forces, exchequer, friends and counsellors in Ayodby&. And
knowing that Dagaratha had departed this life, he did not
ask anything relating to the monarch. Then Vasishtha and
Bharata questioned him as to his welfare in relation to the
body, the (sacrificial) fire, the trees, the beasts and the birds
{of the hermitage). To all this returning ‘So it is,” the
illustrious Bharadwaja from affection for Raghava said unto
Bharata, “What is the use of thy visit here, seeing that thou
art engaged in the task of governing the kingdom ? Do thou
telate all this unto me; my mind is ill at ease. That slayer
of foes, and perpetuator of his race who hath been borne by
Kaugaly&, and who along with his wife and brother hath
been banished to the woods for a long term—that illustrious
one who enjoined by his sire in the interests of a woman,
hath become an inhabitant of the woods for fourteen years—
dost thou, desirous of securely enjoying the kingdom belong-
ing to him as well to his younger hrother, intend to do
any harm unto that sinless one ?” Thus accosted, Bharala
replied unto Bharadw&ja with tears filleng his eyes and his
words choked with grief, “Undone am [if the reverend
one also deems meso. Do not apprghend any wrong from
me; and do thou not reproa&h me thus, Whatever my
mother has said in relation to me, does not express my wish,
Tam not satisfied with that, nor do I endorse her speech,
I, intending to pacify him, am going to that chief of men,
with the view of taking him unto Ayodhy& and of paying
homage unto his feet. Thinking me as already gone, thou
shouldst show thy favor unto me, O reverened Sir, tell me
where stayeth at present Rama, lord of the earth.” Be-
sought by Vasishtha and the other Ritwijas, the venerable
Bharadwaja well pleased, spoke unto Bharata, “O foremost
of men, even this is worthy of thee. Serving superiors, res-
traint of the senses, and following the pious, are ever found in
one sprung in the Raghava line. 1 know that even this is


430 KaMAvaNna.


thy intention ; but for the purpose of making thy mind all the
firmer, I had asked thee in this wise ; so that thy fame might
greatly increase. .I also know the righteous Rima with Sita
and Lakshmana. This brother of thine at present stays at
the mighty mountain Chitrakuta. On the morrow thou wilt
set out for that reigon. Do thou to-day sojourn here along
with thy counsellors. O wise one, do this at thy pleasure,
Othou understanding interest and desire.’ Thereat the
gentle-looking and highly famous one said, “Be it so ;” and
the king’s son made up his mind to spend the night in the
great hermitage (of the saint).


SECTION Lxxxxi.


Tues the ascetic asked Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, w!
he had decided for staying there, to receive bis hospi
Thereat Bharata said, ‘Thou hast for certain done this,—
(bast offered me) «water for washing my feet, Arghya, and
hospitality with what can be procured in the forest.” Then
Bharadwaja as if in jest, said unto Bharata, Il know thee to
be of acomplacent dispositien ; and that thou art pleased
with anything and everything. But I wish to feast thy forces.
And, O best of men, it behoves thee to act in harmony with
my desire. Why didst thou coming hither, leave thy army at
a distance ? And, thou man of men, why didst thou not come
accompanied with thy forces?’ Bharata replied unto bim,
saying, “I had not come accompanied with my forces, from
fear of thee, O reverend Sir. O worshipful one, kings and
their sons should always carefully avoid the regions of asce-
tics. Choice steeds, men, and mad elephants of the best
kind, covering a spacious tract of country, come in my train,
respected Sir. That these might not injure trees or water or
the grounds of the cottages pertaining to the asylums, have


AYODH YARANDAM. 43t


T come hither alone.” “Bring the forces here,”—thus desired
by the mighty ascetic, Bharata accordingly caused the troops
to be brought in.

Then entering the chamber of the sacrificial fire, (Bhara-
dw&ja) having sipped water and cubbed his lips therewith,
invoked VigwakarmA for the purpose of entertaining his guest.
“F invoke Vigwakarma; even Twastri himself. I wish to
entertain guests. Let him accomplish this for me. I invoke
the three guardians of the worlds—gods headed by Sakra.
I wish to entertain guests. Let him accomplish this for me.
Let those rivers that flow westwards, and those that move
tortuously on the earth and in the sky, come hither in a body.
And let others run Afazveya, and others refined wine, and
others again cool waters resembling the juice of the sugar-
cane. 1 invoke the celestials and the Gandharbas and
Vigwavagu and Haha and Hubu and also the divine Apsards
and Gandharbis all; and Ghritachi, Vigw&achi, Micgrakegi and
Alamvusha ; and N&gadatté and Hema and Som residing in
the mountain ; and those ladies that attend Sakra, and those
that attend Brahma. I invoke all these fenfales well attired,
in company with Tumvuru. And let that beautiful forest of
Kuvera in the north Kuru, having its foliage resembling
attires and ornaments, and its fru&s debonair damsels, exist
even at this very spot. And here let the worshipful Soma
yield me excellent viands of diverse kinds in plenty ; things
that may be eaten or enjoyed, sucked or licked ; and varie-
gated blossoms growing in the trees, and wines and (other)
drinks, and meats of various kinds.” Thus, furnished
with unrivalled ascetic energy, did that anchoret observing
excellent vows, express himself orthospically in
consonance with Siksh3. And as he sat with joined
hands facing the west with a rapt mind, there came
separately all those deities. And then touching Malaya
and Dardura, and laden (with perfumes), a delicious and
welcome wind began to blow delightfuly, removing sweat.


432 RABIAVANA,


And the clouds poured down a pleasant shower of blos«
soms; and from all sides were heard sounds of celestial
kettle-drums. And arare breeze set in, and the multitudes
of Apsaras danced; and the celestials and the Gandharbas
sang, and the vin&s let out their-notes. And the dulcet
‘sounds high and low furnished with Sama and measure,
entered the Earth aud the firmanent and the ears of all crea-
tures. When that celestial symphony, delightful unto,the
ears of men, had thus developed itself, Bharata’s forces saw
the workmanship of Vigwakarma. That spot widening into
a level plain measuring five Yoyanas was covered with thick
grass resembling blue lapises. And on it stood Vitwas,
and Kapithwas, Panasas, citrons,and Ama/akas,and mangoes,
embellished with fruits. From the north Kuru bad spread
a wood capable of conferring every enjoyment; and a beauti-
ful river coursed through bordered by many atree. And
there had arisen white edifices having four divisions ; and
stables for horses and elephants ; and grand gateways belong-
ing unto palaces and mansions; and royal residences with
graceful gates, resembling white clouds, bearing white gar-
lands and washed with fragrant waters, having four corners,
and spacious, fitted vp with beds, seats, and vehicles, having
every kind of excellent sapid food, stocked with excellent
edibles and apparels, having every variely of food, possessing
washed and bright vessels, with every description of seats,
graceful, and accomodated with choice beds with coverlets,
Permitted by the Maharshi, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, entered
that mansion abounding in gems. And he was followed by
the counsellors and the priests ; and the latter beholding the
arrangements of the palace, were filled with delight. And
Bharata in company with the counsellors there went round
the august royal seat, the chowrz, and the umbrella, worthy
ofaking. And having bowed down unto Raima, he worship-
ped that seat. And then holding the chowr# of hair, he sat
down on the seat of a minister. Then the counsellors and


A4PODHFARANDAM. 433


priests seated themselves according to rank. And there-
after the general and the protector of the encampment (got
themselves seated). Then at Bharadwaja’s command, came
into being near Bharata streams having payaca for their
slime. And at the pleasure of the Brihmana, oa both their
banks arose charming dwellings, covered with pale clay. And
at that very moment there came twenty thousand women
commissioned by Brahm4, adorned with divine ornaments.
And there came also twenty thousand females sent by Kuvera,
decked out in gold and gems, pearls and corals. The sight
of these was capable of filliag men’s minds with enchanting
ravishmext. And there came from Nandana twenty thousand
damsels; and Narada and Tumvuru and Gopa, resembling
the sun in splendour. The Gandharba kings began to sing
before Bharata. And Alamvush3, and Micrakegi, and Pun
darik, and Vaman& danced before Bharata, at the command
of Bharadwaja. And those blossoms that are in the celestial
regions, and that bloom in the forest of Chaitraratha, became
visible in Prayaga at the energy of Bharadwaja. And Vilwas
did the office of players on the Mridanga, and Vibhitakas,
that of keepers of Soma, and Agwaththas became dancers, at
the energy of Bharadwaja. And Saralag, Talas, Tilakas, and
TamBlas, being delighted, became hump-backed ones and
dwarfs. And Sinsapas, Amalakis, Jamvus and other plants
of the forest, wearing the forms of females, stood at the man-
sion of Bharadwaja. “Let wine-drinkers drink wine, the
hungry eat Payaga, and those that are inclined to it, feed on
clean meat.” And every seven or eight females taking a
man, bathed him on the lovely banks of the rivers, And
damsels furnished with expansive eyes, having wiped the
persons (of the batlers), pressed their legs, and those magni-
ficent women made them drink (wine), And the keepers
duly fed excellent horses, elephants, camels and Suravi's sons
(oxen), with their (proper) food. And some persons possessed
of mighty strength, being directed thereto, fej the bearers
55


434 RAMALANA.


of the foremost Ikshw4ku warriors with suger-canes, honey,
and fried paddy. And the groom forgot his horse, and the
elephant-keeper his elephant : that army there became trans-
ported with wine and exhilaration. And sumptuously enter-
tained with every enjoyment, with their bodies decked with
red sandal, the soldiery in the company of bevies of Apsaras,
exclaimed, “To Ayodhy& will we not go, nor yet to Dandaka.
Peace be nnto Bharata, and may Rima reap happiness”!
Thus did footmen and the riders and keepers of elephants
and horses, as well as others, having experienced such a state
utter words. And men by thousands, exceedingly delighted,
sent up shouts. And saying, “This is heaven,” the retinue
of Bharata—the soldiers—began to dance and laugh and
sing; and bearing garlands, they on all sides rushed by
thousands. And beholding the inviting viands resembling
ambrosia, they, although already fed, became desirous of
eating once again. And wearing new clothes, all the servants,
and maids, and females of the household, became exceedingly
well pleased. And elephants, and asses, camels, kine and
horses, and beasis and birds, being fed their fill, did not
hunger after anything else, And there appeared no one who
wore asoiled habit,or who was hungry, or melancholy, or
whose hair was covered with dust. And the people with
wonder beheld before them vessels of precious metals by
thousands graced with chaplets of flowers, filled with essences
of fruits and fragrant soups and curries and the flesh of goats
and bears, and white rice. And there were on the skirts of the
wood wells having P&yaca for their slime; and the kine
yielded whatever was asked ; and all the trees dropped"honey.
And the tanks were filled with Mazveya as well as with clean
hot meat of deer, peacocks, and cocks, dressed in pans. And
there were rice-holders by thousands, and curry-pots by
hundred thousands, and golden vessels iby Avvudas. And
there were pitchers and water-pots and cleaned vessels for
churning card, filled with the same. And there were tanks


AYODHYARANDAM. 435


of savoury and yellow butter-milk, well-tempered. And
there were tanks filled with Aasé/a ;* and others filled with
milk, and with sugar, And men saw sediments, acrid powders
and various others things in vessels, for the pupose of bath
on the terraces of tanks ; and tooth-cleaning sticks of Angum4n
and other (trees) ; and white saudal paste lying before ; and
cleaned mirrors ; and lots of cloths ; and sandals ; and shoes
in pairs by thousands ; and collyrium-pots ; and combs ; and
brushes ; and bows at some places; and mail; and various
kinds of seats and beds. And they saw reservoirs for asses,
camels, elephants, and horses, with easy descents, filled with
water to assist their digestion; and pools furnished with
lotuses, of the hue of the firmament, with transparent water,
comfortable for ablutions ; and tender (plots of) grass all
around coloured like blue lapises,to serve as pasture for beasts.
Witnessing the wonderful hospitality provided by the Mahar.
shi Bharadw&ja, like unto a vision, the men marvelled.
Thus entertained like unto celestials in Nandana, they passed
the night at the hermitage of Bharadw&ja. Then taking the
permission of Bharadwaja, all the Gaudharbas as well as the
superb damsels went away as they had come. And the men
remained intoxicated and highly inebriate with the liquor,
their persons daubed with goodly aguru and sandal ; and the
various elegant garlands beautiful to behold,lay by theinselves
all around, crushed by the people.


SECTION Uxxxxil,


Havine passed that night, Bharata having been enter-
tained along with his family, appeared before Bharadwija,
desirous (of seeing Rama). Seeing that foremost of men
(standing) with joined hands,Bharadwaja, who had just finish-


= * A preparation of butter-milk. g


436 RAMIPARA.


ed his fire-sacrifice, said, “Hast thou passed the night
pleasantly at our place? And have all thy men been pleased
with our hospitality ? Do thou tell me this, O sinless one.”
Thereupon, Bharata bowing down, with joined hands said
unto that ascetic of excellent energy, as he had issued
oul of his hermitage, “O reverend Sire, I along with all
my forces and vehicles have passed (the night) happily. I
have been full well entertained by thee, O worshipful one
possessed of power. And with our languor and heat
removed, we all sumptuously feasted and comfortably quar-
tered have passed (the night) agreeably along with our
servants, Now, O best of ascetics, I beseech thee to look
with a propitious eye on me who am bound for my brother's
place. And tell me, O thou cognizant of morality, how far
is it unto that high-souled righteous one’s asylum, and by
what way (shall I reach there) ?? When Bharata eager to see
his brother had asked thus, the highly energetic Bharadw&ja
of rigid austerities answered, “O Bharata, two and a half
Yojanas hence, embosomed in a tenantless wood is the
mountain Chitrakata, charming with rocks and woods. On
its northern border flows ‘the river Mandakini, covered
with flowering trees and with blossoming woods. Beyond
the stream is the mountain Chitrakuta. There is theic
thatched cottage, my child; there they abide for certain,
Proceeding by the southern way, do thou with thy forces
composed of elephants and horses, O master of the army,
turn to the left, O exalted one, and go southwards. By
doing so, thou wilt be able to see RAghava.” Hearing of
their departure, the wives of that king of kings, leaving
their cars, albeit worthy of them, gathered round the Brah-
mana. Lean and trembling and in wofui guise, Kaugaly&
along with the noble Sumitr&, with her hands took the feet
of the ascetic. Despised universally because of her unright-
eous desire, Kaikeyi also bashfully took hold of his feet,
and having. circumambulated the mighty and venerable


AV ODHYARANDAM. 437


anchoret, stood near Bharata in dejection of spirits. Then
the mighty ascetic Bharadwaja asked Bharata, “O descendant.
of Raghu, I wish to know particularly about thy mother.”
Thus accosted by Bharadwaja, the pious Bharata deft in
speech said with joined hands, “O reverend sir, she whom
thou beholdest depressed and emaciated through grief
and fasting—resembling a very goddess—is the noble Queen
of my father. This one, Kaugaly4, it is that gave birth unto
that chief of men, having the powerful gait of a lion, Rama,
even as Aditi gave birth to Dh&ata She that stands at her
left hand, in dejected guise, is the noble Sumitra afflicted
with sorrow, the second wife of the monarch—like a
Karnikara bough in a forest, with all its blossoms shrivelled
up. The sons of this exalted lady are the youthful and
heroic Lakshmana and Satrughna, having truth for their
prowess, and resembling celestials in shape. And her in
consequence of whose act those foremost of men have come
by crushing misfortune, and the king Dagaratha hath gone to
heaven, deprived of his son,—wrathful and proud of her good
fortune, setting her heart on wealth—Kafkeyi, dishonorable,
although endowed with the semblance of honor, do thou
know this wicked one intent on sineas my mother. In her
do I perceive the root of my fhighty misfortune.” Having
said this, with his words choked with emotion, that best of
men with his eyes reddened, sighed like an enraged serpent,
As Bharata was speaking thus, the great ascetic Bharadwija
gifted with high understanding and knowing interest,
answered Bharata, saying, 'O Bharata, thou ought not to
cast any blame on Kaikeyi. This banishment of the king
(Rama), shall be for the good (of all). The banishment of
Rama shall surely be for the welfare of the gods and the
Asuras and sages of concentrated souls.” Thus blest,
Bharata saluted the ascetic and went round him, and then
summoning the soldiery, said, “Yoke.” Thereupon, getting
ready excellent steeds and cars decked with gol many people


438 RAMAPANA.


mounted, with the intention of departing. And male and
female elephants and golden chains round their necks, and
furnished with banners, with the sounds (of bells), proceeded,
like clouds at the end of the summer season. And then
proceeded various kinds of cars great and light of movement
and of high value; and the infantry went on foot, Andon
a magnificent car went the ladies headed by Kaucaly&, with
delighted hearts, eager to see Raghava. And ascending an
elegant car resembling the infant sun or moon, driven by
charioteers, went the graceful Bharata well attired. And
that mighty host abounding with horses and elephants
proceeded, blocking up the southern quarter, like a colossal
cloud arisen (in the sky), leaving behind on the other bank
of the Gang& woods inhabited hy birds and beasts, and
coursing by rivers and mountains. And composed of numbers
of elephants and horses in high spirits, that army of Bharata,
frightening multitudes of beasts and birds, dived into that
mighty forest.


SECTION Lxxxxitl.


Avruictep by the mighty force on its way with banners
(displayed), those inhabitants of the woods, leaders of
elepbant-herds, took to their heels in company with the
herds themselves. And bears and Prishatas and Rurus
were on all sides seen in the forest-ways, and on hills and
rivers. And that virtuous son of Dagaratha with a glad
heart held on his way, surrounded by that vast army con-
sisting of fourfold forces, raising a tremendous uproar. And
that army of the high-souled Bharata resembling the waves
of the ocean, covered the earth quite, as clouds in the rainy
season cover the welkin. And filled with steeds and mighty
elephants, the earth at that time for a iong while remained


AYODHYAKANDAM. 439


invisible. And having proceeded a long way, the graceful
Bharata, with his bearers extremely tired, said these words
unto that foremost of counsellors, Vasishtha, ‘From appear-
ances, and from what I had heard, it is evident that we have
arrived at that region which Bharadw&ja bad told us of. This
is the mountain Chitrakuta and that the river Mand&kini.
And from a distance this forest appeareth like dark clouds.
And now our elephants resembling hills afflict the romantic
sides of Chitrakuta. And the trees scatter blossoms over the
sides of the mountain, even as after summer sable clouds pour
down showers. O Satrughna, behold the realms inhabited
by Kinnaras, scattered with steeds, like the main with maka-
vas. And these herds of deer furnished with celerity, being
urged on, roam about like masses of clouds in the sky in
autumn, propelled by the winds. And like the people of the
south, these warriors bearing shields resembling clouds, are
adorning their heads with ornaments of perfumed blossoms.
And this forest, although void of men and dreadful in appear-
ance, at present appeareth unto me like Ayodhy4 teeming
with people. The dust raised by the hoofs (of horses) stands
covering the sky : anon the wind bearing it away, compasses
my pleasure, And, O Satrughna, see how fast these cars
yoked with steeds and driven by skilful charioteers, are
proceeding in the forest. And behold these beauteous
peacocks, which,being frightened, take refuge in thé mountain
—the home of feathered tribes. This country appears to me
exceedingly lovely. This abode of the ascetics is like unto
the way to heaven itself. Male and female deer and Prishatas
in the forest, beautiful to look at, appear as if variegated with
flowers. Now let the soldiers go advisedly and search this
forest, so that they light upon those chiefs of men, Rama and
Lakshmana.” Hearing Bharata’s speecb, persons with
weapons in their hands, plunged into the forest and those
heroes presently discovered the top of a (column of) smoke.
Having seen the top of the (column of) smokg, they came


440 Ramdrana,


before Bharata and said, “Fire cannot exist where there is no
man present. Therefore it is evident that even here are
those descendants of Raghu. But if those foremost of men,
those subduers of their enemies, the princes, be not here,
there are others, being ascetics, resembling Rima.” Hearing
their words acceptable unto the pious, that afflicter of hostile
ranks, Bharata, said unto the entire army, “Do ye carefully
stay here; do not proceed further. I myself will go, and
Sumantra and Dhriti.’ Thus desired, the troops remained
all about that place. Bharata went away, keeping his gaze
fixed in the direction of the top of (the column of) smoke,
Desired by Bharata to halt, that army,looking in the direction
of the smoke, rejoiced soon on learning that the beloved
Rama had arrived (at that place).


SECTION Lxxxxiv.


-AVING spent a long time in that mountain, that lover
of hills and woods, Dagaratha’s son resembling an immortal,
anxious to pleasure Vaideli as well as to please his own
mind, showed the variegated Chitrakuta unto his wife, like
Purandara unto Sachi. ‘“O gentle one, neither deprivation
of the kingdom nor separation from friends afflicts my mind
on beholding this romantic mountain My gentle one, look
but at the hill abounding with flocks of various birds, adorned
with summits cleaving the welkin and teeming with mineral
substances. And some paits of this monarch of mountains
are like silver, and some are blood-red, and some yellow tike
the hue of Manjisth4, and some lustrous like sapphires, and
some shining like blossoms or crystal or Ke¢akas, and some
blazing like stars or mercury, and some dight in mineral
substances. , And the mountain shines, being filled with divers


Ai ODHrAKANDAN. aan


beasts and multitudes of innocuous tigers, hyenas and bears,
and thronged with innumerable birds. And overspread with
mangoes, rose-apples, and Asaxas, and Lodhras,* Piyalas,
jacks, Ankolas, and Bhavyatinigas,and Vilwas, and Tindukas,
and bamboos,Kagmaris, Arishtas, and Varanas,and Madhukas,
sesames,and jujubes, and Amulakas, Nipas,canes, Dhanwanas,
and citrons—all in full flower, and bearing fruits, umbrageous
and charming,—the mountain attains an accession of loveli-
ness. And, thou gentle one, on the picturesque plateau of
the hill behold these intchigent couples of Kiunaras engaged
in sport at spots yiclding every enjoyment; and look at their
swords hung up on the boughs. And see the gorgeous apparel
of Vidyadharis, as well as the charming regiuus in which they
sport, And like an elephant dropping the temporal juice,
this hill appeareth beautiful with cascades, fountains and
rillets, flowing here and there. Whom doth not the breeze
laden with the perfumes of many a flower, soothing the sense
of smell, fill with delight ? If, O blameloss one, I dwell (here)
for many years with thee as well as Lakshmana, grief cannot
overcome me. O damsel, I take delight ip this picturesque
peak abounding in flowers and fruits, and frequented by
various birds. By this banishment of mine, I have gained
two things—my father has majntained his truth in religion,
and Bharata has obtained his dear interest. O daughter of
Videha, art thou being pleased on viewing along with me on
Chitrakuta, various objects grateful unto mind, speech and
body ? O queen, this abode in the forest like unto ambrosia
hath been declared by those royal saints, my ancestors, as
working out one's emancipation alter death. The giant crags
of the mountain grace the place all round by hundreds ; many
and various-hued, blue and yellow and pale and red. In the
night,the annual herbs by thousands growing on this foremost
of hills, shine and become visible by their own lustre, like
flames of fire. And, O lady, some parts of the mountain


+ Symplocos racemosa.—T.


56


442 RAwA ran,


appear like dwellings, and some like gardens, and some,again
consist of single rocks (capable of accommodating numbers of
men). And Chitrakuta looks as if it had arisen, riving the
earth ; and the fair front of Chitrakuta can be perceived from
every point, Behold the beds of pleasure-seekers, consisting
of the petals of lotuses, with Sthagaras, Panagas and Bhurya-
patras for their coverlets. And, my wife, behold these
lotus-garlands have been crushed and scattered ; and the
various fruits have been partaken of. The mountain Chitrakuta
abounding in fruits and roots and waters, surpasses Kuvera’s
capital or Sakra’s city or the north Kurus. My wife, O Sita,
if in consonance with my own excellent rules,I can, remaining
in the path of the pious, pleasantly pass this time along with
thyself and Lakshmana, then I shall attain the happiness
resulting from observing the duties of one’s race.”


SECTION LXXXXV.


Tien going out of the mountain, the Lord of Kosala
showed unto Mithila’s daughter the charming stream Manda-
kini of excellent waters. And R&ma, furnished with eyes
resembling lotuses, addressed the daughter of king Videha,
transcendentally beautiful, with a countenance like the fair
moon, saying, “Behold the river Mandakini, having variegated
islets ; beautiful ; frequented by ducks and cranes ; and filled
with flowers ; covered with diverse trees bearing fruits and
flowers ; and looking graceful all round like Saugandhik&i her-
self of Kuvera. And the waters rendered muddy in conse-
quence of herds of deer drinking of them, as well as the
graceful descents unto the river, fill me with pleasure, And,
my beloved, sages wearing matted locks and deer-skins, with


AYODAVAKANDAM. 445


discovered a mighty army, abounding with elephants, horses
and cars, and consisting of equipped infantry. Thereupon,
Lakshmana communicated uuto Rama tidings concerning
that army filled with elephants and steeds, and decked with
cars and streamers ; and spoke unto Rama, saying, “O noble
one, do you put out the fire; and let Sitd go into the cave.
And do you string your bow and make ready the arrows and
don on your mail.” Thereat, Rima—chief of men—answered
Lakshmana, saying, “O son of Sumitra, do thou (first)
ascertain whom this host belongs to.” Thus accosted
by Rama, Lakshmana, as if consuming that army by his
wrath resembling fire, said, “Having got himself installed,
Kaikeyi's son, Bharata, anxious to render his royalty perfectly
safe, is coming hither for the purpose of slaying us both.
Yonder is seen the graceful tree. By the same appeareth on
the car the Kovid&ra standard, having a shining top. And
men riding swift coursers are at their pleasure making for
this place; and elephant-riders, riding on elephants, are also
cheerfully directing their course hither. Let us, O hero, taking
our bows, station ourselves on this hill. °I will (to-day) see
Bharata, for whom we have come by this mighty misfortune.
Or let us rather remain where we are accoutred in mail and
with our arms ready. Shall he @f the Kovidara banner in
conflict come under our sway? O hero, we have met with
that foe of ours for whom, O Raghava, you, Sith and myself
have (experienced such misery), for whom, O Raighava, you
have been cast off from the entire kingdom. Surely, Bharata
should be slain by me. O Raghava, fault find I none in
slaying Bharata; slaying a former wronger, one doth not
reap unrighteousness. O Raghava, there is religious merit
to be reaped by slaying Bharata, who had formerly done us
wrong. On this one being slain, you will rule the entire
earth, To-day shall Kaikeyi, lusting after the kingdom, with
gtief behold her son slain in battle by me, like a tree riven
by an elephant. I will also kill Kaikeyi along (with the


445 Bat ANA.


hump-backed one), and her friends. Let the earth to-day be
freed from foul sins. To-day will I, O bestower of honor,
vent my restrained ire and bad blood upon the hostile hosts,
like fire set to a heap of hay. To-day with sharpened shafts
will I cut the bodies of the hostile hosts and drench the
woods of Chitrakuta with their blood. The ferocious beasts
shall drag away elephants and steeds and men slaughtered by
me with arrows penetrating into their hearts. I will, without
doubt, in this forest pay the debt I owe to my bow and
arrows, by slaying Bharata together with all his forces.”


SECTION LXXXXVIt.


Baciryinc Sumitra’s son, Lakshmana, transported with
rage and eager for encounter, Rama addressed him, saying,
“When the mighty Bharata possessed of high spirits has
himself come here, what is the use of the bow or the sword
orthe shield? Having promised to maintain my father's
truth, what, O Lakchmana, shall I, having stain Bharata in
battle, do with the kingdom"with a stain attached unto it?
That thing which falls to my lot on the destruction of friends
and adherents I never accept, even like food mixed with
poison, I swear unto thee, I wish for the (possession of) righte-
ousness, interest, desire and the earth, in your interests alone,
O Lakshmana. O Lakshmana, I swear by my weapon that it
is for the maintenance and happiness of my brothers that I
wish for the kingdom. O mild one, this Earth herself is
not difficult of being attained by me; but, O Lakshmana, 1
do not through unrighteousness wish to possess myself of
Sakra’s state-—May fire reduce to ashes any happiness of
mine that, O bestower of honor, happens to be dissevered
from Bharata, or thyself, or Satrughna. I think Bharata


AYODHYAKANDAM. 443


barks for their sheets, are in season performing their ablutions
in the river Mand&kini. And observing rules, persons raising
up their arms, are worshipping the sun, and, O thou of expan-
sive eyes, alter these appear ascetics following vows,(engaged
in Fapa). And the hill seems to dance on the wind swaying
the tops of trees ; and on both sides of the river, the trees
are crowned with flowers and Ieaves. And behold the river
Mandakini, somewhere with its waters resembling pearis,
and somewhere with islets, and somewhere filled with persons
who have attained emancipation. O thou of slender waist,
behold these hosts of flowers spreading along, and others


dipping themselves (in the stream). And, O auspicious one,
behold these sweet-throated birds, the Chakravakas, getting
upon the islets, uttering pleasant notes. Methinks, O beaute-
ous one, the sight of Chitrakuta and of Mand&kini is even
more delightful than life in the metropolis, or the sight of thy
own self. Do thou like unto her companion perform thy bath
with me in this stream, whose waters are perpetually stirred
by emancipated ones, furnished with asceticism, self-restraint,
and control over the senses,who have had their sins removed.
Do thou, O Sits, perform thy ablutions in the Mandakini,
scattering at the sametime, O girl, red and white lotuses. Do
thou, my wile, always consider the wild animals as citizens,
the mountain as Ayodhya’, and this stream as the Sarayu.
The virtuous Lakshmana is ever obedient to my €ommands ;
and, O Videha’s daughter, thou also art favourable to me.
This causes delight in my heart. Bathing thrice (in this
river),and living on tasteful fruits and roots, I in thy company
do not to-day wish either for Ayodhya or royalty. Bathing in
this beauteous stream agitated by herds of elephants, whose
waters are drunk by elephants, lions and monkeys,—which is
graced with flowers, and which is decked with multitudes of
blossoms, there is no one who has not his fatigue removed,
and who does not feel exhilarated.” Having thus along with
his beloved one, spoken variously regarding tha stream, that


444 RAMAYANA.


perpetuator of the Raghu race, Rama, began to range the
charming Chitrakuta, resembling the collyrium in hue.


BECTION LXxxxvil.


Havinc showed unto Mithil’s daughter the river belong-
ing to the mountain, Rama sat down on its table-land and,
gratifying Siti with meat, said unto her. “This clean meat
tastes sweet, having been roasted in fire.” The righteous
Raghava was thus seated in company with Sita, when Bhara-
ta’s followers came there. And filling the heavens, there
arose clouds of dust raised by the army as well as an uproar.
And at this time mad leaders of elephant-herds accompanied
by the latter, scared by the terrible tumult, scudded on all
sides, And Raghava heard the noise raised by the army ; and
also saw all those leaders of elephant-herds scampering away.
And having seen them running away and heard that hubbub,
Rama spoke unto Sumitr’’s son, Lakshmana of flaming energy,
“Hat Lakshmana, in whom Sumitr&i has been blest with a
worthy son, hark! A tremendous and dreadful uproar
resembling’ the rumbling of clouds is being heard ; and in
the woods and mighty forest, deer and buffaloes and herds of
elephants being accompanied by lions are suddenly scamper-
ing away in all directions. OQ Sumitri’s son, it behoves
thee to learn whether any king or prince is hunting in the
forest, or any ferocious beast is (ravaging the woods). O
Lakshmana, this mountain is even incapable of being
frequented by fowls. Therefore it behoves thee to learn all
about it, as has actually been the case.”—Thereat, hurriedly
ascending a flowering Sé/a tree, Lakshmana surveying all
sides, fixed his gaze on the east. And viewing the east, he


AYVODHVAKANDAAL, 447


attached unto his brothers had come to Ayodhy& ; and then
following the morality regulating the race, that one dearer
unto me than life, hearing of me banished, bearing matted
locks and bark, together with Janaki, O hero, and thyself,
thou foremost of men, bas, with his heart surcharged with
affection, and his senses overwhelmed by grief, come hither
for seeing us. He cannot have come on any other account.
And having got wroth with Kaikeyi, and given her rough
speech, that auspicious one, having gratified my sire, has come
hither to make the kingdom over unto me. And the season
being fit, meet it is that Bharata should see us. He does
not even in thought act against us. Hath ere this Bharata
done thee any bad turn? Or did he tell thee any thing so
alarming that to-day thou standest in fear of him? Certainly
thou ought not to say cruel or unpleasant words in relation
to Bharata,—if wrong be done unto Bharata, I shall consider
myself as wronged. Do sons, in times of peril, ever slay
their father, or brothers their brother like unto their life,
O son of Sumitr&? If thou speakest thus for the sake of
the monarchy, on seeing Bharata, I will say unto him, ‘Make
over the kingdom unto this one.’ Earnestly exhorted by me,
saying, ‘Do thou place the kingdom in his hands,’—he will
say, 'Very well.’ ” .

Thus addressed by his brother of a virtuous disposition,
Lakshmana ever engaged in Rama's good, frém shame
seemed to enter into his body, And hearing those words,
Lakshmana affeected by shame, answered, “I conceive our
father Dagaratha himself hath come to see you.” Add
finding Lakshmana overcome with shame, Raghava replied,
“I think that mighty-armed one has come hither to see us; or
I take it for certain that, considering that we are fit for ease
only, and taking our banishment to heart, he will take us
home. Or it may be that graceful descendant of Raghu, my
father, will go away, taking from the forest Videha’s daughter
brought up in the lap of luxury. There are seeq these grace-


448 RAMAYANA.


ful and well-bred steeds, courageous, swift, and furnished
with the speed of the wind—the best of horses. And this
huge elephant belonging to our aged sire, named Satrunjaya,
proceedeth in the van of the army. But, thou exalted one,
I do not see the splendid white umbrella of our father known
among men. Therefore, doubts arise in my mind. Do thou
descend from the top of the tree,O Lakshmana. Do mv
bidding.” Thus did the righteous Rama accost Sumitra’s son.
Descending from the top of the sé/a tree, that conquerer in
battles, Lakshmana, stood by Rama _ with joined hands,
Commanded by Bharata, “Let not( Rama's asylum) be tram-
pled by the forces,” the army took up its quarters at a distance
from the hill, And the Ikshwaku host filled with elephants
and steeds covering half a yojana, encamped at the side of
the mountain, And keeping morality in their fore-front
and renouncing pride, the disciplined forces schooled by
Bharata in view of pleasing that descendant of Raghu (Rima),
stayed in Chitrakuta.


SECTION Lxxxxvitt


“Hawi stationed his troops, that best of men, the
master, bécame anxious to go on foot to the Kakutstha honor-
ing his superiors, And the forces having with humility took
up the quarters assigned, Bharata addressed his brother,
Satrughna, saying, “O mild one, it behoves thee at once to
search this forest all round in company with a large body of
men as well as these Nishadas, And let Guha himself
accompanied by a thousand of his kindred bearing in their
hands arrows and bows and scimitars, also search for the
K&kutstha in this forest. Accompanied by counsellors,
citizens, preceptors and twice-born ones, I will on foot range
every direction. So long as I do not see Rama, or the mighty


APODHVAEKANDAM,. 449


Lakshmana, or the highly exalted daughter of Videha, 1 shall
not altain peace of mind. And so long as I do not see that
face of his fair as the moon, with eyes expansive like lotuses,
Ishall not attain peace of mind. Surely, Sumitra’s son,
Lakshmana, who beholds Rama’s countenance like the stain-
less moon, with eyes resembling lotuses, and beaming in
effulgence, is blessed. So long as 1 do not takeon my head
those feet of my brother bearing royal marks, I shall not
attain peace of mind. So long as established in the kingdom
of his father and grandfather,that one worthy of the monarchy
is not sprinkled with the water of installation, 1 shall not
attain peace of mind, Blessed is Vaidehi, the eminently
virtuous daughter of Janaka, who followeth the lord of this
Earth bounded by the seas. And this Chitrakuta is fotunate—
this hill like unto the monarch of mountains—in which resides
Kakutstha, like Kuvera in Nandana, And blessed is this deep
forest inhabited by ferocious animals, where abideth the great
king Rama, the foremost of those bearing arms." Having
said this, that best of men, the mighty-armed and highly
energetic Bharata, on foot entered the vast forest. And that
best of speakers went over the mountain-side through ranks
of blossoming trees. Then swiftly ascending a Sd/a on
Chitrakuta, he descried the high tolumn of smoke belonging
unto Rama's asylum. Having seen this, like one that has
crossed over the ocean, the graceful Bharata, concluding that
Rama was there, rejoiced exceedingly along with his friends,
Having heard that Rama’s asylum containing pious people
lay in Chitrakuta, that high-souled one again stationing his
forces, speedily went (in that direction), accompanied by
Guha.


37


450 RAMAYANS.


SECTION Lxxxxx.


-AVING quartered his forces, Bharata eager (to go to
R&ma’s place), went to see his brother, showing unto
Satrughna the signs of Rama’s abode being in the vicinity.
And having desired Vasishtha, saying, “Bring my mothers
without delay,” that one attached to his superiors went
before. And eager to see Rama even like Bharata himeelf,
Sumantra followed Bharata at a short distance. And as
Bharata passed on, he observed a neat cottage of leaves
stationed among the asylums of anchorets, furnished with
a portion having a wall with a door, And before the cottage,
Bharata saw fuet broken up, and flowers gathered. And
he saw at places signs of Kuga and bark set up on trees when
Rama and Lakshmana (first) arrived at their asylum. And in
that habitation, Bharata saw great heaps of dry dung of deer
and buffaloes, gathered for preventing cold. As he proceeded,
the intelligent and mighty-armed Bharata with a cheerful
heart remarked unto Satrughna and all the courtiers, “I
conceive, we have reached the tract that was mentioned by
Bharadw3ja, Hard by this spot, I fancy, is the river Manda.
kini. On high are barks set up by Lakshmana. Having to
pass by the way at unusual hours, (Lakshmana) has marked
it with signs. On the side of the hill is the way by which
Iong-tusked elephants pass to and fro with vehemence,
roaring at each other. Here is seen the dense and dark
smoke of that which the anchorets are ever anxious to
preserve in the forest—fire. Even here shall I with a
delighted heart see that foremost of men, the noble R&ghava
resembling a Maharshi, ever engaged in serving his supe-
tists.” Then going to Chitrakuta, that descendant of Raghu,
coming to the Mand&kini, said unto the men. "That fore~
taoat of mtn in all the world, the lord of all, coming into


AVODHYAKANDAM. 450


seclusion, is in his yoga posture. O fie upon my birth and
my life! For me, having come by misfortune, and renounced
every comfort, the effulgent lord of men, Raghava, is dwelling
in the woods. I shall be taxed of men on the score. To-day
(first) pacifying him, F will fall at the feet of Rama as well ag
of Sita and Lakshmana.” Having thus bewailed, Dagaratha's
son saw a splendid, charming, and holy dwelling in that
forest, composed of leaves. And Bharata beheld in Rama’s
habitation a sacred structure made of leaves, covered with a
profusion of Sé/a, palm, and Agwakarna leaves ; spread with
soft Kuga, like a dais in a sacrifice ; adorned with bows
resembling the iris, plated on the back with gold, of mighty
force, and capable of achieving arduous feets and destroying
foes ; and garnished with arrows in quivers, seeming like the
rays of the sun,with fiaming mouths,—like unto the Bhagavati
with serpents ; and exceedingly beautified with golden sheaths
and scimitars and shields spangled with gold and nice guana
finger-fences decked with gold ; inaccessible uuto foes like a
lions’s den unto deer; and furnished with a spacious dais
inclined on the north-east, with a fire flaming on it, And
looking around, anon Bharata saw his superior Rama seated
in the cottage bearing a head of matteg locks, clad in a black
deer-skin, and having tattered cXth and bark for hig garment.
And he saw Rama seated like unto a flame—with leonine
shoulders, mighty-arms, and eyes resembling lotuses—the
righteous lord of this world hounded by the seas—saw the
mighty-armed one like unto the eternal Brahma, seated on a
skin-seat on the ground alung with Sita and Lakshmana.
And seeing him, overwhelmed with grief and affliction, the
tighteous and graceful son of Kaikeyi, Bharata, rushed
(towards him). And soon as Bharata saw Rama, he, exceed-
ingly distressed, broke out into lamentations in words choked
with sorrow. And incapable of holding himself in patience,
he said, “That elder brother of mine, who (seated) in court
should be surrounded by the subjects intent upgn paying him


452 RAMAPARA.


homage, is now surrounded by wild deer. He that used to
adorn his person with attire worth many thousands (of things),
engaged in observing morality, is clad in deer-skin. Why
doth he that always wore varicgated blossoms, Raghava,
beareth this burthen of matted locks ? He who is worthy of
acquiring religious merit by celebrating sacrifices according
to the ordinance, is now following morality by affticting his
person. How is the person of that one whose body used to
ve daubed with costly sandal, covered with dust? It is for
me that Rama, although deserving of comfort, has come by
this misfortune, Wicked that I am, fie upon my life despised
of men!” Thus lamenting in woful guise, with the lotus of
of his countenance covered with sweat, Bharata coming at
Rama’s feet, fell at them bewailing. And inflamed with grief,
the exceedingly powerful prince Bharata, haying in distress
of spirit uttered, “O noble one,” again said nothing, And
beholding the illustrious Rama, Bharata with his utterance
choked with emotion, exclaimed, “O noble one,” and wag
unable to say anything further, Then Satrughna also weeping
paid homage unto the feet of Rama. And shedding tears,
Rama embraced them both. Then as in the sky, the Sun and
the Moon meet with Sukra and Vrihaspati, those two princes
(Rima ang Lakshmana) met with Sumantra and Guba io the
forest. And beholding those kings resembling leaders of
elephant-herds met together in that mighty forest, the
dwellers in the woods, resigning their cheerfulness, began to
shed tears.


SECTION Cc.


Tren R&ma cast his eyes on (Bharata) as clad in bark
and wearing malted locks he lay on the earth with joined
hands, incapable of being gazed at, like the Sun at the time


APODHYAKANDAM. 453


of the universal dissolution. Then recognizing him a little,
he took by the hand his brother Bharata, lean, with a pallid
countenance. And smelling the crown of his head, and
embracing that descendant of Raghu, Rama took Bharata on
his lap and asked him affectionately, “Where was thy father,
child, that thou hast come to the forest ? It certainly behoves
thee not to come unto the forest while he is living, Ah!I
see thee come form far after along time. Why, my child,
hast thou come unto this gloomy forest ? Is the king
alive, my child, seeing that thou hast come hither ; or, afflicted
with grief, hath he suddenly gone to the other world ? And,
O mild one, child that thou art, thy kingdom ever thine
hath not been wrested from thee ? And, O thou having
truth for prowess, dost thou, my child, minister unto our
sire ? And is that truthful one, that performer of Rajasuya
and Acwamedha, ever devoted to righteousness, king
Dagaratha, well? And, my child, is that exeedingly efful-
gent and learned Brahmana ever steady in morality, the
priest of the Ikshwakus, duly honored ? And, my child, are
Kaugaly&, and Sumitré having a son, in*happiness ¢ And is
the noble Kaikeyi in spirits? And is that one, sprung from
a mighty line, humble and versed in various lores thy priest,
who performeth every ceremony, who beareth no ijl will, and
whose gaze is ever fixed upon our welfare,—honored » And
do intelligent and sincere people cognizant of the rules, look
after the sacrificial fire? And do they regularly inform
thee of the proper seasons for performing the fire-sacrifice ?
And dost thou regard the deitics, the ancestral manes, the
Preceptors like unto predecessors, the physicians, the Brahe
manas, and the servants? And dost thou not disregard the
preceptor Sudhanw& versed in excellent arms whether in->
spired with manéras or not, and accomplished in the know-
ledge of polity? And, my child, hast thou employed as thy
concillors, persons, heroic, learned, eelf-controlled, well-born,
‘and understanding signs, who are like thy @wn self? O


454 RAuAya NA.


descendant of Raghu, counsel well kept by clever councillors
versed in lore, is the root of victory with kings. And thou
hast not come under the sway of sleep ? And thou awakest
atthe proper hour? And dost thou during the short hours
revolve the means of acquiring wealthy And thou dost not
take counsel either with thyself alone, or (on the other hand)
with a multiplicity of counsellors? And thy counsel doth
not range the kingdom (i. e. doth not take air)? And,
O descendant of Raghu, having determined upon a course
costing small effort but fraught with a mighty result, thou
setst about it sharply and delayest not? And do the
auxiliary) kings know only those acts of thine that have
been accomplished or those that are well nigh so, and not
those that thou intendest to set thine hand to? And do
others through inference or appearances come at a know-
ledge of thy counsels, although undivulged to others by thyself
or thy counsellors ; and (do thou and thy ministers) attaia
toa knowledge of others’ counsels? And passing by a
thousand dunces, dost thou set thy heart on having a single
wise man? In times of pecuniary stress, a wise man stands
in excellent stead. And although a king might be surrounded
by athousand or ten thousand fools, yet he can count upon
no assistance (at their hands. And a single able counsellor,
intelligent, hervic, and sagacious, bringeth great prosperity
upon a king ora prince. And my child, dost thou employ the
best servants upon the best offices, the middling upon
middling, and the worst upon the worst? And dost thou
employ upon the most worthy offices counsellors who are
above bribery, who have served thy father and grand-father,
and who are pure? And do the subjects visited with
condign punishment, as well as the ministers, disregard thee,
O son of Kaikeyi? And do the priests scorn thee like a
fallen one, even as females do those lascivious folks who
use force towards the former? He that doth not slay a
physician skilled in ways and means, a servant given to


AYODHYARANDAM. 455


enlisting the sympathies of his fellow-servants against his
master, or a hero that covets riches, is slain (by them), And
last thou chosen for thy general one that is confident,
is endowed with intelligence and fortitude, sprung in
arespectable race, and attached and able? And dost
thou practically honor thy foremost warriors possessed
of prowess, who have already given evidence of their
manliness ? And dost thou at the proper time grant thy
soldiers what thou shouldst—provision and pay ; and dost not
delay in doing this 7 If the proper time for granting provision
and pay be passed, the seivants get wroth with their master
and tax him; and great is the evil that springs herefrom.
And are the principal descendants of our race attached unto
thee ; and are they, when enlisted on thy side with concen-
trated minds, ready to lay down their lives? And, O Bha-
rata, are thy spies persons coming from the provinces, and
learned, upright, endowed with presence of mind, represent.
ing the truth, and possessed of wisdom? And dost thou
acquire intelligence of the expedients, eighteen* in respect
of others, and fifteen in respect of thy own self,—by means
of every three spies appointed in connection with each
of these expedients—men quite ignorant of each other's
counsels? And thou dost not contemn those weak ones that,
O destroyer of thy foes, having been expelled, have come
again (unto thee)? And, my child, thou dost not minister unto
atheistical Brahmanas? These childish persons proud of
their learning are only fit for bringing evils upon others.
While there are excellent scriptures, these people of subtle
intellects, having acquired a knowledge of dialecties, speak


1 Minister. 2 Priest. 3 Heir-apparent. 4 General. 5 Warder. 6 Gate.
keeper. of the inner-apartment. 7 Jailor. 8 Treasurer. 9 Conveyer of the
royal orders. 10 Pleadera, 11 Judges. 12 Members of the council. 13 Dis-
tributer of pay and provision to the army. 14 Journeymen’ 15 Justice of the
peace. 16 Protector of the frontiers of the kingdom. 17 Magistrate,
18 Guards of rivers, hills, forests, and fortresses.


asé RamMar ana.


vanities. And, my child, dost thou protect the prosperous
and renowned Ayodhy4, inhabited formerly by our heroic
predecessors ; bearing a true name ; having strong gates ; filled
with elephants, steeds,and cars ; thronged by thousands ; with
noble Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaigyas breathing high
Spirits, and with their senses controlled, each engaged in his
own task ; abounding in people learned in the Veda; and
surrounded with palatial mansions of various shapes? And,
O descendant of Raghu, are the flourishing provinces marked
with hundreds of Chaityas, filled with prosperous people,
graced with abodes of deities, places for distributing water,
and tanks, with men and women in happy mood, gay with
meetings and festivities, having their outskirts well furrowed,
provided with beasts, void of ill feelings, depending on tanks
for their water supply, charming, renounced by fierce animals,
free from all kinds of fear, decked with mines, left by un-
righteous people, and well governed by my predecessors,—
having a good time of it? And do agriculturists and cow-
herds find favor in thy sight? And remaining in their
respective vocations, do they enjoy happiness? And dost
thou maintain them by securing unto them what they wish
for and removing from them what they wish away? All the
dwellers in his dominions shculd be protected by the king.
And dost thou conciliate the females; and are they well
protected by thee? And dost thou regard them? And
thou dost not open unto them thy mind 7 And are the woods
where elephants breed, kept by thee ; and hast thou kine?
And dost thou not foster mares and female-elephants ?
And dost thou show thyself daily in the court, well robed ?
And rising in the morning, dost thou show thyself in the
high-ways? And do thy servants boldly present them-
selves before thee; or do they all keep away? A middle
course contributes to their good fortune. And are all the
forts furnished with wealth, corn, arms. water, machines,
artizans, and bowmen? And are thy incomings great and


ALODHYAKANDAM. 457


outgoings slender? And, O Raghu’s descendant, thou dost
not give away thy coffers unto the undeserving ? And dost
thou spend thy wealth in the interests of the deities, or the
pitris, or the Brahmanas who have come unto thee, or war-
tiors, or friends? If any respectable, pure-spirited and clean
person happen to be accused by some one of theft or other
crimes, dust thou from covetousness punish him without first
having him tried by persons versed in scripture ? And, O best
of men, is a thief, that hath been caught, interrogated (as to his
guilt), and found with the stolen property on his person, set
free (by thy men) from motives of gaing And do thy coun-
sellors, O descendant of Raghu, accomplished in various lore,
uninfluenced by greed, consider the conduct of both the rich
and the poor involved in peril? © son of the Raghu race,
the tears of those who have been falsely charged with any
offence, (and who have failed to obtain Justice), dropping,
destroy the sons as well as the beasts of the ruler that minds
his own comfort only. And dost thou with these three —yilts,
mind and word—try to win over aged people, boys,
physicians, and the principal ones? Ahd dost thou salute
spiritual preceptors, aged persons. ascetics, gods, guests,
Chaityas, emancipated ones, and Bramhanas ¢ And thou dost
not oppose righteousness by iffterest, or interest,by virtue,
or both by desire, intent on gratifying the senses? And, O
foremost of conquerors, dost thou, O thou cognisant, of
time, in season resorting to interest, desire, and virtue res+
pectively, attain them, O bestower of boons? And do
BrShmanas versed in all religious lore and knowing interest,
together with the citzens and the inhabitants of the pro-
vinces wish for thy happiness, O highly wise one? Atheism,
untruthfulness, inattention, anger, procrastination, compa-
nionship with evil persons, indolence, gratification of the
senses, consultation with a single person cancerning the
needs of a kingdom, taking counsel with those that are
cognisant of evils alone, omission to take imshand a task


58


458 KAmArawa.


that hath been decided upon, divulgence of counsel, non-
commencement of a course in the morning, and marching
against all the foes atone and the same time,—hast thou
eschewed these ten and four faults? And, O descendant
of Raghu, truly understanding the tenth,* filth,t fourtht
and seventh§ classes as well ae the eighth, and third ones,4J
and the three kinds of learning,¥* and victory over the
senses, and the evils human and superhuman, six attri-
butes,tt and the (peculiar) duties (of royalty), and the
twenty classes,ff and the kinds of Prakritis§§ and
Mandala, |||} and Y5tra,9 chastisement, and war and peace
having each two sources ; dost thou with due order observe all
these ¢ And, O wise one, dost thou, as laid down in Lhe ordi-
nance, take counsel,severally and in a body with three or four
men? And dost thou observe the Vedas ? And dost thou per-
ceive the fruit of thy acts ? And have thy wives borne children ?
And has thy knowledge of scripture borne fruit? And, O
descendant of Raghu, is thy intellect going the way that I
have indicated above ? This course is conducive to long life,
and fame; and virtue, desire and interest. And, O child, art


* Hunting, gambling, sleeping in the day, calumny, addiction to women,
wine, dancing, singing, playing, and rgving without purpose.—T.

+ Five kinds of fortresses.—T.

$ Four kinds of means adopted for the governing and maintaining of a
king?om.—T.

$ Seven pillars of a kingdom including the sovereign, counsellors &.—T.

4 Eight kinds of manifestation of anger.—T.

{ Interest, desire and virtue —T,

** The Vedas; agriculture and commerce &c. polities. —T,

tt Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, seeking profec-
tion. —T.

tt Twenty classes of men with whom peace should not be contracted. —T.

$§ These five are called Pratvitis—minister, treasure, territory, fortress,
chastisement—T.

Wl Twelve classes of kings, who are ready to enter into a treaty, declare
war or continue in a state of indifference. —T.

q% A Givefolé marching out for war.


4 FODHYARANDAM. 459


thou following the course that was followed by our ancestors ?
And art thou maintaining the conduct that is excellent and
passes along pious ways? And, O son of Raghu, thou dost
not alone partake of sapid meats thyself alone? And dost
thou share them with those friends who expect it? The
Jearned king ruling (all) righteously—that chastiser of the
subjects—the monarch attaining duly the entire earth, going
away from hence, acquires the celestial regions.”


SECTION Cl.


Kyowa Bharata as devoted to his superior Rima
along with his brother Lakshmana, asked him, “What
for is this (visit of Lhine unto the woods)? I wish to hear
as clearly related by thee the reason why clad in blackdeer-
skin and wearing matted locks, thou, leaving thy kingdom,
hast come to these regions. It behoveth thee to tell me all
this.’ Thus accosted by the high souled Kakutstha, Kaikeyi’s
son, suppressing his grief by a strong effort, with joined
hands said, '‘O noble one, forsaking usall, our father possess-
ed of mighty-arms, having peMormed this terrible task, in
consequence of being urged by a woman, my mother Kaikeyi,
hath gone to heaven afflicted with grief on account o{his
son, O repressor of foes. And she hath commitled a signal
sin capable of destroying her fame. And without obtaining
the kingdom which she had coveted as the fruit of her
action, a widow tried with grief, my mother will fall into a
terrible hell. Now it behoves thee to extend thy favor unto
me who have become thy slave. Do thou this very day get
thyself installed in the kingdom, like unto Indra himself.
All these subjects and our widowed mothers have come
unto thee. It behoves thee to show thy favor unto them.
Thou art the first-born ; and meet it is that thoushouldst get


460 RAMAYANA,


thyself installed, O bestower of honor. Therefore do thou
receive the kingdom righteously and fulfil the desire of thy
friends. And like the autumnal Night on having the
unclouded moon, let the entire Earth cease to be a widow on
having thee, her lord. With bent head I beseech thee along
with these counsellors. It behoves thee to show thy favor
unto thy brother, disciple, and slave. Therefore, O chief of
men, thou ought not to pass by this honored band of ancestral
ministers, who have always been serving this race.” Having
said this, with tears flooding his eyes, the mighty-armed son
of Kaikeyi, Bharata, again took Rama's feet on his head,
Thereupon Rama embracing his brother Bharata resembling
amad elephant, and sighing again and again, said, “Of a
high race, possessed of strength, endowed with energy, and
vowed unto sterling worth of ‘character, how can one like
me commit sin for the sake of dominion ? Fault find I none
ever so small in thee, thou destroyer of foes. Nor doth it
become thee from puerility to tax thy mother, O exceedingly
wise one, O thou that art sinless, superiors may act as they
list in relation to those wives and sons of theirs that are alter
their heart. And this also thou shouldst learn that wives,
sons and disciples sifould always be obedient as has been
held by the emancipated ones. O mild one, the monarch
is competent to make me stay in the woods clad in black
deer: skin, as to establish me in the monarchy. And, O thou
conversant with morality, O foremost of those observing,
righteousness, ia respect of virtuous conduct, a mother should
be as much regarded (by a son) asa father is. How can I,
O descendant of Raghu, having been told by my righteous
father and mother—Go to the woods’—act otherwise ? Thou
ought to receive the kingdom, Ayodhy&, honored of men;
and I ought to dwell in Dandaka dressed in bark. Having
made this division of duties in the presence of ail, and also
enjoined this, the mighty monarch, Dagaratha, hath ascended
heaven, Tl.at superior of all, even the virtuous king, is thy


AVODHFAKANDAM, 460


evidence. It behaves thee to enjoy that which hath been
assigned-unto thee by thy sire. And, O mild one, taking
refuge in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years, I will act
the part that hath been set apart for me by my magnanimous
father. What hath been assigned to me by that one respected
by all men, my high-souled father resembling the lord of
celestials himself, is my prime good; the masterdom of all
the worlds I would decline (should it he opposed to the will
of my sire).”


SECTION Cll,


Hearne Rama’s words, Bharata answered, “Deprived
of the kingdom in consequence of my posteriority in point of
birth, what doth regard for morality avail me? O best of men,
even this morality has ever been established with reference
to us, viz, that the eldest son of the king existing, a younger
one cannot be the king. Do thou, therefore,O Raghava go
along with me to the prosperous Ayodhy&; and get thyself
installed there for the behoof ofsour race. Although a king
observing interest and virtue, and who towers above average
humanity, hath been called a mortal, yet to me he*is a very
deily. While I was in Kekaya and thou wast in the fSrest,
that intelligent monarch honored of the good, given to cele-
brating sacrifices, ascended heaven. As soon as thou hadst
set out (for the forest) along with Sita and Lakshmana, the
king borne down by grief and chagrin, went to heaven, O
foremost of men, do thou arise, and offer water unto the
spirit of our sire. Satrughna and Ihave ere this offered
water unto (the departed). O Raghava, anything offered
unto the (manes of the) ancestors by a beloved descendant,
conduces to their eternal behoof; and thou wast the favorite


46a RAMAPANA.


of our father. Mourning thee and exceedingly desirous of
seeing thee, his mind being fastened on thee and incapable
of being turned away, deprived of thee, and smitten with
gtief on thy account, thy father departed this life, remember-
ing thee.”


SECTION Ci.


Hearine those piteous words uttered by Bharata in
connection with the demise of their father, Raghava was
deprived of his senses. And on that thunder-bolt of a speech
being uttered by Bharata, like unto a (real) thunder-bolt
hurled in battle by the enemy of the Danavas (Indra), that
subduer of foes, Rama, stretching his arms, fell down to the
earth, like a blossoming tree that hath been hewn by an axe.
Seeing that lord of the world and mighty bowman, Rama,
fallen, like a sleeping elephant fatigued with turning up earth
with its tusks, his brothers exercised with sorrow, broke out
into lamentations, and along with Videha’s daughter began
to sprinkle-water (on his face). Then regaining his conscious-
ness, Kakutstha shedding teats from his eyes, distressfully
addressed himself to speech. And hearing that lord
of earth, his sire, had gone to heaven, that righteous one
said unto Bharata words fraught with virtue and interest,
“What shall Ido with Ayodhy&i, my sire having gone the
way ordained by the gods? And who will govern her,
now that she hath been deprived of that foremost of mon-
archs ? Of fruitless birth that 1am, what can I do for that
magnanimous one? And of him that renounced his life
from grief on my account, I have not even performed the
last rites. Ah! Bharata, thou, O sinless one, art biessed,
since by thee as well as by Satrughna have been performed
all the funeral,rites of the king. To Ayodhy&, bereft of the


A¥FODHVAKANDAM. 483


monarch, having none to preside over her destinies, and
many rulers, will I not return even when the term of my
abode in the woods has been passed. My father having gone
to the other world, who, O subduer of enemies, will again
counsel me when, my stay in the forest being over, I shall
have returned unto Ayodhya ? And from whom shall I hear
those words grateful unto the ear, which my father gratifying
me used to speak unto me when I happened to do something
well?’ Having thus addressed Bharata, Raghava burning
in grief, spoke unto his wife, with her countenance resembling
the full moon, saying, “O Sit&, thy father-in-law is dead
and, O Lakshmana, thou art fatherless. Bharat has com-
municated unto me the sad intelligence that our father hath
ascended heaven,” When Ka&kutstha had said this, tears
began to shower forth from the eyes of the renowned princes.
Then all those brothers pacifying as best they could Rama
stricken with sorrow, said unto him, “Do thou perform the
watery rites of that Jord of the earth, our sire.” Having
heard that her father-in-law, the king, had gone to the
celestial regions, Sita with her eyes filled* with tears, could
not see her beloved. Thereupon, pacifying the weeping
daughter of Janaka, Rama moved with grief, spoke unto the
distressed Lakshmana, saying, “Do thou bring Ingudi fruits
as well as a piece of new bark. I will go to perform the
watery rites of our high-souled sire. Let Sita go “first. ~Do
thou follow her, I shall go last. Even this is the course
of those in mourning.” Then that magnanimous one, having
a knowledge of the soul, mild, graceful, capable of controlling
his senses, steady in his regard for Rama, and ever following
him--Sumantra—in company with those sons of the king,
having cheered up Raghava, brought him to the auspi-
cious river, Mand&kini. Then those illustrious ones, having
in distress arrived at the river Mandakini, having convenient
descents, charming, ever furnished with blossoming woods,
and of rapid currents ; and approached its desgents, goodly


rs aati raNa,


and void of mud, offered water unto the monarch, uttering,
“May this be so!” And the protector of the earth (Rima),
holding water with his joined hands, facing the south, said
weeping, “O foremost of monarchs, may this clear water
knowing no deterioration, reach thee, who hast gone to the
world of the ancestral manes!”’ Then drawing nigh unto
the marge of the Mand&kini, the energetic Raghava along
with his brothers, offered the Pinda unto his father. And
placing the Ingudi Pinda mixed with juyube on a bed of
darbha, Rama crying in distress, said, "O mighty monarch,
do thou well pleased feed on this, which we also live upon.
That which is the fare of an individual, is also the fare of
his divinities.’ Then that foremost of men ascending the
bank of the stream by the self-same way, got up on the
charming side of the hill, And having arrived at the gate of
the cottage of leaves, that lord of the earth held both
Bhatata and Lakshmana with his hands. And there the hill
reverberated at the sounds raised by the brothers walking
along with Vaidehi, like unto lions roaring. And perceiv-
ing the loud uproar of those mighty ones engaged in offering
water unto their sige, indulging in lamentations, the army of
Bharata became agitated. And they said, “For certain
Bharata hath met with Rima; and this mighty noise proceeds
from them, as they are bitterly mourning their deceased
sire.” Thereat leaving aside their vehicles. they with one
mind, rushed towards the spot wherefrom proceeded the up-
roar. And of those that were tender, some weut on horses,
and some on elephants, and some on ornamented chariots,
while others went on foot. And eager to behold Rama stay-
ing away for a short time, though seeming to do so for a long
period, all the men at once went to the hermitage. And
desirous of witnessing the meeting of the brothers (with
Rama), they with all despatch proceeded by means of various
vehicles consisting of beasts and cars. And the ground trod-
den by the wheels of innumerable cars, emitted loud sounds,


AYODHVAKANDAMN. 485


like those emitted by the sky on clouds gathering. And
frightened by the uproar, elephants accompanied by female
ones, perfuming all sides (by the fragrance of temporal
juice), went to another forest. And boars, and deer, and
lions, and buffaloes, and Srimaras, and tigers, and Gokarnas,
Gayals and Prishatas were striken with panic. And wild
with alarm, Chakravakas and swans, and Natyuhas, and
Plavas, and Karandavas, and male coels, and Kraunchas,
fled away in all directions. And the welkin was enveloped
by birds frightened by the noise, as the earth was covered by
men, and both the sky and the Jand then gave out great
effulgence. As the people suddenly saw that foremost of
men, the sivless and illustrious Rama seated on the ground,
accusing Kaikeyi as well as the vile Manthar&, the people
approached Rama, with their countenances discovering
tears. Seeing those men oppressed with grief with theie
eyes filled with tears, that one cognizant of virtue like fathers
and mothers, embraced those that deserved it. And he
embraced some persons; and some offered him salutations.
And the king’s son, as each deserved, properly received them
along with their friends and equals in age. And the sounds,
produced by those high-souled persons lamenting, gesounding
the earth and the sky, and the mpuntain-caverns, and all the
cardinal points, were heard like peals of Afridanga’.


SECTION Civ.


Desirous of sceing Rama, Vasishtha, taking before him
the wives of Dagaratha, proceeded towards the hermitage.
And as the wives of the king were going slowly by the
Mandakini, they discovered the landing-place which was
used by Rama and Lakshmana. Thereupon Kaugaly4, with


so


466 aaairaNa.


her eyes filled with tears and her countenance rendered pale,
observed unto the forlorn Sumitra as well as the other wives
of the king, “Sacred like unto a first wife, in this forest this
is the landing-place of those unfortunate ones of untiring
energy, who had been deprived of the kingdom. From here,
O Sumitr&, doth thy son, Saumitri, ever vigilant, personally
procure water for my sun. Although thy son performeth a
servile office, yet he is not to blame : (the performance of) that
alone which serves no purpose of his brother possessed of
many perfections, could bring blame upon him, To-day let
thy son, who doth not deserve such toilsome work, cease to
perform that office which is fraught with hardships fit only for
the base.” That lady of expansive eyes happened to sce on
the earth the /ngudipinda, which had been placed by Rima
for his sire on the dardha with their tops pointing south-
wards. Seeing this, which had been placed on the ground by
R&ma disconsolate for his sire, the noble Kaugaly& addressed
all the wives of Dagaratha, saying, “Do ye behold this that
hath been duly offered to the high-souled descendant of
Raghu—lord of the-Ikshwaku race—by Raghava. I do not
deem this as fit fare for that magnanimous monarch resembling
a celestial, who had enjoyed every luxury (in life). Having
enjoyed this earth boundeé by the four seas, how can that
lord of the world, resembling on earth the mighty Indra,
feed on this /ugudi pinda? Nothing appeareth to me more
deplorable in this world than this that the auspicious Rama
hath offered an /agudi cake unto his father. Seeing the
dngudi pinda offered by Rama unto his father, why doth not
my heart break ‘into a thousand shivers? Now the tradition
in vogue among men, appeareth to be true, viz., that “the fare
that is partaken by a person, is also parlaken by his deity.”
Then those that were co-wives with her, consuled the
distressed Kaugaly% ; and, (entering the asylum), beheld Rama
like an immortal dropped from the celestial regions. Seeing
Rama, who kad been deprived of every comfort, his mothers,


APODHYARANDAM. 47


overwhelmed with grief and distress, began to shed tears,
Jamenting. Raising his mothers, that foremost of men,
Rama, true to his promise, took hold of those lotus feet of
theirs. And those ones furnished with expansive eyes, (on
their turn) by means of their fair hands of delicious feel
furnished with soft fingers and palms,fell to rubbing the dust off
Rama’s back. After Rama had done, Sumitra’s son algo, seeing
all his mothers, with sorrow gently paid his reverence unto
them with affection. Thereat,as they had treated Rama,all the
ladies treated that one sprung from Dagaratha, Lakshmana,
graced with auspicious marks. Sit& also with her eyes filled
with tears,having taken hold of the feet of her mothers-in-law,
stood before them in distressful guise. Embracing that
woeful one in banishment,even as a mother doth her daughter,
Kaugalya, smitlen with grief, said, “The daughter of Videha’s
King, and the daughter in-law of Dagaratha, and the wife of
Rama himself—why doth such a lady undergo misery in the
lone forest ? O Vaidehi, beholding thy face like unto a lotus
heated under the sun, ora lily that hath been crushed, or
like unto gold covered with dust, or the moon enveloped by
clouds, grief begot of this vortex of disaster that is in my
mind, fiercely burneth me, as fire consumeth a strycture.” As
his wretched mother was thys speaking, Bharata’s elder
brother, Raghava, approaching, took the feet of *Vasishtha,
Having taken hold of the feet of the priest resembling a
flame, and of accumulated energy,—like unto that lord of the
immortals, Indra, taking the feet of Vribaspati, Raghava sat
down with him. Then behind them (R&ma and Vasishtha),
along with his own counsellors, and principal citizens, and
generals, and persons of eminent piety,—sat the virtuous
Bharata in the presence of his elder brother. Seeing Raghava
in the guise of an ascetic, flaming in grace, the exceedingly
powerful Bharata with joined palms sat down in company
with his brother, like the great Indra of controlled
faculties in presence of Prajapati. “What will Bharata having


468 KAuAvawa,


bowed unto R&aghava and paid him homage,wiil say to him ?”
—this intense curiosity arose in (the minds of) all the noble
persons present there. And Raghava having truth and
forbearance, and Lakshmana endowed with maguanimity, and
Bharata possessed of righteousness, surrounded by their
friends, appeared (there) like unto the three fires surrounded
hy Sadasyas.


SECTION cv


As those foremost of persons surrounded by their friends
indulged in lamentations, the night passed away in grief.
On the night being succeeded by an auspicious morning,
those brothers surrounded by their friends, having performed
Homa and Fapa on the Mandakini, returned unto Rama.
And silting silent} no one said anything. Then Bharata
addressed Rama in the midst of those friends, saying, "My
mother was (first) pacified (by grant of the kingdom.)
The kingdom is (now, mine.’ 1} grant the same unto thee.
Do thou enjoy the kingdom rid of its thorns. Like unto a
dyke forced by a torrent during the rains, this mighty
monarchy is difficult of being protected save by thee. As a
mule is incapable of imitating the course of a horse, or as
birds, that of Tarkshya, I, O Lord of earth, lack the strength
to imitate thee. O Rama, ever happy is the life of him that
others depend upon for subsistence : unhappy is the life of
the person that depends upon others for support. As a tree
planted by a person, and by him made to increase, (until at
last), sending out branches, a mighty tree, it is incapable
of being got up by a dwarf; and then, if, flowering, it
show no feuit-, it cannot contribute to the  satis-


AYODHYAKANDAM. 469


Faction of him for whom it hath been planted. O mighty-
armed one, this comparison is meant for thee. This* it
behoves thee to apprehend, inasmuch as thou art our excel-
lent lord, and thou dost not teach us who depend upon thee
for support. Let the principal orders, O monarch, behold
thee, repressor of foes—established in the kingdom, like the
powerful sun himself. O Kakutstha, let mad elephants roar,
with the view of following thee ; and let the women of the
inner apartments with concentrated minds utter jubilation.”
On hearing the words of Bharata, who was beseeching Rama,
many of the citizens expressed their approbation by exclaim-
ing. “Excellent well!” Seeing the illustrious Bharata
aggrieved and engaged in lamentation, the calm and consider
ate Rama consoled him, saying, “No creature is endowed
with the power of exercising any control over the course of
events,—man has no independent status (in nature), The
Destroyer draws him both here and hereafter. Those that
increase, are destined to deteriorate ; those that go upward,
ultimately fall, those that come together, separate in the end;
and life at length meets with death. As‘a ripe fruit hath no
other fear than fall, so man who is born, hath no other fear
than death. Even as a stout-pillared edifice, gettitg dilapidat-
ed, waxes weak, so men coming ‘under the sway of decrepitude
and death, get enfeebled. A night that hath gone by, doth
not return, as the full Jamun&, when she hath entereg the
ocean, doth not come back. In this world, days and nights
pass away with creatures, and speedily impair their lives,
even as in summer the rays (of the sun) (dry up) the waters.
Do thou therefore deplore thyself. Why dost thou lament
any thing else? Every one’s life is decreasing, whether
he sits or moves. Death goeth with one, sitteth down
with one, and, after having gone a long way, relurneth with
one. The person is filled with folds in the skin, the hair
hath grown hoary, the individual is enfeebled because of age,—
+


+ The import of the image —T.


470 RAMAYANA,


by doing what, can he prevent this? People rejoice on the
rising of the sun; they feel delighted at the approach of
night—but they do not understand that their lives have
(meanwhile) been shortened. People are exhilarated at the
commencement of a new season in novel fashion ; creatures
get their lives shortened at the change of seasons. As on
the mighty ocean, one piece of wood comes in contact
with another; so, a person, having been in association with
another, is separated from him in time. In this way,
wives and sons and kindred and wealth, having been in
associalion, go away; their separation is certain, There
exists not one in this world that can change one’s nature as
received, A person lamenting a dead individual, hath no
power to prevent his own death. As, while one is proceed-
ing on a road, another stationed by the way, says,
‘lL too will go in thy wake,’ even so, the way that hath
been followed by our predecessors, (must be followed ax
well by us). Why should people mourn (for deceased
relatives , when they are themselves subject to the fate that
knoweth no turning? (Perceiving the destruction of) life
declining, like unto a current that never turneth back, one
should engage his soy! in happiness; for all men are said to
be born for the same. My child, our righteous sire, who,
after having performed excellent aud entire sacrifices,
accompanied with dakshinds, hath repaired to heaven,
honored of the good, should not be mourned.* Having
renounced his human frame wasted and worn out with


= The N. W. P. text has seven additional lines here, wanting in the other
texts:—"That lord of the earth, our father Dacaratha, hath gone to heaven.
On account of having adequately maistained his servants and governed his
subjects, and virtuously given away wealth, our sire hath gone to heaven,
‘And by virtue of supremely excellent and desirable acts, and sacrifices accom-
pained with detshinas, that master of this world, our father Dagaratha hath
ascended heaven. Aud having celebrated many sacrifices and enjoyed tuz-
uries, that lord of the earth, having attained a goodly age, hath gone to
heaven.*—T.


APODHVAKANDAM. 47


age, our father hath attained celestial state, which ex-
ists in the regions of Bramh&. Such an one should
never be mourned by any wise person like thee or my-
self, accomplished in learning and more than ordinarily
intelligent. Such manifold grief and mourning and lamenta-
tion should be renounced by intelligent and firm per-
sons in all conditions in life, Do thou cast off this grief:
let not sorrow overpower thee. Going thither, stay in that
city. And, O best of speakers, this was also enjoined by
our sire of controlled senses. I also must do my noble
father’s will as to whatever that one of pious acts has laid
upon me. QO subduer of foes, it is not proper for me to pass
by his orders, So they are also worthy of being honoured by
thee. He is our friend and father. O descendant of Raghu,
that mandate of our righteous father, acceptable unto me,
will [ obey by abiding in the woods. O foremost of men,
(good in) the next world is capable of being attained by an
honest and pious person crowned with sterling virtues,
ever following his superiors. O best of men, thinking that
our father Dagaratha has attained exceWent state, do thou,
resorting to all noble qualities, seek thy welfare in the next
world,” Having said these significant words unto his younger
brother, with the view of making him obey the injunctions
of their father, that lord, the magnanimous Rama, paused.


SECTION CVI.


On Rima having stopped after speaking these pregnant
words, the virluous Bharata addressed the righteous Rama
attached unto his subjects in an excellent speech on the banks
of the Mand&kini, saying, “O vanquisher of foes, who is there
in this world like unto thee? Pain doth not afflict thee,


473 RAIMAYVANs.


nor doth pleasure exhilarate. Thyself the exemplar of even
aged people, thou referrest to them on doubtiul points
(of morality). ‘Living like unto dead and existing like
unto non-existing’—what shall make a person that hath
attained this intellectual state, grieve? O lord of men, he
that like unto thee understands the nature of the soul and
its environment coming by any calamity, ought not to
despond. Thou resembiest, O Raghava, the god in
strength, and art magnanimous, and truthful in promise,
and knowest every thing and art endued with intelligence,
Calamity, however unbearable it may be, should not
overpower a person like thyself furnished with such virtues
and cognizant of life and death, The sin that in my absence
from home hath been perpetrated by my mean-minded
mother doth not find favour in my’ sight. Be thou therefore
propitious to me. I am bound by the fetters of religion. For
this it is that I do not by a severe penalty slay my wicked
mother deserving of chastisement. How having sprung
from Dagaratha of righteous deeds and born of immaculate
race, and knowing, virtue and vice, can I commit such a re~
prehensible action? Dagaratha is our superior, of meritori-
ous acts, aged our king, adeparted spirit, and our father, it
is on account of this thay Ido not censure our father
who is a deity unto us. OU cognizant of virtue, what virtuous
person ccaversant in morality, should, seeking the pleasure
of his wife, commit such a sinful act devoid of both righteous-
ness and interestg ‘Creatures, as their end approaches,
lose their sense’ this ancient adage has been illustrated in
‘the world by the course the king has taken. Do thou, intent
upon bringing about good, redeem the wrong that hath been
done by our sire through anger, ignorance and recklessness.
The son that repaireth the wrong done by his father by
acting contrary to the latter is in this world considered
teally a son ; but not be that acteth otherwise. Be thou that
(real) son (of the monarch). Do thou not approve the action


APODH1VAKANDAM. 473


of thy father, since what he has done is divorced from right-
eousness and is blameworthy. Do thou rescue all these—
Kaikeyi, myself, my father, our friends and adherents, and
the whole body of the citizens as well as the inhabitants of
the provinces. Where is the forest? And where is Kshatriya
morality? Where are matted locks? And where is thy
government of the country? It Lehoves thee not to act in
such an untoward way. Even this is the first duty of a
Kshatriya, viz—getting oneself installed—by means of
which, O highly wise one, he can compass the government of
. the people. What base Kshatriya setting aside this indubit-
able morality, resorts to a dubious and inauspicious course,
which should be followed by the old alone ? But if thou be
bent upon practising this austere morality, do thou undergo
this trouble, after having righteously ruled the four orders.
© thou cognizant of morality, those versed in duty say that
of the four modes of life, the life of the householder is the
foremost. Why then dost thou wish to renounce the same ?
I am inferior to thee in learning, in position, and in birth.
How can I then govern the earth, thou existing ? Void of
sense and quality, a boy, and inferior to thee in point of
years, I, deprived of thee, can not liye. O thou cognizant of
morality, do thou, along with thy friends, accogding to thy
proper morality rule this entire ancestral kingdom rid of its
thorns and enjoying tranquillity. Even here, O thdu cognizant
of the Mantras, let all the subjects and the Ritwijas with
Vasishtha, versed in the Mantras, instal thee. Having been
installed, go to Ayodhy& for the purpose of governing it,
having with our assistance conquered thy enemies by thy
strength, like Vasava conquering (his foes; with the help of the
Maruts. Having freed thyself from thy three-fold debts, do
thou govern me, repressing thy foes, and propitiating thy
friends with every gratification. O noble one, to-day let thy
friends rejoice in consequence of thy coronation. To-day let
those that intend to do thee harm, being frightgned, fly to the


59


a74 RAMAPANA,


ten cardinal points. O foremost of men, wiping out the
disgrace of my mother, do thou emancipate our sire from sin.
I beseech thee with bent head. Be thou merciful unto me,
unto all our friends, and, O great lord, unto all creatures in
general. But, if disregarding my solicitations, thou wend
from here to the forest, I shall go along with thee.” Although
thus besought and propitiated by Bharata with bent head,
that lord of the earth,Rama, possessed of strength, established
in the words of his father, did not decide for going, Witness-
ing that wonderful firmness in Raghava, the people were at
one and the same time delighted and depressed. They were
aggrieved because he would not go to Ayodhya ; they rejoiced
on seeing his firm resolution. Then the Ritwijas, the citizens,
and their leaders, and the mothers with their senses lost and
with tears in their eyes, extolled Bharata as he was speaking
thus; and, bowing down unto Rama, they directed their
solicitations together.


SECTION CVI.


As Bharata was again speaking in this strain, his grace-
ful elder brother, having been highly honored, answered
Bharata in the midst of his relatives, saying, “Having ‘been
born as a son unto Dagaratha—foremost of monarchs—by
Kaikeyi, this speech of thine is worthy of thee. O brother,
formerly when our father espoused the hand of thy mother,
he promised her the kingdom as her marriage portion. Then
on the occasion of the war between the gods and the Asuras,
that master, the king, well pleased (with her), being
besoughit, granted her a boon. Having been thus promised,
that virtuous Indy, thy illustrious mother, O foremost of men,


AYODRYAKANDAM. 475


asked for two boons (of the king),—viz., thy enthronement,
© best of men, and my banishment. Thus besought by her,
the king conferred on her the boon. And, thou foremost
of men, I have been enjoined by my sire to stay in the woods
for fourteen years, in consequence of his having granted
her the boon. And, having, in company with Lakshmana and
Sit&, come to the lone forest, | in humble guise am staying
in the truthful speech of my father. Thou too, thou
foremost of kings, shouldst in the same way speedily
render our father truthful, by getting thyself instalied. O
Bharata, for my sake, do thou free that lord, the king, from
his debts. Do thou, O thou cognizant of morality, deliver
our father and gladden thy mother. O child, we hear that
in Gay%, formerly the famous Gaya, engaged in a sacrifice,
chanted this Vaidika hymn, for pleasing his departed
ancestors : ‘Since a son delivereth his sire from the hell named
Put, a son goeth by the appellation of putra, be protecting
his (departed) ancestors in every way. One should wish for
many sons crowned with qualities and versed in various
lore, for the chance is that one at least of these may repair
to Gay&.’ Oson of the Raghu race, the R&jarshis have
delivered their decision on the point. Therefore, thou
foremost of men, do thou, O lord, rescue thy sire from hell.
O Bharata, go to Ayodhy&, and please‘ the subjects, in
company with Satrughna, O hero, and all the regenerate
ones. I also, O hero, without delay shall have to enter® the
forest of Dandaka in company with Lakshmana and Sita.
O Bharata, be thou thyself the monarch of men. “I shalt be-
come the king of kings of deer. Go thou to that foremost of
cities with a glad heart: with a glad heart will I enter Dandaka.
O Bharata, let the umbrella barring out the rays of the sun,
afford cool shade unto thy head: I shall happily seek the
dense shade of these forest trees. Satrughna endued with
cleverness is thy helper: Sumitra’s son is well known as
my best friend. We four worthy sons of that_foremost of


476 RAMAYANA,


monarchs will keep him established in truth, O Bharata. Let
not thy mind despond.””


SECTION cvilt.


A\s Rima cognizant of righteousness was thus encourag-
ing Bharata, Javali—best of Brahmanas—addressed him in
words divorced from morality, saying, “O Raghava, endowed
with a noble understanding and leading a life of asceticism,
do not suffer thy intellect to entertain inanities, like any low
person. Who is whose friend? And to what is one
entitled and by virtue of what relation ? And who is such ?
Since a creature is born alone and dies alone, a person that
cherishes his father and mother with affection, must, O
Rama, be looked upon as a madman. No individual hath
any one (in this world). Ason the eve of setting out for
another country, a person stays somewhere (outside the
village he lives in), and the next day goes away, renouncing
that abode, even such are a man's father and mother, house
and wealth. O Kakutstha, worthy people never bear affec-
tion towards a mere abode Therefore, O best of men,
leaving thy ancestral kingdom, thou ought not to abide in the
disagreeatne forest filled with dangers and difficulties. Do
thou get thyself sprinkled in the prosperous Ayodhya. The
city expects thee wearing a single woven braid. O king’s
son, enjoying costly regal pleasures, do thou sport in
Ayodhy4, like Sakra in the celestial regions. Dagaratha is
none unto thee, and thou too art none unto Dugaratha. He
is quite other than thy sire; and thou hast no connection
with him. Therefore, do thou act as I tell thee. A father
is merely an instrumental cause (touching the generation
of his child). A father’s semen coming in contact with a
mother’s blood, at the time befitting conception, a person


AIL ODHVARANDAM. 477


is brought into being. The king hath gone the way he
should. This is the nature of all creatures. But thou for
naught denyest thyself (the manliness of monarchal power).
Those that disregarding interest are devoted to virtue, do I
mourn—and not others; for having suffered misery here,
they in the end meet with extinction. People engage in
Ashtaka* in behalf of ancestors and deities, Behold the
waste of edibles. Doth any dead person feed?” If food
partaken by one is transferred to the body of another, offer
Srdddha unto one going to a distant land, and that shall
serve for his provender on the way. Works (on morality)
enjoining—'Worship,’ ‘Give away,’ ‘Be initiated,’ ‘Observe
rites,’ ‘Renounce,—have been composed by intelligent
persons, for inducing people to be charitable. O magnani-
mous one. assure thyself there is no hereafter, Do thou
remain grounded in the evident, turning thy back on what is
beyond our ken. Placing in front the intellect of the good,
and approved by all, do thou, propitiated hy Bharata, accept
the monarchy.”


>

Heaane Javali’s words, Rama having truth for prowess,
by help of an exceedingly subtle intellect uninfluenced (under
the exhortation of that sage), said, “What thou, wishing for
my welfare, hast dwelt upon, though wearing the guise of a
good action, is really not such; and though appearing to be
beneficent, is really calculated to entail misery. The person
that with his sinful acts sticking to him, walketh astray,
as well as he that holdeth up (unto others) different patterns
of characler (from those recommended by scripture), doth


* The lunar days and months for propitiating the manes.


478 RAMAYANA,


not win honor with the good. One's character (fashioned
according to scripture) shows whether one is high-born or
base, heroic or vainly priding himself on his manliness,
pure or impure. (But by adopting the code of conduct
inculcated by thee), a mean character may appear as a noble
one, one bereft of purity may appear pure, an inauspicious
individual may seem auspicious, and one of vile ways may
appear bénest. If J adopt this unrighteous course, calculated
to produce confusion of castes, and do acts not recognized
by scripture, I shall, renouncing good, have to reap only
evil, Then what man possessed of consciousness and
capable of discriminating between right and wrong, shall
honor me, given to wicked ways and deserving of universal
reprehension ? Whose is this course (that thou askest me
to follow)? And by what way shall I attain heaven, by
following the present course, which would make me give up
my vow? When I have (first) myself set up desire as my
standard of action, the entire body of the people shall follow
me: subjects take to the ways that have been adopted by
their sovereigns. This eternal regal morality founded in
kindness towards the subjects, is verily true. Hence a
kingdom is essentially based upon troth; and thie world
itself is estanlished in truth. Saints and celestials for certain
regard truth alone. In this’ world a truthful person attains
the regions, of Brahm’. Untruthful persons harass people
as much as serpents. In this world virtue, which is said to
be the root of everything, is itself established in truth. In
this world, truth is the Lord; in truth is established right-
ecousness. Everything hath truth for its basis. No condition
is superior to truth. The Veda, which inculcates gift, sacri-
fice, Aoma, and asceticism, is based on truth. One protects
men, another his family; one is plunged in hell,—another
is honored in heaven. Why should F not then obey the
mandate of my father? My father was of truthful promise
and of righteous ways; and with the object of observing


AY ODHYARKANDAM. a7y


his promise, he Said on me this (for faithful performance).
Having promised to my superior with an oath, I shall never
through covetousness or forgetfulness or pride rive the
bridge of truth. We have heard that the gods and the Pifris
do not accept offerings from one inclined to untruth, or who is
unsteady and of volatile faculties. This duty of maintaining
truth, whase influence radiates all over one’s soul, Mcertainly
find to be the prime one; and this burthen hath (ere this)
been borne by worthy people. And it is for this that I
reverence the same. I abjure that Kshatriya morality which,
wearing the garb of righteousness, is in fact impiety, and
which is pursued by the low-minded, or the wicked, or the
covetous, or the sinful. A person commits a sin by means
of his physique, but alter be hath accurately cast it in his
mind ; and he hath also spoken an untruth with his tongue.
Thus asin is threefold. The earth and fame and renown
and auspiciousness pay court unto the truthful person. The
good follow truth,—therefore even truth is to be sought (by
all). Therefore the seemingly excellent thing that thou, alter
having well ascertained it, hast said unto me in words inform-
ed with reason—'Thou hadst rather do this’—appears to me
wanting in nobility. How, after having promised® unto my
superior this exile of mine, shal? I act up to Bharata’s words,
setting aside those of my superior? I having remained firm
in the promise I had made unto my superior, that nable
lady, Kaikeyi, became exceedingly delighted. Living in the
forest, pure, with regulated fare, I shall, propitiating thé gods
and the Pitris with fruits, flowers and roots, (fulfil my vow).
Satisfying the five classes,* I shall, retaining my simplicity
and my religious faith, and being able to distinguish between
right and wrong, pass away the term (of banishment). Having
come to this scene of action, one should do that which is
proper. Even Agni and Vayu and Soma reap the fruits of


* Pardkramam—The commentator says that the word means, Chandrayana
ind other rites —T.


480 RAMATANS.


their own acts. Having acquired the appellation of Saés-
Aratu, the sovereign of the celestials hath gone to heaven ;
and, haviyg performed rigid austerities, the Maharshis have
attained the celestial regions.” Having heard of the reasons
couched in that atheistical speech which he could not allow
to pass without stricture, that one of fierce energy, the king’s
son, ceusucing what J&vali had said, again spoke, ‘Truth,
righteousness, prowess, kindness to creatures, fair spoken-
ness, and worship of the twice-born ones , gods and guests,
these have by the pious been styled the ways to heaven.
Having duly heard that these are capable of conferring the
summum bonun, and also come to the same conclusion
by reasoning, Vipras, adequately and competely observing
morality with the utmost care, are eagerly desirous of attain-
ing those regions. I blame this act of my father’s, viz.-—
that he took (for his priest) one of perverse understanding,
who rangeth by help of such an intellect—who is frightfully
atheistic, and who bath swerved from the path of righteous-
ness. As a thief is, so is a Buddha, and kuow that in this
matter, an atheist is in a like predicament. Therefore, such
an one, when capable of being punished like a thief for the
good of the people, should be punished like a thief; and
let no Braébmana ever speak with an atheist. Other
Brihmanas than thyself, superior to thee, have, serving
thie world as well as the next, performed various excellent
acts. Therefore those Bralumanas, amen, who have spared
life and in other ways practised morality, and have also
given away in charity, performed austerities and served
others, (perform sacrifices in consonance with Vedas). And
Principal ascetics engaged in religion, surrounded by the
good, possessed of energy, having charity for their foremost
attribute, void of envy, and their hearts free from all stain,—
are honored in this world.” When the magnanimous Rima
of undiminished strength had wrathfully said this, that
Vipra with' supplications again spoke words fraught with


AYODRrAaRANDAM. a8e


morality and high spiritual truth. Ido not speak the language
of atheists ; nor am { an atheist; nor yet is it true that there
is nothing (hereafter). Onthe occasion of things having
teference to the sext world being performed, {am again a
believer; and on the occasion of things’ connection with.
this world being taken in band, {am an atheist once again.
© Rima, the time has gradually drawn nigh when for the
purpose of making thee turn back, it is necessary that I
should speak the language of atheism. But pacifying thee,
€ have (again) spoke this (¢. ¢. { am a believer).


SECTION CX.


.NOWING that Rama was wroth, Vasishtha said, “Jav&li
knoweth the departure of creatures to the next world and
their return thence. Anxious of making thee turn back,
he had spoken thus. Do thou now, O lord of the world,
fearn the genesis of creatures from me. Water was every-
where, The earth was constructed therein. Then sprang
the self-create Brahma along with all.the celestials. Having
become a boar, he raised up che earth, and along with his
sons of subdued souls created everything. Brahm& eternal,
existing through all time and incapable of decay, sprang
from the sky. From him Marichi came into being, and
Kagyapa is Marichi's son. Vivaswat drew his birth from
Kagyapa, and Manu from Vivaswat. Manu was formerly
known as Prajapati. Ikshwaku is son unto Manu; and this
world was first conferred upon Ikshwaku by Manu. Do
thou know Ikshwa&ku as the first king in Ayodhyl. The
graceful Kukshi is known as the son of Ikshwaku. And,
Q hero, Kukshi’s son was Vikukshi. Vikukshi had the
powerful Vana possessed of exceeding energy for bis son.
Viana had the mighty-armed Anaranya of high austerities


oi


482 RAMAYANA,


for his son, During the time of that foremost of righteous
persons, the monarch Anaranya, drouth or famine did not
occur (in Ayodhy&) ; nor were there any thieves at that time.
O mighty king, from Anaranya sprang king Prithu. From
Prithu sprang Trisanku of mighty energy. This hero by
virtue of his truth-telling went to heaven in person. Tri-
sanku had.the famous Dhundumfra for his son; and from
Dhandumara Juvan3sya was born. Juvan&sya’s son was the
handsome M&ndh&ta; and from M&ndhita Susandhi came
into being. Susandhi had two sons; Dhruvasandhi and
Prasenajit, Dhruvasandhi had the illustrious Bharata, des-
troyer of foes (for his son). From Bharata sprang Asita—to
whom sprang these hostile kings as foes, Harhayas, Talajan-
ghas and Sasavindus—heroes all. Having engaged with them
in battle, the king was excited (by them). And on the rom-
antic Himavat, he became engaged in asceticism. It is said
that at the time, his two wives were gone with child. There
one of the exalted ladies having eyes resembling lotus-pelals
saluted Bhrigu’s son furnished with the splendour of a celestial,
desirous of having ‘an excellent son. Another administered
poison unto the other for destroying her foctus. Bhrigu’s
son named* Chyavana «was at that time staying in Himavat.
Appearing éycfore the sage, Kklindi saluted him. Tiereupon
he returned the greeting that had been made by that lady
anxiyus to secure a boon for the birth of ason. “Thou,
shalt, O lady get a son of mighty soul, who shall be celebrated
among men; and who shall be pious and powerful—the per-
petuator of his race and destroyer of enemies”. Hearing
this, that noble lady having gone round him and paid in
respect unto the ascetic went to her home and gave birth to
ason furnished with eyes resembling lotus-petals, and
of sheen like that of the inside of a lotus. And because
her co-wife, had given her poison for destroying her foctus,
and as in consequence of this, he had come in contact with
poison, he came to be called Sagara. The name of that


AYODRYAKANDAM. 483


king is Sagara, who having been initiated in a sacrifice exca-
vated the ocean, frightening the people with the vebemence
of his operations. Asamanja is known to kave been the son
of Sagara. This wicked man while yet in life, was banished
by his father. Asamanja’s son was the puissant Angumat.
Dilipa is the son of Angumat and Dilipa’s son is Bhagiratha,
From Bhagiratha sprang Kakutstha ; from whom the Kakuts-
thas came to be well-known. Kakutstha had Raghu for his
son; after whom have been named the Raghavas. Raghu’s
son is the energetic Pravirda, who ate human beings, He is
known on earth under such names as Kalmshap&da, Saudasa,
We have heard that Kalmashapada’s son was Sankhana, who
having been endowed with prowess, found destruction along
with his forces. Sankhana’s son was the beautiful and heroic
Sudargana, Sudargana’s son was Agnivarna and Agnivarna’s,
Sighraga ; Sighraga’s son was Maru, and Maru’s Pracugruva,
Pragugruva’s son was the magnanimous Anvvarisha. Amvari-
sha's son was Nahusha having truth for his prowess. Nahusha’s
son was the exceedingly virtuous N&abhaga. Nabhiga had
two sons,—Aja and Suvrata. Aja’s son was the virtuous king
Dagaratha. His eldest son art thou celebrated under the name
of Rama. Do thou receive thy own kingdom and*look after
the world. Among the Ikshwakus, the first born becomes the
sovereign. The first born existing, an inferior son cannot be
installed in the kingdom. It therefore doth not to-day bebove
thee to depart [rom the ever existing morality of the descend-
ants of Raghu. Do thou rule this earth filled with gems, and
furnished with high fame, do thou like unto a father govern
her containing many kingdoms.”


48 REMRV ANA,
SECTION cxi.


athe


Havine thus addressed Rima, the royal priest Vasishtha
again spoke unto him words fraught with righteousness,
saying, “Unto a man born there are three superiors, viz, the
preceptot, O K2kutstha, and father and mother, O Raghava.
© foremost of men, the father begets a person, the preceptor
imparts wisdom and therefore is he called a superior. 1, O
subduer of foes, have been the preceptor of both thyself
and thy father. By doing what I say, thou wilt not lose
the state of the righteous, These courtiers of thine—these
relatives, and these kings—by protecting them virtuously
thou wilt not lose the state of the righteous. It doth not
pehove thee to disregard the words of thy aged and virtuous
mother. By doing her bidding thou wilt not lose the state
of the righteous, O Raghava, by acting as Bharata, who is
soliciting thee, says, thou having the morality of truth for
thy prowess, wilt not be frustrated of the state of the pious.”
Thus sweetly addressed by his preceptor personally, that
foremost of men, Raghava, replied unto Vasishtha, seated
with him, saying, ‘What his father and mother always do in
behalf of their son, and what'they effect by way of provision
and sleep and clothing and constant sweet speech, and sport,
is dificult of being repaid. Therefore, what my father, king
Dagaratha hath commanded me to do, must not be falsified.”
Ra&ma having said this, the broad-breasted Bharata, extre-
mely depressed spoke unto the charioteer who was by,
saying, “O charioteer, do thou speedily spread Kuga on the
ground here. 1 will remain near the noble one until he be
kindly dispesed (towards me). Even as a twice-born one
deprived of his wealth lieth down (at the door of an unright-
eous person) eschewing food and in darkness, will I lie down
in front of this cottage, until he betakes himself back (to
AyodhyS).” “Then with a dispirited heart finding Sumantra


AFPODH YARANDAM. 485


looking up to Rima, Bharata himself spread Kuca and lay
down upon it. To him spoke that foremost of Rajarshis, the
highly energetic Rama, “O Bharata, my dear brother, what
have I done that thou hast down by me? It is a Brahmana
who alone can obstruct a person by lying down beside him ;,
but there is no rule by which a member of the military class*
can fie down (in this wise). O best of men, arise, rgnouncing
this difficult vow; and, O descendant of Raghu, do thou from
hence take thyself unto that best of cities, Ayodhya.” Being
seated, Bharata, eying the citizens and the inhabitants of
the provinces, remarked, "What for do ye not solicit the
noble one?” Thereupon the citizens and the dwellers of
the provinces answered that high-souled one, saying, “We
perceive that the descendant of Rahgu says unto Kakutstha
what is fit; and this exceedingly virtuous one stayeth
by the words of his sire. Therefore we are incapable of
suddenly saying anything.” Hearing their speech, Rima
said, “Listen to the words of these friends having morality
for their vision. And, O scion of the Raghu race, hearing
their utterances as regards both thyself and me, do thou
decide. Arise, thou mighty-armed one. Touch me and then
water.” Thereat arising, Bharata, having touched water,
said, Ye courtiers, and ye mifisters, listen to me! I did
not wish for my paternal kingdom ; nor did I sway my mother
(towards obtaining the same); nor did I know thag the
exceedingly righteous Raghava was to seek the woods. But
if he must dwell here, and thus act out the mandate of our
father, I also will abide in the forest for fourteen years.”
Astonished at the determination of Bharata, the righteous
Rama eying the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces,

* Murdhddhisikta —Murdhd, the head ; Adhisista, sprinkled ; kiogs being
consecrated by having poured on their heads, while seated on a throne, pre-
pared for the purpose, water from some sacred stream, mixed with honey,
clarified butter, and spirituous liquor, as well as two sorts of grass and sprouts
of corn ; the term applies to the Xebetviya as identiSed with the king, the
duties of royalty belonging specially to the military caste. ©


486 RAMAPANA,


said, “Neither Bharata nor I can anoul any sale or pledge or
purchase effected by our father during his life. Therefore I
ought not to accept any substitute for living in the woods,
who can but contribute to my censure. Kaikeyi hath spoken
«what is proper; and my father hath acted well. I know
Bharata to be forgiving, and given to serving superiors.
Everything in that high-souled one intent on truth appeareth
beneficial. Having returned from the forest, I will in company


with this brother of virtuous character become the worthy
master of this earth. The king having been made by Kaikeyi
to consent (to her proposal, I have done as she told me.
Do thou by acting in the way calculated to free that lord of
the earth, our father (from the debt of promise, do so.”


SECTION CXxil.


Ovservine the taeeting of the two brothers of unparallel-
ed energy, capable of making one’s hair stand on end, the
Maharshis struck with. surprise came to the scene. And
remaining jnvisible, the ascétics. Sidhas and prime saints
admired those brothers, the virtuous KAkutsthas. ‘Blessed
is he, whose sons these, two cognizant of virtue and having
truth for prowess are. Having heard their converse, we
are delighted.” Then the saints, desirous of the destruction
of the ten-headed one, having become unanimous, speedily
addressed that foremost of monarchs, Bharata, saying, “Born
in‘an illustrious line, endeued with high wisdom, of high
character and high fame, thou shouldest accept Rama’s words,
if thou hast a care for the happiness of thy sire. We wish
that Rama may always act truthfully in respect of his father.
By virtue of his truth connected with Kaikeyi, Dagaratha
hath gone te heaven. Having said this, the Gandharbas,


AYODHVARANDAM. 487


Mabarshis, and Rajarshis each went to his proper quarter,
Having paid homage unto those saints, Rima possessed
of a gracious presence, hearing their words, was filled with
joy, and looked lovely with bis delightful countenance.
But with his frame agitated (with emotion), Bharata with
joined hands again addressed Raghava in words faltering
(with feeling), “O Rama, taking into account ths morality
of this race, it behoves thee to act in accordance with the
solicitations of my mother (and thine), I do not venture
to govern this vast kingdom alone, or please the citizens
and the inhabitants of the provinces attached unto thee,
And as husbandmen remain expecting rain, our kindred,
and warriors and friends and adherents wait in expectation
of thee. O exceedingly wise one, accepting the kingdom,
do thou place it in the hands of some person. O Kakutstha,
whomsover thou wilt chose for performing this office, will
surely prove strong enough to govern the people.” Having
said this, Bharata fell at his brother's feet ; and sweetly ad-
dressing him—“O Raghava”, solicited him once again.
Taking on his lap that sable-hued one* furnished with eyes
resembling lotus leaves, Rama with a voice like that of
a mad swan, spoke unto (Bharata), .”Thou hast at length
attained the mental attitude @hat is natural ang that also
comes of the training one receives at the hands of his
preceptor. And brother thou venturest greatly’ to protect
the earth, Taking counsel with courtiers, adherents and
intelligent ministers,do thou achieve grand tasks. Even
if beauty forsaketh the moon, or Himavat his snow, or the
ocean overleaps its shores, I shall not forsake the promise of
my sire. And, my brother, thou oughtst not to cherish in thy
mind what thy mother incited by covetuousness or affection
for thee hath done; and thou shouldst act by her as one
should by one’s mother.” When Rima resembling the sun
in energy and like the moon of Pratipat in appearance,
bad said this, Bharata said unto the son of Kaugalya,


488 RAMEP ANA.


“@ noble one, do thou take off thy feet thy sandals
adorned with gold. These shall protect what the people have
got and secure unto thee what they lack.” Thereupon
taking off his sandals, that highly energetic one gave them
to the magnanimous Bharata. Bharata, bowing down
unto the sandals, said, “O hero, for four and ten years shall
I, wearing matted locks and bark, and subsisting upon
fruits and roots, O scion of the Raghu race, expecting thy
arrival, remain outside the city, having, O subduer of foes,
made over the task of government unto thy sandals, And,
O foremost of Righus, if alter the completion of the four-
teen years, I do not see thee, I shall enter into fire. Promising,
“So be it,” and affectionately embracing Bharata, and also
embracing Satrughna, Rama said,” Do thou protect thy
mother Kaikeyi. Do not be angry with her. Both Janaki and
I conjure thee to do this, O descendant of Raghu.” Having
said this, he forsook his brother, with tears in his eyes. Then
accepting those burnished and garnished sandals, Bharata
versed in morality circumambulated Raghava, and placed the
sandals on the head*of an excellent elephant. Then having
one by one honored that assemby, and his preceptor
and the counsellors, and the subjects and his younger brothers,
perpetuator of the Raghu rate, steady in his owa duty like
Himavat itself, took leave of them. His mothers with their
throgts invaded by the vapour of grief could not from distress
of heart say aught unto him, And R&ma also having paid
homage uato all of them, weeping entered his own cottage.


SECTION cx.


Tuex taking the pair of sandals on his head, Bharata in
company with Satughna well pleased, ascended the car.
And Vasishtka, and Vamadeva and Javali steady in his vow,


AYODHYARANDAM. 489


as well as the ministers, honored on account of their counsels,
went before. And going round the charming Mand&kini,
they went eastwards, circamambulating {at the same time) the
mighty hill, Chitrakuta. And behelding various kinds of
beautiful minerals by thousands.” Bharata accompanied by,
his army went by the side (of the hill). At a short distance
from Chitrakata, Bharata beheld the spot where the ascetic
Bharadwaja had built his habitation. Approaching the
asylum, the puissant Bharata descended from the car, and
the son of Raghu then paid homage unto the saint's feet.
Thereat Bharadw&ja well pleased said, “Hast thou, my child,
on meeting with Rima, done what it behoved thee to do 7”
Thus addressed by the intelligent Bharadwaja, Bharata
attached to righteousness answered the former, saying,
“Solicited by our preceptor as well as by myself, Raghava of
steady prowess highly pleased spoke unto Vasishtha, ‘I would
(faithfully perform my father's promise for fourteen years ;
for even this is the promise of my father. Thus accosted,
the eminently wise Vasishtha skilled in speech replied unto
Raghava in these pregnant words, ‘Bo thou well pleased
confer (on Bharata) thy sandals decked in gold. Thereby, @
exceedingly wise one, thou wilt be able to protect what the
poople have and secure untg them what they have not.’
Thus addressed by Vasishtha, Raghava facing the east,
conferred on me his sandals decked in gold, iavorder that 1
might-carry on the government of the kingdom. Commanded
by the magnanimous Rama, I retrace my steps. I will go ta
Ayodby&, taking the sandals along with me.” Hearing these
auspicious words of the high-souled Bharata, the ascetic
Bharadwja said unto Bharata, “It is no wonder that Rama
hath acted nobly by thee, foremost among men and possessed
of an (excellent) character and disposition, even as water
poured out, foweth downwards. Thy father Dagaratha hath
become freed from his debts, since he hath a son like unto
dlee, righteous and attached to virtue.” Whon the ascetic


62


ago RAMAYANA,


had said this, Bharata with joined palms paid bis respects
unto that highly wise one, by taking hold of his feet. And
after having again and again gone round Bharadwaja, the
graceful Bharata went to Ayodhy& accompanied by his
«counsellors. And returning by means of cars and carts,
horses and elephants, that army marching in the wake of
Bharata, gpread wide. And after having crossed the beautiful
river Yamuna flowing in waves, they again beheld the river
Gang& of auspicious waters. And having along with his
friend crossed over that river filled with beautiful waters,
Bharata together with his army entered the charming city of
Sringava. And from the city of Sringava he went to Ayodhy&
and again beheld it. And seeing Ayodhya bereft of his
father and mother, Bharata burning in grief, said unto the
charioteer, O charioteer, behold that Ayodhy&’, which shorn
of its splendour and decorations, and plunged in grief, forlora
and silent, doth not appear delightful.”


SECTION cxiv.


Arrarvine by means of a car emitting a low and solemn
soungi, that lord, the highly famous Bharata specdily entered
Ayodhy&, ranged by cats and owls, with the doors of the
people’s dwellings remaining closed ; like a night enveloped
in darkness; gloomy; and invisible ; resembling the beloved
wife of Rahu’s enemy, Rohini, brilliant with the lustre of
the latter, when she is forloru in consequence of her lover
being afflicted by that planet; like unto a mountain stream
shrunk up, having its waters turbid and slightly heated, and its
fowls burning in the heat ; and with its fishes, alligators and
other aquatic animals rendered lean ; resembling a flame of
fire devoid ohsmoke and streaming up in golden splendour,


AYODHSARANDAMN. aor


next sprinkled with clarified butter, and lastly appearing with
its crest extinguished ; with armour scattered all round, and
sick elephants and horses and cars and standards,—and heroes
lying dead,—in distress; like unto an army in a mighty
encounter; resembling the silent ripples of the ocean raised
by the gentle breeze, which ere now (in the shapes of surges)
were heaving, brimming over with foam and sending forth
roars; like a silent dais after the sacrifice is over, without the
sacrificial appurtenances, without worthy priests: like unto
the wife of a youthful ox, exercised with anxiety on having
been forsaken by her favorite ox, staying in distress in a pen,
abstaining from fresh grass ; like unto a string of new pearls
divorced from noble, mild-gleaming rubies aud other excellent
gems; like a star on the expiration of its virtue, moving from
its place, and dislodged from heaven, dropping to the earth
with its brightness contracted ; like a blossoming creeper at
the end of spring with maddened Bhramaras* suddenly
rendered nerveless in consequence of being caught by a forest
fire ; with her merchants plunged in grief, and her shops and
stalls closed ; like the welkin covered with clouds, and having
its moon and stars hid ; like an unclean, uncovered spot used
for drinking, with all the wine draingd, and scattered with
broken bowls, and with the tipplers lying dead 4 like unto a
reservoir with its terrace riven, filled with broken pots, and
lying with its pillars crushed ; like a long strong bow-gtring
fixed on a bow furnished with nooses, falling off the bow to
the ground, being snapped in consequence of the pressure of
the arrow ; like a mare, suddenly urged on by a rider skilled
in battle, lying (on the ground, having been slain by the
hostile forces.

That son of Dagaratha, the beauteous Bharata, while
proceeding on his car, addressed the charioteer as he drove
that best of cars, saying, “Why do I not hear as formerly
the solemn sounds of song and instrumental music spreading


* Black bees.


a Raga raNna,


on all sides in Ayodhy& ? And there doth not breathe around
the aroma of fiquor,or the perfume of garlands, or the incense
of agurz and sandal. And on Rama being banished, in this
city: is not heard the mild neighing of steeds, the rattle of
, vehicles, the roar of mad elephants, or the mighty clatter of
arms. And on Rama having repaired to the forest, youthful
folk stricken with sorrow do not enjoy the incense of aguru
and sandal, or costly fresh chaplets. And persons bearing
variegated garlands do not walk abroad ; and no festivities
are celebrated in the city striken with grief on account of
Rama. Surely, the grace of the city hath gone away with my
brother. - Surely,that Ayodhy& doth not look beautiful like an
autumnal night with showers pouring down, When shal! my
brother, coming hither like a carnival, gladden all hearts in
Ayodhy& like rain in summer? And the highways shall be
graced with young people elegantly attircd and bearing them-
selves bravely in Ayodhya. Having said this in grief,Bharata
in company with the charioteer entcred Ayodhy& and imme-
diately went to the residence of his father, bereft of that fore
most of men, like a cavern bereft of its lion. Seeing the inner
apartment shorn of its splendour, like a day deprived of the
sun, mourned by the deities, and everywhere unclean, the
self-possessed Bharata, moved by grief, began to drop tears.


SECTION CxVv.


Havinc placed his mothers in Ayodhy4, Bharata steady
in bis vow, kindling in grief, said unto his preceptors, “I
shall go to NandigrAma, and therefore greet you all. There
I shall suffer all this grief on account of Rima’s absence.
The king hathegone to heaven, and my superior is staying


AFODHYVAKANDAM. “493


in the woods. I shall remain in expecttaion of Rama, ascum-
ing the reins of government. Verily that illustrious one
is the king.” Hearing this excellent speech of the high-
souled Bharata, the counsellors as well as the priest Vasishtha
said, “What, O Bharata, influenced by affection for thy,
brother thou sayest, is worthy of thee and is highly commend-
able. Who will not endorse what hath fallen {rom thee,
ever engaged in serving thy friends, established in fraternal
love, and who hast entered upon a noble course ¢’ Having
heard the words of the counsellors acceptable and welcome,
Bharata said unto the charioteer, “Do thou yoke my car.”
Then with acheerful countenance having spoken to his
mothers, that graceful one ascended the car in company
with Satrughna, Having swiltly ascended the car, both
Satrug!na and Bharata, right glad at heart, set out, surrounded
by counsellors and priests. And going ahead, all the precept
ors headed by Vasishtha proceeded eastwards, in which
direction lay Nandigrama. And the forces, filled with ele-
phants and horses and cars, although not called, set out on
Bharata proceeding, as well as all the citizens. And ascend-
ing the car, the virtuous Bharata attached unto his brother,
speedily went to Nandigrama, holding the sandals (of Rima)
on his head. Then entering* Nandigrima in aghort time,
Bharata swiftly alighted from the car and addressed his
preceptors, saying, This monarchy hath been" consigned
unto me asatrust; and these gold-decked sandals shall
carry on the work of government, protecting what the
people have and securing unto them what they have not.”
Then bowing unto the sandals which represented the trust,
Bharata burning in gfief addressed the entire body of the
subjects, saying, “Do ye speedily hold the umbrella (over
these sandals’, These represent the dear feet of the exalted
one. Through these sandals of my superior, will be estab-
lished the regal morality (of the kingdom). This kingdom
from love hath been conferred on me as a teust ; therefore


494 RAMAPANA,


Ishall govern it until Raghava comes. Again speedily
putting these sandals on R&ghava’s feet, I shall behold
them with the sandals on. On Raghava coming (back’,.[
shall, my burden being cast upon him, making over the

ckingdom unto him, engage myself in serving my superior.
And having rendered unto Raghava the trust in the shape
of these ysandals, this kingdom, and Ayodhy&, I shall be
washed from my sin.” Henceforth wearing bark and
matted locks, and in the guise of an ascetic, the heroic
Bharata dwelt in Nandigr&ma along with his forces. Having
consigned all rule unto the sandals, Bharata himself held
the umbrella and the chowr? furnished with hair. And the
graceful Bharata, having installed the sandals of the noble
one, always carried on the government in subordination
to them.


SECTION cxvi.


On Bharata having returned, while Rama was dwelling
in the woods, he noticed affright among the ascetics, added
to a desire fo remove to another place. And those ascetics
fhat were living happily in the asylum in Chitrakuta,
relyigg upon Rama (for their protection), he found to be
wrought up with anxiety. And by means of signs by the
eye and contractions of the brow, they, afflicted with fear,
were, alluding to Rama, slowly speaking to each other.
Perceiving their anxiety, Rama apprehensive of himself, with
joined hands addressed the patriarchal ascetic, saying, “O
reverened one, do ye find me deviating from the path of
former sovereigns, or acting contrary to their practice, —
which hath perplexed (the minds of) these ascetics ¢ Have the
sages seen my younger (brother), the high-souled Lakshmana,
do anything fcom inadvertence that is unworthy of him 7 Doth


AYODH! AaKRANDAM. 49s


not Sild engaged in serving you, having to serve me, now
minister unto you as a woman should?” Thereat a certain
aged and decrepit ascetic, with his frame trembling, said
unto Rama ever kind towards creatures, “Where is the
falling-off of that one of excellent character, engaged in.
offices of beneficence,—more specially with reference to
ascetics ? This fear arising from Rakshasas afflicts the ascetics
because of thee; and they, extremely agitated, converse
with each other (on the subject). A Rakshasa named Khara,
a younger brother of Ravana, hath been harassing the ascetics
dwelling in Janasthana. And Dhrishta also a fearless and
wicked R&kshasa feeding on human beings,—and the
unrighteous Avalipta, cannot bear thee, my child. As long
my child, as thou hast been residing in this asylum, the
R&kshasas have been plaguing the ascetics, And they show
themselves sometimes in disgusting shapes, sometimes in
horrible and dreadful ones,—in various frightful forms capable
of frightening folks, And they throw execrable and unclean
things amoog the anchorets, and torment those that happen
tocome before them. And they také delight in approach-
ing asylums unperceived, and slaughtering ascetics, alter
having bound them by means of their arms.“ And on the
occasion of sacrifices, they thrdW away the vessels containing
sacrificial articles, pour water on the sacrificial fire and
break vessels containing water. Eager to renounce, this
asylum infested by those wicked ones, and removing to
another place, the sages to-day have been exhorting me (on
the object). And, O Rama, ere this, those wicked ones
have stain ascetics. Therefore we would renounce this
asylum. Not far from here is a picturesque wood abounding
in fruits and roots. Thither shall I betake myself together
with my own folks. Khara shall also annoy thee. If thou
think it proper, go hence in company with us. O Righava,
although thou art vigilant, able, and in all ways capable,
it would be unpleasant for thee to dwell here now in doubt.”


496 RAM ALANA.


When the anxious ascetic had said this, Rama could not con-
wole him by his words, Then having paid homage unto Rama,
+ and spoken to him and encouraged Raghava, the patriarch:
” ascetic renouncing the asylum, went away along with his own
People, And Rama having (for a time) followed the sage
who was departing from that place, and having paid him
respects, being permitted by them, well-pleased, and advised
(as to what it behoved him to do), came to his quarters repos-
ing there, (Thenceforth) Raghava never for a moment left
that asylum forsaken by the sages.—Raghava having such
qualities in his character as were likely to stand the sages
in stead, the ascetics (that remained behind) ever followed
Raghava. y


SECTION cxvil-


Wae Ube ascetics had gone away, Raghava reflected
{as to his stay at that place); and from diverse reasons, he
did not relish remaining there any further. ‘Here have I
seen Bharata and my mother in company with the citizens.
Overwhelmed with grief oi my account, they ever recur lo
my memory. And in consequence of Lhe troops of that
high-souled one having quartered here as well as the dung
discharged by his elephants and horses, this place has got
exceedingly dirty. Therefore will I go to another quarter.”
Having settled this in his mind, Raghava departed along
with Videha’s daughter and Lakshmana. Aod having arciv-
ed at Atri’s asylum, that renowned one paid obeisance (unto
the sage); and the reverend Atri also on his part received
R&ma as son. And having personally given Rama respect-
ful reception and entertainment, the ascetic regarded the ex~-
alted Lakshmana and SilA with a gracious eye. And bis aged
wife having. come there, Atri greeted her ;_and after she


AVODHYARANDAM. 497


had been paid homage, the sage cognizant of virtue ever
engaged in the good of all creatures, gladdened her (by
presenting Sit& unto her). And that best of sages said unto
the pious female ascetic, Anasuy&, engaged in offices of virtue,
"Do thou accept Videha's daughter.” And Atri related unta
Rama matters connected with the female ascetic, engaged in :
offices of virtue, “The people were ceaselessly gburning in
consequence of a drouth extending over ten years. O sinless
one, that one resembling thy mother is this, by whom furnish-
ed with rigid asceticism and adorned with voluntary penan-
ces, were created fruits and roots and the Jabnavi was made
to flow through the asylum; by whom were performed mighty
austerities for ten thousand years,—in virtue of whose pen-
ances, disturbances to the asceticism of the sages ceased,—
by whom ten nights were brought within the compass of a
single one. Let Vaidehi always resort to this aged ascetic
devoid of anger, who is worthy of being bowed down to by
all creatures.” When the saint bad spoken thus, Raghava
saying, “So be it,” turned his eyes to Sit, and thus spoke
unto that one knowing morality, “O princess, thou hast
heard what hath been uttered by the ascetic. For the sake
of thy own welfare, do thou speedilysresort to the female an-
choret. Do thou without del&y resort unto the,ascetic Ana-
suy&, who is worthy of being associated with, and who hath
by virtue of her acts attained renown among men.” Hgaring
these words of Righava, Mithila's daughter, the illustyious
Sit&, drew near the righteous wife of Atri. Thereupon Sit&,
announcing her name, saluted the pious and chaste Anasuy&
old with slackened joints, with folds all over her skin, and
hex hair hoary from age, whose frame shook perpetually, like
a plantain-leaf in the wind. Having paid homage unto that
ascetic with her senses subdued, Vaidehi glad at heart, with
joined hands, enquired alter her welfare. Seeing the virtuous
Sith engaged in righteous acts, the old lady consoling her.
said By luck it is that thou regardest righteousness. O Sit5,
63


498 RAMAPANA.


having teft thy kindred, and banishing pride, thou hast, O
honoured lady, followed Rama staying in the woods. They
that love their husbands, whether living in the city or the
forest, whether well or ill disposed towards them, attain great
, State. Wicked, or libidinous, or indigent, a husband isa
supreme deity unto a wife of noble character. Than the
husband a greater friend find I none, O Vaidehi, who is
worthy of being served both in this world and the next, and
who is like imperishable asceticism, But bad women
whose hearts hunger after carnality, and who lord over
their (husbands, do not get acquainted with the virtues and
demerits (of their husbands); and range at their will. O
Mithila's daughter, surely women of this sort who are
given to doing evit acts, reap infamy and fall off from
tighteousness. But worthy women like thee furnished with
excellences, see a superior and better world, and range the
celestial regions, like pious people. Therefore following this
one, and adopting the course of chaste women, do thou prove
the associate in virtue of thy husband,—and then shalt thou
attain both fame and ‘eligious merit.”


SECTION cxvill.


Tavs addressed by Anasuy4, Vaidehi devoid of malice,
honouring her words, began, “That thou shouldst instruct me
is no wonder in thee. I know that a woman's spiritual
guide is her husband. Even if.a husband should be poor
and ofa disreputable character, he should be ungrudgingly
obeyed by the like of me. And to be said of one that
is crowned with qualities, kind, seif-controlled, of steady
affection, righteous-souled, and who is dear asa father or
amother? The exceedingly strong Rama beareth himself
towards the other wives of the monarch ashe doth towards


AYODHPARANDAM. 499


Kaugalyd herself. Renouncing sense of self-importance,
that heroic one conversant with righteousness, devoted to
his king, regardeth as his mothers those on whom the
monarch once cast his eyes. What my mother-in-law instruct-
ed me at the time that I was leaving for the lonely and
fearful forest, is constantly present in my tind. And what
also my mother taught me in presence of fire on tpe occasion
of the bestowal of my hand, is also remembered by me.
And, O thou engaged in acts of righteousness, I have not
forgotten the words that my relatives said unto me, viz,
the asceticism of a woman is ministering unto her husband.
They did not teach any thing else. Having served her lord,
S4vitri is highly honored in heaven ; and thou also, following
the same course, by virtue of having served thy husband,
hath secured heaven. And this foremost of females, this
goddess of heaven, Rohini, is not seen for a moment
without the moon. And prime women of this sort, firm in
their husbands, are highly respected in the celestial regions
by virtue of their pious acts.” Hearing Sita’s words, Anasuy8,
exceedingly delighted, smelling her heat, spoke thus, pleas-
ing Maithili. “By observing restrictions, I have earned great
asceticism. By resorting to that energy, I weuld, O Sita,
confer a boon upon thee, O thou of pure vows, O Maithili,
thy words are just and proper. I am welt pleased (with
thee.) Tell me, O Sit’, what good shall I do thee ?” JHear-
ing her words, Sit, surprized, said with a smile, unto that
lady equipped with ascetic strength. “All this hath been
done by thee.” Thus accosted, that one cognizant of virtue,
was still more pleased, and said, “I am exceedingly pleased
(with thy words). I will attain a desire of mine. This noble
and grand garland, this apparel, these ornaments, and this
precious’ paste for adorning the person, presented by me-—
let these, O Sith, grace thy person. These, worthy of thee
will never be tarnished. O daughter of Janaka, daubing
thy person with this excellent paint, thou swilt grace thy


goo RAMAYANA.


husband even as Sree doth the undeteriorating Vishnu.”
Thereupon Mithila’s daughter accepted those things presented
unto her out of love, viz. the apparel, the paint, the
ornaments and the garland. Having accepted those presents
_ conferred on her from love, that illustrious one, Sit&, quietly
sat beside the female ascetic with joined hands. Then as
Sit& was sitting, AnasuyS firm in vow asked her concerning
a thing that was near her heart, saying, “I have heard, O Sita,
that thou wert won by the renowned Raghava on the occa-
sion of a self-choice. O Maithili, that story I should like to
bear, related at length. It therefore behoves thee to
relate that unto me in detail.” Thus addressed, Sit&, saying
unto the ascetic engaged in pious acts, “Listen |" began
to tell the story. “Mithila’s lord, the heroic Janaka, justly
ruleth the earth, engaged in observing the duties of Kshatri-
yas, As he was ploughing a plain intended for a sacrifice, I
rose from under the earth; and (in this sense) ] am the
daughter of that king. Tending me, with my body covered
with dust, Janaka, engaged in throwing handfuls of dust
(to level hollow spots), was struck with amazement,
Being childless, he look me on his lap from affection, and
saying—='This is my daughter,’ conceived affection for me.
Then there ~ere uttered words in the welkin, resembling
those of a human being,—‘O king, in all righteousness, this is
thy deughter.’ Then well-pleased,my righteous father,the king
lord.of Mithila, receiving me, attained mighty good fortune.
Consigned unto the pious eldest noble one (queen), desirous
of having offspring, 1 was brought up by that mild lady, with
the tenderness of a mother. (In time) seeing me fit for the
company of a husband, my father in distress was plunged,in
thought, like a poor man that hath lost his wealth. Even
if the father of a girl be like unto Sakra himself on earth,
he reapeth odium at the bands of his equals and inferiors,
Perceiving this obloquy at a short distance, the king was
plunged in a%sea of anxiety, but could not cross it, like one


AYODHYVAKANDAM. 508


that hath no raft. Knowing me as unborn from any female
vessel, the lord of earth reflecting upon it, could not come
upon a suitable and fit husband for me. Then as he reflected,
this thought occurred to him ‘I will righteously celebrate
the self-choice of my daughters.’ In the great sacrifice of
Daksha, the high-souled Varuna had well-pleased conferred
on Devar&ta an excellent bow with inexhaustible earrows and
acouple of quivers. Incapable of being moved on account
of its weight, the kings could not even dream of bending
the bow. Having obtained the bow, my truthful father
said, ‘No fear!’ inviting at the same time the kings to an
assembly of sovereigns. ‘He that, raising the bow, shall
string it, shall doubtless receive my daughter for his wife.’
Seeing that best of bows in weight resembling a hill, the
kings saluting it, go away, unable to move it. And it came
to pass that after a long time, this highty effulgent R&ghava
came to witness the sacrifice in company with Vigwdmitra.
And Rama having truth for his prowess, and the righteous
Vigwamitra were respectfully received by my sire. Then
Vigw&mitra said unto my father, ‘The “descendants of Raghu’
sons of Dagaratha, Rama and Lakshmana, are anxious to
behold the bow.’ Thus accosted by the Vipta, my father
brought the bow, and showed that celestialpbow unto the
princes. Thereupon, in the twinkling of an eye, bending it,
the powerful (R&aghava) stringed the bow and drew ite And
as he drew it vehemently, it broke in the middle in éwain.
And the sound of it was dreadful like unto the bursting of
athunder-bolt. Then raising an excellent vessel of water,
my truthful father prepared to bestow me on Raghava. And
pie on Raghava, I was accepted of him, after he bad
cbasulted the wish of his father, that lord, the master of
Ayodhya. And inviting my father-in-law, the old king
Dagaratha, my father bestowed me on Rama, having a
knowledge of self. And my father bestowed on Lakshmana
for his wife, my younger sister, the beatteous and chaste


goa RAY ANA,


Urmila. Thus was I bestowed on Rama on the occasion
of that self-choice. And ever since I have been devoted
unto my husband, the foremost of those possessing prowess.”


SECTION cxIx.


Hause heard this grand story, Anasuy& cognizant
of righteousness, smelling the head of Mithila’s daughter,
embraced Siti with her arms. “I have heard all that
thou, describing the selfchoice, hast spoken sweetly and
beautifully in articulated letters and feet. O sweet-speeched
one, IT have been delighted with thy narration, But
ushering in the auspicious night, the graceful Sun
hath set. And there are heard the notes of feathered
ones, which, after having gone about in search of food
are resting now for the purpose of sleeping. And these
ascetics having bathed, are wending their way ina
body, carrying water-pitchers, their barks drenched with
water. And the smoke arising from the fire-sacrifice duly
performed by* the ascetfics,—-reddish like the hue of the
Pigeon’s neck, is seen, wafted” by the wind. And trees of
spare foliage appear dense (on all sides); and distance is
no longer perceptible. And animals ranging in the night
are going about all round; and those deer of the asylum
are reposing on the daises. O Sit&, the night crested by
the stars hath arrived ; and, veiled in moonlight, appeareth
the moon in the heavens. Go thou ;I permit thee. Do thou
seek the society of Rama. Ihave been pleased with t
sweet converse. And, O daughter of Mithila, do thou deck
thyself before me. Do thou thus please me, my child, thou
that lookest beautiful with excellent ornaments.” Thereat,
having adorned herself, Sit, resembling the daughter of a
celestial, bowing down to the feet {of the female ascetic),


AFODHYAKANDAM. 503


directed her steps towards Rama. And that best of speakers,
Raghava, saw Sita, decked with the ornaments affectionately
presented by the ascetic; and he rejoiced thereat. Then
Mithil&'s daughter, Siti, related unto R&ma all about her
having been affectionately presented bythe ascetic will
attire, ornaments and the garland. Thereupon, witnessing
the honour that had been accorded unto Mafthili,—rare
among men, Rama became well pleased,—as also that mighty
car-warrior, Lakshmana. Then Raghu’s son, ministered
unto by the ascetic, happily spent the delightful hight there
with her face resembling the moon. Om the night having
passed away, those foremost of men, after performing their
ablutions, enquired of the ascetics performing fire-sacrifices,
who fived in the forest, Thereat the righteous ascetics
ranging the forest said that all the sides of the forest were
infested by R&kshasas. “Ferocious beasts feasting on blood,
and Rakshasas, O Raghava, living on human beings,—wear-
ing various shapes, abide in this mighty forest. These eat
up ascetics leading the Brahmacharyg mode of life, who
happen tobe unclean or heedless. Do thou, therefore, O
R&ghava, let them. This is the path of the Maharshis, who
procure fruits in the forest. By this’ way thou wilt be able
to enter the impracticable wild, O Raghava.” Thus address-
ed by the ascetic twice-born ones, and having been blessed
by them, that repressor of foes, Righava, entered the forest
in company with his wife and Lakshmana, like the*sun
entering a mass of clouds.


END oF AYODHYAKANDAM.
